Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026 by E Street BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 20 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009929
7A Saxon Drive, Acton, Ealing W3 0NU
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Lubna Ollerhead against the decision of the Council of the London Borough
    of Ealing.
•   The application Ref is 253131FUL.
•   The development proposed is for the conversion of existing flat into 2 x self-contained flats, roof
    extension with roof lights, and associated refuse, cycle storage and amenity space.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure and Preliminary Matters
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal. In addition, and despite differing from the decision notice, the
   description on the application form sufficiently identifies the works to which the
   appeal relates. I have therefore used it above.
3. Having reviewed the most recent changes to the National Planning Policy
   Framework, I am satisfied that they do not affect the substance of the main issues
   in the appeal. Since they would not therefore be prejudiced, I have proceeded
   without further consultation with the main parties.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are the effect of the proposal on a) the character and appearance
   of the area and b) the internal and external living conditions of the future occupiers.
Reasons for the Recommendation
Character and Appearance
5. The appeal site is an end of terrace building which has been subdivided into two
   flats. The building has been extended in the past by virtue of the two-storey
   outrigger and dormer windows. The wider terraced dwellings are largely uniform in
   their appearance in terms of their plain roofscapes and relatively unaltered nature
   to which the appeal site is an outlier. Any instance of dormer windows or
   extensions sit comfortably within the roofscape and is clearly subservient. These
   features together contribute to a pleasant consistency to the character and
   appearance of the area.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009929


6. The placement of the two dormer windows on the outrigger along with their
   geometric form (use of catslide roof shape) would result in a cluttering effect
   detracting from the consistency of the plain roofscapes experienced. Whilst the
   dormers would be set down and back form the eaves and ridge, their siting and
   design would emphasise their awkward and contrived nature. Notwithstanding that
   they would be in matching materials to the existing roof, their design in conjunction
   with the previous extensions would detract from the simplicity and originality
   experienced across the street scene. Overall, they would subsume the majority of
   the roofscape.
7. Notwithstanding that the scheme is situated to the rear of the property, its visibility
   from neighbouring properties would still result in an adverse impact on the wider
   character and appearance of the area with the above in mind. The proposal would
   thus cause harm to the character and appearance of the area. As such, there
   would be conflict with Policies D3 and D4 of the London Plan (LP) 2021, Policies
   7.4 and 7B of the Ealing Development Management Development Plan Document
   (DPD) 2013 and Policy DAA of the Ealing Draft Local Plan 2026. Together, and
   amongst other things, these seek to ensure that development proposals are of a
   high-quality design and standard.
Living Conditions
8. Internally, the appeal proposal would result in the ground floor Flat 7 remaining
   unaltered. Flat 7A would be subdivided into Flat 7A and Flat 7B. Flat 7A would be
   on the first floor and Flat 7B within the roof partially facilitated by the proposed roof
   extension. The refusal reason has several concerns in terms of living conditions for
   the future occupiers across the three proposed flats.
9. Flat 7B is to consist of a kitchen/lounge, bedroom and bathroom. There is a sloping
   roof to the front elevation of the property along with the two proposed dormers.
   Resultantly there is likely to be reduced headroom. I do not have precise
   measurements. The section plan gives a visual interpretation of the headroom but
   with no exact measurements I am unsure as to whether the flat would meet the
   75% requirement of headroom of 2.2m in height as required by the Nationally
   Described Space Standard (NDSS) which is referenced by Policy D6 of the LP.
   Moreover, a condition to submit the measurements would not be appropriate post
   permission as if they were unacceptable there would be no way to rescind the
   decision. Therefore, with no evidence to the contrary, I can’t be sure that the flat
   would meet all of the requirements to be a suitable living space for a future
   occupier.
10. The internal arrangements of Flat 7 in terms of minimum space standards and
    furniture layouts for future occupiers are not the subject of the appeal or included in
    the appeal description. The proposed plans do not suggest any changes. Any
    concerns the Council has in terms of a breach of the previous planning permission
    are for the parties to discuss outside of this appeal process.
11. The inaccuracies in terms of Flat 7A and the lack of access to the kitchen and
    bathroom has been advised as a drafting error. As viewed on the site visit, there is
    a doorway to the kitchen and bathroom, and it is the appellants intention for it to
    remain this way. Moreover, the external amenity space appears to be incorrectly
    labelled. Flat 7 has direct access to a private garden which is the existing situation.
    The communal garden is accessed by a separate side access which is labelled as


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009929


     Flat A & B. Whilst the labelling isn’t the clearest, I am satisfied that any occupiers of
     Flat 7B would have sufficient access to external private amenity space.
12. As a result, notwithstanding the lack of harm found in terms of some of the strands,
    this does not outweigh the harm identified in terms of the NDSS for Flat 7B. As a
    result, the proposal would thus cause harm to the living conditions of future
    occupiers. As such, there would be conflict with Policy D6 of the LP and Policies
    3.5 and 7D of the DPD which together amongst other things, seeks to ensure that
    living conditions are protected.
Conclusion and Recommendation
13. With regard to Policy S4 of the Framework and the principle of development within
    settlements, there would be some benefits to the proposed development. It would
    support one additional residential unit which would add to housing in the area. It
    would also make an efficient use of land. However, I have not been advised of any
    specific housing shortfall, and an efficient use of land would be expected to make a
    proposal acceptable in principle. I would therefore ascribe the benefits of the
    proposals limited weight.
14. The harm I have found, and the subsequent development plan conflict, would be
    obvious, enduring and relate to a poor standard of living conditions for future
    occupiers respectively. This would be worthy of significant weight. The Framework
    also reinforces, as part of Policy DP3, that development proposals should respond
    to their context, so they integrate with and enhance their surroundings and, in
    regard to section 12, ensuring safe and healthy living conditions. With this and the
    above in mind, the benefits of granting planning permission for the proposals would
    be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects.
15. With this and the above in mind, the appeal scheme would conflict with the
    development plan, and I have been given no other compelling reason to deviate
    therefrom. I therefore recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

E Street
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
16. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
