 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 11 August 2026
 By Terrence Kemmann-Lane JP DipTP FRTPI MCMI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 24 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6009270
 Land adjacent to Village Hall, Clay Hill, Great Henny, Essex, CO10 7NL
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr G Moore against the decision of Braintree District Council.
 •    The application Ref is 25/02803/FUL.
 •    The development proposed is proposed replacement outbuilding.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issue
2. The main issue in this case is the suitability of the site for the proposed use.
Reasons
3. The appeal site is triangular in shape immediately adjacent to the Great Henny
   Parish Room on Clay Hill, near its junction with Church Lane. The site is largely
   untended grassland with a small, dilapidated touring caravan apparently discarded
   near the centre of the site. Clay Hill is designated as a protected lane under the
   name ‘Gantry’s Farm Road’. The site lies within the Stour Valley National
   Landscape Project Area and is within the setting of the Grade II Listed Thatched
   Cottage (List Entry No: 1123268), situated on the corner of Clay Hill and Church
   Lane. The southern site boundary has a mature hedge providing some screening.
4. The proposed pottery studio would be single-storey, finished with larch cladding set
   over a brick plinth and under a metal standing seam pitched roof, as stated in the
   application form, but is shown on the plans as being of natural slate. The building
   would provide a vaulted open environment for work benches, a kiln, potter’s wheel,
   shelving, tool storage, clay bins, a painting and drying area, a sink and general
   storage for associated tools and equipment for the use of an amateur potter. The
   application plan has a note that shows the caravan being refurbished and re-sited,
   but this is not part of the description of the development.
5. Policy LPP1 of the adopted Local Plan states that development outside
   development boundaries will be confined to uses appropriate to the countryside
   whilst also protecting and enhancing valued landscapes, sites of biodiversity or
   geological value and soils to protect the intrinsic character and beauty of the
   countryside.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6009270



6. The site is indeed within the open and attractive countryside, and the proposed use
   is not related to an agricultural of other appropriate countryside use. No explanation
   is given as to the reason for siting the pottery studio in this location, although I note
   that the land is owned by the appellant. Again, there is no indication of where the
   appellant resides, but it would seem inevitable that access would be by a private
   motorised vehicle. Thus, the proposal is contrary to Policy LPP1, and would not
   amount to sustainable development.
7. In addition, the Essex County Council (ECC) Historic Buildings Consultant advises
   that the development would result in a low level of less than substantial harm to the
   nearby Grade II Listed Thatched Cottage. This objection is on the proposed
   building’s size, height and massing and the use of inappropriate materials and
   contemporary fenestration. As paragraph 215 of the National Planning Policy
   Framework states: “Where a development proposal will lead to less than
   substantial harm to the significance of a designated heritage asset, this harm
   should be weighed against the public benefits of the proposal including, where
   appropriate, securing its optimum viable use”. In this case I cannot identify any
   public benefit.
8. I agree with the assessment of the ECC consultant and on the basis of the above, I
   find that the proposal is contrary to Policy LPP 1, and that it would result in less
   than substantial harm to the nearby listed building.
9. The appellant makes the point that it cannot be the case that a development plan
   can be expected to provide policies for each and every development proposal that
   will be submitted to that authority. That is a statement of the obvious, but provides
   no justification for a development that goes against explicit policy, would result in a
   low level of less than substantial harm to the nearby Grade II Listed Building, and
   would not amount to sustainable development.
10. The appellant also suggests that he could use the land for a whole range of
    purposes for up to 28 days per calendar year without permission; potentially sitting
    on the land and carrying out pottery in the open air; completely enclose the land
    with fencing or a brick wall (without permission); could utilise the land for a range of
    agricultural activities (without permission and generating as many car journeys as
    required) and use for recreational camping (again, without permission and
    generating as many car journeys as required). He contends that in that context the
    proposed use and building is vastly less intrusive than a range of uses that are
    already available to him. That may be so, although for the most part, these are
    rather fanciful.
11. Finally, the appellant seeks to rely on paragraph 11 c) or d) of the National
    Planning Policy Framework (NPPF). Sub-paragraph c) requires approval of a
    development that accords with an up-to-date development plan. In this case the
    proposal does not accord with such a plan. Sub-paragraph d) deals with the
    situation where there are no relevant development plan policies, or the policies
    which are most important for determining the application are out-of-date. In this
    case there is policy, Policy SP3 (Section 1) Policy LPP1 (Section 2), in plans that
    are up-to-date, or just over 5 years old but in accord with the NPPF and in
    particular, with paragraph 187 a) and b). There is also the weighty matter of less
    than substantial harm to a heritage asset (NPPF paragraphs 212 and 215).



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
 Appeal Decision 6009270



12. As a result of these considerations, the appeal will be dismissed.

Terrence Kemmann-Lane
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
