 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 8 September 2026
 By Terrence Kemmann-Lane JP DipTP FRTPI MCMI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 01 October 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6009577
 42 Robinia Close, Laindon, SS15 4HD
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Hickson against the decision of Basildon Borough Council.
 •    The application Ref is 25/00970/FULL.
 •    The development proposed is demolition of side porch and erection of single storey rear extension
      and new front porch to No. 42. Erection of 1no. two-storey dwelling with associated residential
      curtilage, refuse and cycle storage provision. Creation of additional parking space within existing
      parking court.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issues
2. The main issues in this case are: i) the effect of the proposed dwelling on the
   appearance of the host dwelling, the terrace and the streetscene; ii) the effect of
   the proposal on the living conditions of neighbours, particularly Nos.59 and 61.
Reasons
3. The appeal site is a residential plot, the main part of the which contains the existing
   2 storey dwelling of No. 42 Robinia Close and its associated rear and side gardens,
   located within a mature but recent residential estate. In addition, the red edged
   appeal site also includes the parking court which is located behind Nos.45 to 61
   and accessed next to No.45. The dwelling is an end terrace, being attached to a 3-
   storey block of flats (containing 6 no. flats) and 3 no. 2-storey staggered houses.
   The immediate area is of high-density residential of 2 and 3-storey flats and
   houses. To the north of the site is a landscape buffer with Noak Hill Road (A176)
   beyond; to the east lies the attached flatted block; to the south is on-street parking
   and turning; to the west are 2 and 3-storey dwellings.
The effect of the proposed dwelling on the appearance of the host dwelling, the terrace
and the streetscene
4. At present the appeal property has a gable roof, the ridge of which runs parallel to
   the highway. The design of the proposed house would include a hip roof set just
   below the ridge line of the gable of the present house. The remainder of the present
   terrace has gables. However, there are other hipped roofs in the immediate vicinity,
   such as at Nos.38 and 40 Robina Close which are immediately opposite the other
   end of the terrace, and the central projecting element of the flats in the terrace has

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6009577



     a hipped roof. The hip roof would have the merit of continuing the diminishing
     height of development from the neighbouring three-story flats. I conclude that the
     proposed dwelling would not have a harmful effect on the appearance of the host
     dwelling, the terrace and the streetscene.
The effect of the proposal on the living conditions of neighbours, particularly Nos.59
and 61
5. The proposed dwelling would bring a side elevation closer to the 2 houses at
   Nos.59 and 61. This side elevation has the merit of having no windows which could
   cause overlooking problems, but the blank brick wall is not at attractive outlook at
   close range. Whilst there would remain a 7m gap between the front wall and
   number 59, the closest of the opposite dwellings, these houses front onto a
   pathway, rather than a road with a wider width. I understand that the main windows
   to the front of these houses serve a kitchen rather than a living room, but much
   time can be spent in a kitchen, particularly standing up. The approach to these
   houses would also be more enclosed. I conclude that there would be an
   overbearing effect on these neighbours as a result of the construction of the appeal
   proposal which would be detrimental to their living conditions.
Overall conclusion
6. I have considered all other matters raised in coming to my conclusion, including
   noting that the council does not have a 5-year housing land supply and the remarks
   about environmental and social benefits. However, whilst I find that the proposal
   would not have a harmful effect on the appearance of the host dwelling, the terrace
   and the streetscene, I do find that it would have an overbearing effect on the
   neighbours at Nos.59 and 61 which would be detrimental to their living conditions.
   This outweighs considerations that are in support of a permission. For that reason,
   the appeal will be dismissed.


Terrence Kemmann-Lane
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
