Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 July 2026 by L Clark MSc MRTPI
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28th August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009279
Windsor, 22 Kirk Road, Walpole St Andrew, Norfolk PE14 7LL
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Ms O'Callaghan against the decision of King's Lynn and West Norfolk
    Borough Council.
•   The application Ref is 25/01494/F.
•   The development proposed is a self-build dwelling.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a self-build dwelling
   at Windsor, 22 Kirk Road, Walpole St Andrew, Norfolk PE14 7LL in accordance
   with the terms of the application, Ref 25/01494/F, subject to the conditions in the
   attached schedule.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. Having reviewed the most recent changes to the National Planning Policy
   Framework, I am satisfied that they do not affect the substance of the main issues
   in the appeal. Since their cases would not therefore be prejudiced, I have
   proceeded without further consultation with the main parties.
4. A planning obligation has been submitted to secure the appeal building as a self-
   build unit. Amendments to the Biodiversity Gain (Town and Country Planning)
   (Amendments and Transitional Provisions) (England) Regulations 2026 came into
   effect on 6 August 2026. They removed the self and custom build exemption for
   mandatory Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG) contributions. However, they also
   introduced a new 0.2 hectare exemption for small sites. The appeal site area
   equates to 0.0308 hectares. The proposal would therefore not be liable for BNG.
5. There does not appear to be any principle policy objection to a dwelling in this
   location. Although the Council consider the self-build to be positive, for the
   purposes of this appeal, the decision does not turn on whether or not the proposal
   is secured as a self-build by a completed obligation.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009279


6. Since the appeal process should not be used to evolve a scheme, I have
   considered the plans on which the Council based their decision in the interests of
   fairness to all parties.
Main Issues
7. The main issues are the effect of the proposal upon a) the living conditions of the
   occupants of Number 20 Kirk Road (No.20) and The Old School, Kirk Road with
   particular regard to privacy and b) the character and appearance of the area.
Reasons for the Recommendation
Living Conditions
8. The site is surrounded by residential properties on all sides, bordered by fencing
   and hedging. The proposal is for a detached two storey dwelling. The rear elevation
   of the property would face towards No.20 and the side elevation would face
   towards The Old School.
9. The detached outbuilding at No.20 would be the closest structure to the proposed
   dwelling, with the side elevation of the house set further back within their garden.
   Due to its layout, the window for bedroom one would be positioned further back
   than the rearmost part of the property and the rear garden of the proposed dwelling
   would also be between the window and the neighbouring dwelling. In addition, the
   window would be relatively small and contained within a modest dormer. Views
   from the window would be initially directed towards the boundary hedging and
   detached garage at No.20. Whilst there would be some views of No.20 and parts of
   its garden from the bedroom window, having regard to the separation distance and
   intervening features, this would not result in a harmful loss of privacy for the
   occupants of No.20.
10. The Old School is opposite the appeal site and the proposed dwelling would benefit
    from a side garden. This would result in a substantial degree of separation between
    the two buildings. Whilst a small first-floor window serving bedroom two would face
    towards The Old School, the separation distance between the properties would be
    such that any intervisibility would not result in a harmful loss of privacy. There
    would also be a bathroom window on the same elevation, but a condition will be
    recommended to ensure that the window would be obscure glazed. Consequently,
    the proposal would not unacceptably harm the living conditions of the occupants of
    The Old School with regard to privacy.
11. The proposal would therefore not cause a loss of privacy for the occupants of the
    neighbouring properties and would comply with Policy LP21 of the King’s Lynn and
    West Norfolk Local Plan 2025 (LP) which is concerned with amenity amongst other
    things.
Character and Appearance
12. The appeal site is currently used as a large garden area for the host dwelling. The
    land extends to the side and occupies a corner plot on Kirk Road. There is an
    eclectic mix of house types, designs and usage of materials around the site which
    include bungalows and two storey properties. Similarly, there is no clearly defined
    uniformity to building spacing, garden size or scale with some dwellings set back
    from the roadside and some immediately alongside it.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009279


13. The proposed dwelling would sit amongst the varied form, scale and appearance of
    the existing residential properties along Kirk Road and would be set back from the
    road. Given the absence of a uniform architectural style or building form along the
    road, the modest two-storey rendered dwelling would sit comfortably within its
    surroundings. Whilst the development would result in the loss of an existing
    grassed corner plot, the contribution of this land to the character of the area is
    limited by the boundary hedging which restricts views into the site, the narrow
    nature of Kirk Road and the tight-knit grain of surrounding residential development.
    Consequently, the loss of the open corner plot would not materially harm the
    character or appearance of the residential area.
14. The proposed garden spaces would be smaller than that which serve some of the
    closest dwellings however they would not be cramped and would retain a garden
    space around each dwelling. Although the garden for 22 Kirk Road would inevitably
    be reduced, it would still be of an adequate size to serve the dwelling. The same
    can be said for the garden for the proposed dwelling which would extend to each
    side. The proposal would therefore reflect the character and appearance of the
    area and would comply with Policies LP02, LP18, LP21 and LP31 of the LP which
    are concerned with character amongst other things.
Other Matter
15. I have not been provided with a copy of the Ombudsman decision that the Council
    refer to. That being said, such a decision is case specific and should not be used
    as a blanket rule for all planning applications which may turn on different matters
    which are individually site or circumstance specific. It would remain to be a matter
    for a decision maker as to whether a breach of a 21 metres distance between
    windows would amount to living conditions harm in each case.
Conditions
16. Other than the standard time limit condition, it is necessary to ensure that the
    development is carried out in accordance with the approved plans for certainty and
    enforcement. In the interests of the character and appearance of the area, a
    condition relating to the agreement of materials is necessary. I see no reason why
    these details should be agreed pre-commencement, and I have therefore
    recommended that they are so prior to any development above slab level.
17. In the interests of the living conditions of the occupants of neighbouring properties,
    a condition will be necessary to ensure that the first-floor bathroom window in the
    side elevation will be obscure glazed and non-opening prior to occupation. Given
    that the site is located in an area at risk of flooding, a condition is necessary to
    secure mitigation measures prior to occupation of the dwelling.
18. A condition is also necessary regarding the construction of the access and parking
    area to ensure that they are carried out in accordance with highways specification
    and to ensure that no surface water would discharge on to the highway. These
    details should be submitted, agreed and carried out prior to occupation and then
    retained thereafter. A condition would also be necessary and reasonable to ensure
    there is a 2-metre-wide visibility splay for each property in the interests of highway
    safety and entering and exiting the site safely. The splay shall be retained with no
    structures exceeding 1.05 metres in height within it.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009279


19. The Council has suggested a condition that would remove permitted development
    rights for the installation of new windows. However, given my findings above and
    the distance that there would be between the new dwelling and the closest
    neighbouring properties, such a condition would not be reasonable or necessary.
Conclusion and Recommendation
20. The appeal scheme would comply with the development plan and there is nothing
    compelling to suggest a decision other than in accordance. I therefore recommend
    that the appeal should be allowed.

L Clark
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER
Inspector’s Decision
21. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed. Planning permission is therefore granted, subject
    to the conditions set out in the attached schedule.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009279


Schedule of Conditions
     1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
        the date of this decision.
     2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
        following approved plans: PP1000 and PP1100.
     3) Notwithstanding the plans hereby approved, no development above slab level
        shall take place until details of the materials to be used in the construction of the
        external surfaces of the development have been submitted to and approved in
        writing by the local planning authority. Development shall be carried out in
        accordance with the approved details.
     4) The development hereby permitted shall not be first occupied until the mitigation
        measures set out in paragraph 5.2 of the Flood Risk Assessment ref:
        ECL1588/SWANN EDWARDS ARCHITECTURE undertaken by Ellingham
        Consultancy Ltd dated September 2025 have been completed. The measures
        shall be retained thereafter.
     5) The development hereby permitted shall not be first occupied until the first-floor
        bathroom window has been fitted with obscured glazing, and no part of that
        window that is less than 1.7 metres above the floor of the room in which it is
        installed shall be capable of being opened. Once installed it shall be retained
        thereafter.
     6) The development hereby permitted shall not be first occupied until details for the
        construction of the access and parking area including surface water disposal
        have been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority.
        Development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details prior
        to the first occupation of the development hereby permitted and retained
        thereafter.
     7) The development hereby permitted shall not be first occupied until a 2-metre-
        wide parallel visibility splay on the roadside frontage and additionally along the
        flank frontage of the adjacent property as outlined in blue on the approved plan
        has been provided. The visibility splays shall be retained thereafter and no
        structure or erection exceeding 1.05 metres in height shall be placed across or
        within the splay at any time.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
