Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 August 2026
by MG Garrard LLB (Hons), PGDip.LP, Solicitor
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6009410
Land rear of 53 Beresford Avenue, Chapel-en-le-Frith, Derbyshire SK23 0PZ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Anna Wickham against the decision of High Peak Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is HPK/2025/0352.
•    The development proposed is siting of two storage containers for agricultural machinery with
     associated minimal permeable hardstanding; retention of beehives and small poultry enclosure.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for siting of two storage
       containers for agricultural machinery with associated minimal permeable
       hardstanding; retention of beehives and small poultry enclosure at land rear of 53
       Beresford Avenue, Chapel-en-le-Frith, Derbyshire SK23 0PZ in accordance with
       the terms of the application, Ref HPK/2025/0352, subject to the following
       conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall accord with the layout shown on
              UG_3026_USRB_DRG_SP rev P02 Site Plan, expressly excluding the key,
              and the elevations shown on UG_3262_UD_DRG_100_01 Plans and
              elevations.
     2)       The containers shall only be used for agricultural purposes ancillary to the
              agricultural use of the site and for no other purpose.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The appeal relates to development already carried out. I am satisfied that the
       storage containers, hardstanding, beehives and poultry enclosure are positioned
       broadly as shown on the submitted site plan. However, the lettering in the key to
       that plan does not accurately identify those features and I have therefore excluded
       it from the approved plans condition. Although the submitted material refers to a
       children's playhouse and informal children's play, neither form part of the
       development proposed, and they have not been assessed as part of this decision.
       As ‘retrospective’ describes the timing of the application rather than the
       development itself, I have omitted that term from the description above.
3.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published in August 2026. The main parties were given an opportunity to comment
       on the implications of the revised Framework for the appeal, and I have taken
       those comments into account in reaching my decision. References to the
       Framework in my decision are to the August 2026 version.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009410


Main Issues
4.     The main issues are:
     •     the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area; and
     •     whether the proposal would be an acceptable countryside use, having regard
           to whether it supports an agricultural enterprise.
Reasons
Character and Appearance
5.     The appeal site is an agricultural field on the edge of Chapel-en-le-Frith with
       residential development on two sides. It slopes up steeply from the rear of
       residential properties and has commanding views across the settlement to the
       landscape beyond.
6.     It lies within the Settled Valley Pastures Landscape Character Area, where the
       High Peak Landscape Character Supplementary Planning Document SPD5,
       March 2006 (Landscape SPD) advises that development should contribute to, and
       not erode, landscape character and sense of place.
7.     Large metal containers are not inherently characteristic of a rural landscape.
       However, they are finished in a dark green colour and positioned within an
       excavated area in the corner of the field. Seen in the context of the appeal site’s
       edge-of-settlement location, where built development and more commercial forms
       of activity are apparent in wider views, they do not appear as discordant features
       within the landscape.
8.     The appeal site is visible from some nearby dwellings and in wider views across
       the valley. However, the containers’ partly recessed position, subdued colour and
       the distances involved limit their visual prominence, so they do not appear unduly
       conspicuous. The associated stone hardstanding does not appear especially bright
       or reflective, and vegetation is becoming established through parts of its surface.
       Consequently, it is not a visually intrusive feature and is largely absent from wider
       views.
9.     From Ashbourne Lane, the principal visual receptors are pedestrians and drivers.
       The road lies at a lower level than the appeal site and is bordered by hedgerows
       and verges, with the containers set slightly back from the boundary. Consequently,
       views are limited and will reduce further as the recent additional hedgerow planting
       matures. From higher sections of the lane, the containers are largely screened by
       taller vegetation behind them, whilst from lower sections the difference in levels
       and roadside planting obscures them. As a result, drivers are unlikely to
       experience more than fleeting glimpses of the upper parts of the containers, and
       pedestrians are generally only aware of them when looking directly up at them.
10. I agree with the Council that the beehives and poultry enclosure are modest,
    moveable and non-permanent structures which, by reason of their limited scale
    and unobtrusive appearance, do not harm the character or appearance of the
    countryside.
11. Taking these factors together, I find that the containers, hardstanding and
    associated works sit relatively comfortably in their surroundings and do not appear


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009410


       to be intrusive or discordant features within the countryside. Consequently, I
       conclude that the proposal would preserve the character and appearance of the
       area and would not conflict with Policies EQ2, EQ3 and EQ6 of the HPLP insofar
       as they seek to protect landscape character.
12. It would also comply with Policy DP3 of the Framework which sets out key
    principles for well-designed places and requires development to respond positively
    to its context.
Location
13. The appeal site is adjacent to the built-up area of Chapel-en-le-Frith and outside
    its settlement boundary where Policy S2 of the High Peak Local Plan 2016 (HPLP)
    indicates development will be strictly limited to that which has an essential need to
    be located in the countryside. Policy EQ3 of the HPLP seeks to strictly control rural
    development to protect the landscape’s intrinsic character and distinctiveness,
    while also facilitating certain rural development.
14. It is not disputed that poultry keeping and beekeeping are agricultural activities.
    Whilst currently undertaken on a modest scale, the sizeable field requires ongoing
    management and, as suggested by the appellant, it has potential to support
    additional activities, such as sheep grazing.
15. The appellant acknowledges that one of the containers is currently used to store
    equipment associated with an engineering business, which is not an agricultural
    use. However, the appeal proposal relates to agricultural use of the containers,
    and the evidence indicates they are capable of serving that function. Any concern
    regarding future non-agricultural use could therefore be addressed through a
    condition restricting the containers to purposes ancillary to the agricultural use of
    the appeal site.
16. At the time of my visit, one container contained agricultural equipment, and a small
    tractor was present in the field, which could reasonably be stored in the other
    container. The presence of electricity and internal lighting does not, in itself,
    demonstrate any particular use and I attach limited weight to this matter. Although
    there was some evidence of limited domestication, including a bench and fairy
    lights, the field nevertheless retained an overall agricultural character.
17. However, having regard to the very modest scale of the agricultural activities
    taking place, and in the absence of any substantive evidence of agricultural activity
    beyond a hobby, I cannot conclude that currently there is a meaningful agricultural
    enterprise that is supported by the development.
18. Consequently, the development does not fall within the types of rural development
    supported by Policy EQ3, and I conclude that it would not be an acceptable
    countryside use, having regard to whether it supports an agricultural enterprise.
19. Therefore, it conflicts with Policies S2 and EQ3 of the HPLP with regard to their
    expectation that development in the countryside will be strictly limited, while
    amongst other things, supporting proposals for agriculture and related
    development which will help sustain existing agricultural enterprises, including new
    agricultural buildings that maintain the landscape quality and character of the
    countryside.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009410


Planning Balance
20. I have found that the development does not help sustain an existing agricultural
    enterprise and in this regard conflicts with Policies S2 and EQ3 of the HPLP.
21. Policy DM8 of the Framework indicates that where consideration is being given to
    an application for retrospective planning permission, if it is concluded based on
    evidence that the unauthorised development was intentional, that fact should be
    given substantial weight in considering whether to grant planning permission.
    However, there is no substantive evidence before me that this was the case, and I
    therefore attach limited weight to that matter.
22. Policy S5 of the Framework supports development for agriculture outside
    settlements and does not require such development to support an existing
    agricultural enterprise. The development does not conflict with any of the policies
    in the Framework indicating that development proposals should be refused in
    specific circumstances.
23. The benefits of the development are modest but include supporting the existing
    agricultural activities on the site, albeit not a meaningful agricultural enterprise, and
    facilitating the ongoing management and maintenance of the land. Taking account
    of the presumption in favour of sustainable development in Policy S5 and weighing
    the benefits against the limited adverse effects that I have identified, including the
    development plan conflict, I find that the benefits of granting planning permission
    would not be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects of doing so.
Conditions
24. No conditions were suggested by the Council. I have imposed a condition requiring
    accordance with the approved plans in the interests of certainty. A commencement
    condition is unnecessary because the development has already been carried out.
    Having regard to the tests in Policy DM6 of the Framework, a condition restricting
    the use of the containers to purposes ancillary to the agricultural use of the appeal
    site is necessary given the basis upon which the proposal has been assessed. I
    have not sought further comments from the parties on these conditions because
    they do no more than secure the development proposed and assessed.
Conclusion
25. Although the development conflicts with the development plan read as a whole,
    there are material considerations of sufficient weight to indicate that a decision
    should be made other than in accordance with the development plan.
26. Therefore, for the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.

MG Garrard
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
