Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 27 July 2026
by P Eggleton BSc(Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009771
88 Eastern Road, Romford RM1 3QA
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr J Murphy against the decision of the London Borough of Havering
    Council.
•   The application reference is P1622.25.
•   The development proposed is a single storey rear extension to facilitate change of use from dwelling
    (Use Class C3) to a house of multiple occupancy (Sui Generis), including installation of security gate,
    new fences, bin/cycle stores and internal alterations, following the demolition of the existing rear
    extension.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a single storey rear
   extension to facilitate a change of use from dwelling (Use Class C3) to a house of
   multiple occupancy (Sui Generis), including installation of security gate, new
   fences, bin/cycle stores and internal alterations, following the demolition of the
   existing rear extension at 88 Eastern Road, Romford in accordance with the terms
   of the application, reference P1622.25, and the plans submitted with it, subject to
   the conditions within the attached schedule.
Application for costs
2. An application for costs was made by Mr J Murphy against the London Borough of
   Havering Council and is the subject of a separate decision.
Main Issue
3. The main issue is the effect on the living conditions of the adjacent residents with
   regard to noise from the proposed parking area.
Reasons
4. The proposal would result in the use of this property as a ten person, house of
   multiple occupancy (HMO) with ten bedrooms. A similar proposal relating to this
   property was considered at appeal, reference 6000600 and was dismissed on 9
   December 2025. This appeal relates to an amended proposal. The officer report
   recommended approval but the council refused the application for a single reason
   relating to concerns that the five vehicle parking area would result in noise and
   disturbance that would be harmful to the amenity of neighbouring properties.
5. The previous inspector found that the use of the rear garden for ten parking
   spaces, uniformly spaced along the boundary shared with 86 Eastern Road, would

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision: 6009771


     be likely to have a noticeable impact on neighbouring occupiers from the increase
     in vehicle movements in this area, which may lead to higher levels of noise and
     disturbance through engine noise, doors slamming and comings and goings,
     particularly during early mornings and late evenings. It was found that such activity
     could disrupt the quiet enjoyment of neighbouring gardens and outdoor spaces
     resulting in an unacceptable effect on the living conditions of occupiers of adjoining
     properties, with specific regard to noise and disturbance contrary to Policy 8(iii) of
     the London Borough of Havering Local Plan 2016-2031 (HLP).
6. The current proposal shows five car parking spaces located on the boundary with
   90 Eastern Road. That property is the St Kilda's Children Centre and there are
   outdoor areas associated with that use, close to the proposed parking area.
   However, noise at more unsociable hours would not result in significant concerns
   relating to that use.
7. The spaces would be further from the boundary with number 86 but vehicles
   manoeuvring in and out of the spaces would come close to the shared boundary.
   The garden of 86 does not extend the full depth of the site but the area that
   appears to be used for sitting out, is close to the proposed access into the
   manoeuvring area. The parking spaces are close to the very rear extent of the
   garden to number 84 which extends beyond its neighbour.
8. The accessing and use of the parking spaces would be likely to result in significant
   activity to the rear of the property. The position of the parking, further into the site,
   would take this activity further from the houses. Whilst I note the presence of the
   railway line and other parking areas at depth in the area, given that this use may
   attract residents that may have hours of working and other activities, that result in
   comings and goings at quieter times, the proposal would result in some disturbance
   to the neighbouring residents of number 86 in particular.
9. This property would have been a relatively large dwelling with its current extension
   and could have accommodated a large family with a number of cars. I am not
   persuaded that this would have resulted in the level and timing of activity that could
   be associated with the proposed use. However, the property also has a lawful
   development certificate to operate as a 6-person HMO, and the neighbouring
   residents suggest that this has commenced. The rear garden area was clearly
   available for parking during my visit, with space for numerous cars.
10. With regard to the fallback position, given the nature of the existing
    accommodation, as shown on the existing floor plans for the 6-bed HMO, it is not
    clear how many of the residents would be likely to have vehicles. No evidence or
    information of past or likely future use has been provided. This proposal would
    result in a higher standard of accommodation with up to ten residents. By limiting
    the parking space numbers, such spaces would be at a premium and it seems
    more likely that the spaces would be well used. Even with the lower number of
    parking spaces, it is likely that the level of activity would be greater than the lawful
    use as a 6-bed HMO. However, given the lawful use and with the parking area
    formalised and limited, although the proposed use may result in greater levels of
    noise and activity, it is not likely to result in such an increase that it would be
    unacceptably harmful to the living conditions of the neighbouring residents.
11. LP Policy 7 seeks to avoid unacceptable levels of noise and disturbance. The
    proposal would be likely to fall just under this threshold. Policy 8iii relates


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         2
Appeal Decision: 6009771


     specifically to HMO and requires that proposals would not be likely to give rise to
     significantly greater levels of noise and disturbance to occupiers of nearby
     residential properties than would a single family dwelling of equivalent size. I am
     not satisfied that this proposal meets this test but accept that the property has a
     lawful use as a small HMO and that the formalising of the parking provision may
     result in the noise and disturbance being more comparable. The layout, with
     parking furthest from the living accommodation, gains some support from Policy 34
     and offers some mitigation as required by Policy D14 of the London Plan 2021
     (LP). I find some conflict with the National Planning Policy Framework which seeks
     a high standard of amenity for existing and future users.
Other matters
12. I have had regard to the matters raised by local residents and those raised at the
    committee and reported in the minutes. To a large extent, these have been fully
    addressed within the council’s report and during the previous appeal. With regard
    to the access and highway safety, the use of the driveway, with vehicles crossing
    the footpath, would continue in a similar manner to the lawful use.
13. The site is relatively close to the centre of Romford where there are services and
    public transport options within walking distance. The level of parking proposed
    would not encourage all residents to use public transport and not have a car and as
    such, would not gain support from LP Policy T1. LP Policy T6B advises that car-
    free development should be the starting point for all development proposals in
    places that are well-connected by public transport. LP Policy T6.1 refers to
    maximum parking standards as does HLP Policy 24. The parking standards do not
    provide specific requirements for HMO and the use of the maximum parking
    provision for a dwelling, for each single room, seems excessive. Whilst the
    proposal does not conflict with these standards or HLP Policy 8iv, which requires
    that the proposal meets Havering's parking requirements; and will not have an
    unacceptable impact on parking conditions and traffic congestion in the area, a
    further reduction in parking would assist in mitigating the noise impact further whilst
    also supporting the move towards more sustainable travel.
14. The proposal does provide for cycle storage, and this does weigh in favour of the
    proposal, as does the submitted Unilateral Undertaking which would prevent
    residents from obtaining parking permits, so addressing concerns that the reduction
    in parking would displace vehicles onto surrounding streets.
15. The design of the extension would not be in keeping with the character or
    appearance of the house, but it would be screened from view. It would not harm the
    character or appearance of the locally listed buildings to each side. The quality of
    the outdoor space would be significantly improved from that considered in the
    dismissed appeal. The standard of accommodation, particularly compared to the
    existing layout, would be improved.
16. Whilst it has been suggested that the proposal represents an overdevelopment of
    the site, in seeking maximum occupancy rather than appropriate housing provision,
    it would offer good quality accommodation within a site that can accommodate it,
    without wider harm to the character of the area. It gains support from the LP and
    HLP in this respect. Concern has been raised regarding the concentration of HMO
    in the vicinity, but I have no evidence to indicate that there is an over-concentration
    of such uses.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
Appeal Decision: 6009771


17. The concern with regard to bin storage being too far from the entrance has been
    addressed by moving it to the front garden. Whilst a bin store has been illustrated, it
    is not clear whether this would be suitable for the waste provisions necessary for
    ten residents. It would also be necessary for the front hedge to the property to be
    retained and managed otherwise, a bin store in this position would detract from the
    character and appearance of the area. The management and maintenance of the
    landscaping is a matter that needs to be addressed to ensure that the use would
    operate effectively without harm to the character and appearance of the area and
    the amenities of neighbouring residents.
Conclusions
18. The proposal does have shortcomings with regard to the form and design of the
    extension and the scale of the parking provision. It is likely to result in greater
    impacts on the adjacent residents than the lawful use but I am not satisfied that this
    would result in unacceptable harm, although the amenity concerns result in some
    conflict with the HLP and the Framework. I am not persuaded that the level of
    parking represents a positive measure as less parking would result in greater
    benefits with regard to encouraging a shift in travel patterns and would help to
    reduce noise. However, I have considered the proposal as submitted.
19. The development would accommodate a greater number of households and offer
    good quality, lower cost housing, in an accessible location. As the council is unable
    to identify a suitable supply of housing land, the provision of this type of housing,
    for ten separate households, adding to the housing mix, gains considerable support
    from the development plan and the Framework.
20. Some comments have been made by interested parties with regard to potential
    effects of the activities of future residents on children, the elderly and disabled in
    the area. I have had due regard to the Public Sector Equality Duty contained in
    Section 149 of the Equality Act 2010. This requires consideration of the need to
    eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and foster
    good relations between people who share a protected characteristic and people
    who do not share it. There is little before me to demonstrate how or why interested
    parties consider the proposal would specifically affect people who share a
    protected characteristic. The site boundaries are well contained, and the proposal
    is of a relatively small scale. It is unlikely that there would be any adverse effect on
    the surrounding community. This aligns with the council's view who raise no
    concerns in this respect. Consequently, it would be proportionate to allow the
    appeal.
21. Given these particular circumstances, I am satisfied that, although there are some
    adverse impacts of allowing the proposal, including some conflict with the
    development plan and Framework, there is also a number of matters that weigh in
    favour of the proposal and gain support from other elements of the development
    plan and the Framework. When taking both the development plan and the
    Framework as a whole, they offer support for the proposal. I conclude that the harm
    would not significantly and demonstrably outweigh the benefits. I therefore allow
    the appeal.
Conditions
22. I have imposed conditions relating to the commencement of development and the
    details of the approved plans for the avoidance of doubt and in the interests of

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         4
Appeal Decision: 6009771


     proper planning. A condition restricting the number of residents to ten is necessary
     to limit the scale of occupation to that which can be accommodated within the
     property; and to ensure that it does not result in harm to the surrounding area. I
     have imposed a condition to require that the materials of the extension be agreed
     to ensure that the development would have a satisfactory appearance. Conditions
     would prevent the installation of addition side facing windows and the use of the flat
     roof as a balcony to protect neighbouring amenity.
23. I have limited the number of parking spaces to five and required that they be laid
    out in accordance with the approved plan to ensure that noise and disturbance is
    limited to the use of five vehicles, in the positions proposed, to protect the
    amenities of the neighbouring residents. I have also required the installation of the
    cycle store to ensure alternative modes of travel are encouraged.
24. Conditions requiring details of hard and soft landscaping and details of boundary
    treatments have been imposed as the existing details are not sufficient, particularly
    with regard to existing vegetation. The conditions are necessary to ensure that the
    development is adequately contained and has a satisfactory appearance. I have
    included a requirement for a landscape and maintenance management plan to
    ensure that management responsibilities and maintenance schedules are in place
    to ensure that the property is suitably maintained and has a satisfactory
    appearance.
25. I have not imposed a construction hours condition as this is a matter better
    controlled by other legislation. Whilst adoption of the principles and practices of the
    Secured by Design Award Scheme and Designing against Crime are encouraged, I
    have not been provided with details regarding the anticipated requirements but in
    any event, this is a matter partly for building regulations; and any additional
    provisions are a matter for the appellant.

Peter Eggleton
INSPECTOR


Schedule of conditions
     1)     The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
            the date of this decision.
     2)     The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
            the following approved plans: 3584/01/46 Revision 01 and 3584/01/46
            Revision 00.
     3)     The property shall be limited to a maximum of ten residents at any one time.
     4)     Before any above ground development is commenced, details of the external
            walls and roof materials to be used in the construction of the extension shall
            be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
            works shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details.
     5)     No window or other opening, other than those shown on the approved plans,
            shall be formed in the flank walls of the building.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        5
Appeal Decision: 6009771


     6)     The roof area of the extension hereby permitted shall not be used as a
            balcony or similar amenity area at any time.
     7)     Notwithstanding the details on the approved plans, the use shall not
            commence until refuse and recycling facilities are provided in accordance
            with details which shall have been submitted to and approved in writing by
            the local planning authority. The refuse and recycling facilities shall be
            permanently retained thereafter.
     8)     Car parking within the site shall be limited to five vehicles using the five
            spaces proposed. These spaces shall be laid out in accordance with the
            approved plans prior to the commencement of the use hereby permitted.
     9)     Prior to the commencement of the use hereby permitted, the proposed cycle
            store shall be installed. The cycle storage provision shall be used only for its
            design purpose and shall be made available for use by all residents at all
            times.
     10)    Notwithstanding the details on the approved plans, the use shall not
            commence until a scheme of soft landscaping and a landscape management
            and maintenance plan have been submitted to and approved in writing by the
            local planning authority. The landscape scheme shall include indications of
            all existing trees, hedges and shrubs on the site, and details of those to be
            retained, together with measures for their protection in the course of
            construction. All planting, seeding or turfing comprised within the approved
            scheme shall be carried out no later than the end of the first planting season
            following the commencement of the approved use. Any trees or plants, which
            within a period of 5 years from the commencement of the use, die, are
            removed or become seriously damaged or diseased, shall be replaced in the
            next planting season with others of a similar size and species. The landscape
            management and maintenance plan shall include management
            responsibilities and maintenance schedules for all landscaped areas. All
            landscaping shall be managed in accordance with the approved landscape
            and maintenance management plan.
     11)    The use shall not commence until details of hard landscaping, including
            driveway and parking areas and any proposed walls, fences and boundary
            treatments, including the perimeter treatment to the communal amenity
            space, have been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
            authority. The approved details shall be carried out in accordance with the
            approved details before the use commences and shall be retained thereafter.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         6
