Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 10 September 2026
by L Gardner MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009917
7 Marine Parade, Folkestone CT20 1PX
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Cesar Benitez against the decision of Folkestone and Hythe District Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/2193/FH.
•    The development proposed is change of use from former hotel to dwelling house.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.     During the course of the appeal a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. The main parties were provided
       with an opportunity to comment. I have had regard to the 2026 version of the
       Framework in my decision.
Main Issue
3.     The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the provision of
       visitor accommodation and the local tourism industry.
Reasons
4.     The appeal site relates to a mid-terrace townhouse on Marine Parade, along the
       sea front overlooking the English Channel, close to both the harbour and the town
       centre of Folkestone.
5.     The surrounding area has a mixed-use character, with the terraced row itself
       comprising both commercial and residential uses. Historically, the appeal site was
       operated as a hotel in combination with the attached 8-9 Marine Parade, albeit the
       appeal site has since been separated from these properties, which are now in use
       as apartments. I understand that the hotel ceased operation in 2008. A separate
       hotel use continues to operate at 4-5 Marine Parade.
6.     Policy E4 of the Folkestone & Hythe District Places and Policies Local Plan (2020)
       (the Local Plan), relates to hotels and guest houses. It sets out that applications for
       the change of use or redevelopment of hotels, guest houses or self-catering units
       which would result in a loss of visitor accommodation will only be permitted subject
       to criteria listed within the policy.
7.     One of these criteria relates to the standard and type of accommodation that is, or
       could be provided at a reasonable cost, being unsuited to meet visitor demands.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009917


       The appellant has presented that it is no longer economically viable or physically
       practical for the appeal site to remain in a hotel use.
8.     Having visited the appeal site, I appreciate that the building would require
       renovation to bring it to a reasonably habitable and attractive state for visitor
       accommodation. Specifically, I understand that the building requires the installation
       of essential utilities and that to increase room revenue, additional bathrooms and
       amenities may need to be provided.
9.     Nevertheless, outside of quotes for new utilities supply (which I am not convinced
       would be a cost solely associated with a hotel use), I have been presented with
       very little substantive evidence to the likely costs associated with such a
       renovation, such as a viability assessment or a schedule outlining costs against
       revenue. I therefore cannot reasonably conclude that the costs of bringing the
       building back into an active hotel use would be unreasonable.
10. Occupancy rates of the existing hotel at 4-5 Marine Parade have been presented
    for the preceding years, demonstrating relatively low occupancy, particularly within
    the winter months. However, the hotel at 4-5 Marine Parade represents a greater
    scale in comparison to the appeal building, and therefore I cannot be satisfied that
    the visitor demands and expectations, or hotel operations, would be directly
    aligned to the appeal building, despite their similar location. I have therefore
    afforded the occupancy rates presented limited weight in my overall decision.
11. My attention has been drawn to changes to tourism trends in recent years,
    including a focus on self-catered, bed and breakfast style tourism since the
    Covid 19 outbreak. However, I am not satisfied that this amounts to a
    consequential significant deterioration of demand for more traditional hotel uses,
    including a smaller more boutique style offering which could reasonably be
    expected within the size of the appeal building. Equally, there is little evidence
    before me to demonstrate that the appeal building could not reasonably be brought
    into use as an alternative form of visitor accommodation which would align with the
    cited tourism trends.
12. Even noting future projects to renovate and redevelop the sea front (which may
    affect views from the appeal building), the appeal building is still in an optimal
    tourist location, offering good access to the areas of main tourist activity, such as
    the town centre, harbour and the sea front. In the context of Policy E4 of the Local
    Plan, I therefore cannot conclude that the appeal site is poorly located, or that
    areas in the immediate vicinity are predominantly unrelated to tourism, or
    incompatible with the continued tourist use of the premises.
13. The final criteria of Policy E4 of the Local Plan requires demonstration that the
    business has been marketed at a reasonable rate and for a period of 12 months.
    The evidence before me includes a letter dated 15th May 2026 outlining the
    marketing which has been undertaken for the property.
14. The building was marketed from March 2025 and it is stated that it remains an
    active listing, thus satisfying the time period referred to in Policy E4 of the Local
    Plan. It is explicitly stated that the property has been marketed on both residential
    and commercial listings.
15. However, even in acknowledgement that the price of the listing was dropped, there
    is little to persuade me that the rate advertised is reasonable for a commercial

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009917


       hotel use. Without copies of the listings, it is unclear whether the listing price
       differentiated between a commercial or residential use. It is also unknown as to
       whether the listing has been updated to reflect the offer acceptance (which I
       understand is subject to planning permission for residential use). In the event that
       the listing has been updated to reflect a conditional sale, this may have deterred
       further commercial interest following the sale in July 2025.
16. The proposal would lead to the loss of a hotel use in an established and long-
    standing tourist location. On this basis, it would have a harmful effect on the
    provision of visitor accommodation and consequently the local tourism industry.
    Taking the above into account, I cannot be satisfied that the loss of hotel
    accommodation would be justified. The proposal is therefore contrary to Policy E4
    of the Local Plan.
Other Matters
17. The appeal property is part of a Grade II listed terrace comprised of 4-7 Marine
    Parade. Adjoining to the west, are 8-9 Marine Parade, and in a separate terrace,
    10-15 Marine Parade, all of which are Grade II listed. The appeal site is also within
    the Folkestone Leas and Bayle Conservation Area (CA).
18. The duties under Section 66 (1) and Section 72 (1) of the Planning (Listed
    Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act) require that special regard
    be paid to the desirability of preserving listed buildings, their settings, and any
    features of special architectural or historic interest that they possess, as well as to
    pay special attention to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or
    appearance of the CA.
19. The appeal building is of a Regency style with a stucco finish, which derives its
    significance in part from its special architectural and historic interest. The overall
    street frontage, which forms a combination of several listed buildings, including the
    appeal building, of similarly designed classic architecture makes a positive
    contribution to this part of the designated CA.
20. The proposal relates solely to the change of use of the building. It would therefore
    make no alterations to the building which would affect the significance of the listed
    building, nor would it alter the relationship of the appeal site with the adjacent
    listed buildings or their combined appearance within the CA. On this basis, I have
    identified no harm or loss of significance to the listed building, the setting of nearby
    listed buildings, or the character and appearance of the CA.
21. Whilst I note that 8-9 Marine Parade has already been converted from a previous
    hotel use, I understand that this permission was granted some time ago, before
    the adoption of the current Local Plan, and in a different economic climate. It also
    appears that the permission included securing improvement works to the
    appearance of 6-7 Marine Parade (through an associated legal agreement), and
    thus the material planning considerations were different to those in the current
    appeal scheme. The previous approval at 8-9 Marine Parade therefore does not
    set a precedent which would lead me to alter my overall conclusions above.
22. There is a suggestion that the conversion of the appeal property in the manner
    proposed would present the opportunity to invest in the existing hotel use of 4-5
    Marine Parade. Notwithstanding that there is little to suggest that this is necessary
    in planning terms, I have not been presented with a reasonable mechanism in

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009917


       which to secure this through the appeal. I have therefore attached this very limited
       weight in my consideration of the appeal.
23. Whilst I note that no objections have been raised relating to the character and
    appearance of the area, flood risk, living conditions or highway matters, these
    factors do not specifically weigh in favour of the proposal.
Planning Balance
24. Policy S4 of the Framework outlines that development proposals within
    settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by adverse effects, when assessed against the national
    decision-making policies in the Framework.
25. Policy HO7 of the Framework sets out that substantial weight should be given to
    the benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community. The appellant contends that the latest
    evidence suggest that the Council’s housing supply is currently 3.1 years, a figure
    which the Council has not disputed. This is a notable shortfall demonstrating the
    importance of boosting housing delivery within the District.
26. The evidence before me suggests that the proposal would lead to the long term
    preservation of the listed building, utilising the historic layout of the property, and
    preventing the risk of deterioration through neglect. Whilst this could be viewed as
    a public benefit, I am not satisfied that the change of use to a dwelling house is the
    only reasonable means of securing the long term use of the building. I have
    therefore attached this benefit limited weight.
27. Nevertheless, the proposal would lead to the creation of an additional dwelling in a
    sustainable location, through the re-use of an existing building of architectural
    merit. In the context of the Framework, including the prescribed weight to be
    attached to the use of vacant buildings and meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community, I attach substantial positive weight to the
    benefits, primarily associated with additional housing delivery.
28. Set against the benefits, the proposal would have a harmful effect on the provision
    of visitor accommodation and consequently the local tourism industry, contrary to
    Policy E4 of the Local Plan, a policy which seeks to safeguard visitor
    accommodation.
29. The Framework is clear that, in applying Policy S4, the circumstances in which the
    benefits of approving development are likely to be substantially outweighed by
    adverse effects include, but are not limited to, situations where the development
    proposal would have a substantial adverse impact in relation to the safeguarding
    of land or buildings for particular uses in the development plan. In my reasoning
    above, I have set out that I am not satisfied that the safeguarding of the appeal site
    as visitor accommodation is no longer appropriate. I therefore find Policy S4(2)a.i.
    to be of direct relevance to the appeal proposal.
30. In this case, I find that the substantial adverse impact in relation to the impact on
    the provision of visitor accommodation in an established tourist location, would
    substantially outweigh the benefits of bringing the building into a residential use.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009917


Conclusion
31. Taking all of the above into account, the benefits of the proposal, including the
    associated housing delivery, are not sufficient to outweigh the harm identified. This
    brings the scheme into conflict with the development plan when read as a whole,
    and material considerations do not indicate a decision otherwise than in
    accordance with it. I therefore conclude the appeal should be dismissed.

L Gardner
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
