Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 27 August 2026
by C Butcher BSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009030
Somerville, Mingoose Vale, Truro, TR4 8BY
•     The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•     The appeal is made by Mr H Bosustow against the decision of Cornwall Council.
•     The application Ref is PA25/07957.
•     The development proposed is described on the application form as being the ‘construction affordable
      of minimum 6 & maximum 8 dwellings’.

Decision
1.      The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.      The proposal is for permission in principle. Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
        advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
        housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has two
        stages: the first stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site
        is suitable in-principle and the second (‘technical details consent stage’) is when
        the detailed development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first
        of these two stages.
3.      The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
        land use and the amount of development permitted1. All other matters are
        considered as part of a subsequent Technical Details Consent application if
        permission in principle is granted. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
4.      An updated version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework)
        was published on 17th August 2026. In the interests of fairness, I provided the main
        parties with an opportunity to provide comments on the new Framework as part of
        the appeal process. I have taken account of those comments when making my
        decision.
Main Issue
5.      The main issue is whether the site is suitable for residential development, having
        regard to its location, the proposed land use and the amount of development.




1
    PPG Paragraph: 012 Reference ID: 58-012-20180615

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009030


Reasons
6.     The appeal site is predominantly an undeveloped field with some hardstanding
       present. It is situated immediately adjacent to the small settlement of Towan
       Cross.
7.     Policy 3 of the Cornwall Local Plan Strategic Policies 2010 – 2030 (the LP), sets
       out the way in which new housing will be provided across the county within the
       plan period. Part 3 of the policy states that, outside of the main towns, residential
       development will be delivered through a variety of means. The Council has
       indicated that the proposed development in this instance would not accord with the
       aspects of Policy 3(3) which support the rounding off of settlements or limited
       infilling. I have no reason to disagree with that assessment. However, it is clear
       from the appellant’s evidence that it was always their intention to submit the
       proposal as a rural exceptions scheme in accordance with LP Policy 9.
8.     Policy 9 provides support for development proposals on sites outside of, but
       adjacent to, the existing built up area of smaller towns, villages and hamlets where
       the primary purpose is to provide affordable housing to meet local needs in a
       location that would be well related to the physical form of the settlement.
9.     While specifically related to infilling, paragraph 1.68 of the LP is helpful in
       describing what might constitute a settlement. It notes that settlements should
       have a form and shape and clearly definable boundaries, rather than being a low
       density straggle of dwellings. They should also be in reasonable proximity to larger
       settlements with a greater range of facilities. I have also had regard to similar
       guidance contained within the Chief Planning Officers Advice Note on
       Infill/Rounding Off, December 2017.
10. In this instance, Towan Cross comprises several different clusters of dwellings with
    landscape gaps in between them. It is notable that there are road signs at either
    end of the settlement which provide an impression of entering and exiting a village
    as one passes through along the primary road. I note that the glossary of the
    Framework sets out that the definition of a settlement does not include hamlets or
    scattered groups of houses. However, it seems to me that the clusters of
    development form a settlement that is akin to a small village with definable
    boundaries and is not a straggle of dwellings. Furthermore, the village is within
    reasonable proximity to larger settlements such as Mount Hawke and St Agnes.
    As such, I am satisfied that Towan Cross can be considered to be a settlement,
    whether considered under the auspices of the LP or the Framework.
11. Given that the appeal site is clearly well related to the physical form of Towan
    Cross, the first aspect of LP Policy 9 is met. However, the policy also requires that
    relevant proposals be appropriate in terms of character and appearance as well as
    scale.
12. Clearly, given that the application is for permission in principle, details of the
    design and layout of the proposal are currently unknown. However, it is still
    reasonable to consider the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance
    of the area in a more general sense in order to help determine whether the site is
    in a suitable location.
13. In this instance, the site is immediately adjacent to two of the clusters of built form
    that comprise the village of Towan Cross. As one travels along the primary road

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009030


       through the settlement it is apparent that the landscape gaps between the clusters,
       including the appeal site, form an absolutely integral part of the character of the
       area by connecting the built form to the surrounding countryside and by providing
       the immediate area with a highly verdant and spacious feel.
14. The development of up to eight homes on the site, in whatever form that would
    take, would effectively remove one of these landscape gaps, thereby making the
    small settlement feel much more urbanised. Moreover, it is inevitable that the
    scheme would greatly erode the existing perception of spaciousness and
    verdancy. As a result, the development would cause significant harm to the
    character and appearance of the immediate surroundings. Furthermore, given the
    proximity of the site to a primary road, this harm would be readily apparent from
    the public realm.
15. The Council has argued that Towan Cross is a location that contains very few
    services and facilities. This is undoubtedly the case. However, the wording of LP
    Policy 9 does not set any expectation that rural exception schemes should take
    place in locations where there is an abundance of such facilities. Indeed, the fact
    that the policy supports such developments in very small settlements, including
    hamlets, means that a reduced level of accessibility must be anticipated. In any
    event, I note that there are bus stops in the village which provide fairly regular
    services to locations such as St Agnes and Truro. While there is no pavement from
    the site to the bus stops, they would still be easily reached on foot. As such, an
    abundance of services and facilities can be accessed in a sustainable manner and
    so there would be no harm in this regard.
16. In terms of the amount of development proposed, I do not consider that the
    provision of up to eight homes would be inappropriate in a settlement of this size if
    it was delivered in a suitable location.
17. As a result of these deliberations, it is clear that the proposed development would
    not be in a suitable location as a result of the harm caused to character and
    appearance. It would therefore conflict with LP Polices 1, 2, 3, 9, 21 and 23 as well
    as Policy C1 of the Climate Emergency DPD 2023 (the CE). Taken together, the
    relevant aspects of these policies seek to ensure that new development is
    sustainable, and in particular that it is well designed and preserves character and
    appearance.
18. Given the bus services that would be available to future residents, I do not find
    conflict with LP Policy 27 or CE Policy T1, which in part seek to encourage the use
    of sustainable forms of transport. While the proposal would not accord with any of
    the clauses in LP Policy 7, I am aware that the appellant never intended for the
    proposal to be considered under that policy which concerns housing in the open
    countryside.
Other Matters
19. The appeal site is close to the boundary of the Mingoose Conservation Area. Its
    significance is derived from the attractive design of many of the buildings that
    comprise the Conservation Area and the tastes and styles of the time. However,
    there is sufficient distance between the appeal site and the aspects of the
    Conservation Area that form its significance, and so I do not find harm in relation to
    its setting.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009030


20. There would also be no harm to the significance of the World Heritage Site, the
    boundary of which is adjacent to the appeal site. Indeed, the proposal would have
    no effect on the setting of key elements which contribute to the Outstanding
    Universal Value of this heritage asset.
21. I note that the site has permission for the construction of a stables. However, this
    would involve much less built form than the construction of up to eight dwellings
    and so this matter has little bearing on my decision.
22. The appellant has drawn my attention to an appeal decision in which the Inspector
    allowed a proposal to build up to nine affordable dwellings2. However, I have set
    out why the level of harm to character and appearance would be significant in
    terms of the proposal before me, having had careful regard to the site and its
    surroundings. Indeed, in this case the proposed development could not be
    successfully assimilated through layout and landscaping. Moreover, the weight to
    be afforded to such matters is at the discretion of the individual decision maker
    based on the evidence in each case.
23. The site is located within the zone of influence of the Penhale Dunes Special Area
    of Conservation. It appears that mitigation has been secured in relation to this
    matter. However, as I am dismissing the case, an appropriate assessment is not
    required.
Conclusion
24. The proposal would result in harm to character and appearance and is therefore
    not in a suitable location in terms of the requirements of permission in principle
    applications. As such, it would conflict with the development plan when considered
    as a whole. In this instance, I am of the view that the level of harm would be
    significant and enduring.
25. The proposed development would provide up to eight affordable dwellings which
    would help meet locally evidenced affordable housing needs as set out within the
    appellant’s statement of case (paragraph 6.1), as well as unmet housing needs
    across the county more generally. There would also be some economic benefits,
    both during the construction phase and post occupation. The development could
    likely be built out fairly quickly given that the site is unconstrained. However, the
    scale of the proposal would be fairly modest and so I consider that the collective
    benefits would be moderate in nature.
26. With regards to the Framework, the site is outside of an existing settlement and so
    Policy S5 is of relevance. Part (f) of the policy enables exception sites to come
    forward under Policy HO10. In considering Policy HO10, I am satisfied that the
    appeal site is well related to the settlement of Towan Cross. There does however
    appear to be a conflict with part 2(b) of the policy which notes that development
    should not exceed 5% of the size of the existing development. Indeed, it seems
    likely that a development of eight homes would breach this threshold.
27. In any event, I am also very mindful of the content of Policy DP3(3) of the
    Framework which states that any development proposals which conflict with
    paragraph 1 of the policy should be refused. Given the harm to local character that
    would occur as a result of the proposal, conflict with paragraph 1 is inevitable.

2
    Appeal ref: APP/D0840/W/25/3367115


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009030


       Given the wording of this policy, it is clear that it is an important matter that must
       be given the highest possible weight. I have also had regard to Policy HO7 of the
       Framework which requires that substantial weight be afforded to the provision of
       development that would meet identified needs.
28. Nevertheless, taking account of Policy S5(1) of the Framework, I conclude that the
    identified harm would substantially outweigh the benefits, even when attributing
    substantial weight to the above considerations. Accordingly, there are no material
    considerations, either individually or in combination, that outweigh the identified
    harm and associated development plan conflict. The appeal is therefore
    dismissed.



C Butcher
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
