Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 August 2026
by L Gardner MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 8 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009871
77 Harvey Road, Ilford, Redbridge IG1 2NJ
     •     The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as
           amended) against a refusal to grant planning permission.
     •     The appeal is made by Mr I Wahid against the decision of the London Borough of Redbridge.
     •     The application Ref is 0583/26
     •     The development proposed is change of use of premises from Use Class B (storage) to Use
           Class E (a) retail.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    During the course of the appeal, a revised National Planning Policy Framework
      (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. The main parties were
      provided with an opportunity to comment. I have had regard to the 2026 version of
      the Framework in my decision.
3.    It was stated within the application form that the change of use had not already
      started. However, I observed during my site visit that the appeal site was in a retail
      use, for the hire of motor bikes. I have therefore taken the development to be
      retrospective.
Main Issue
4.    The main issue is the effect of the development on the vitality of nearby
      designated local centres.
Reasons
5.    The appeal site relates to a modestly sized plot fronting Harvey Road, a street
      which is primarily residential in character. There is no dispute between the main
      parties that the site is outside of a designated centre, being approximately 220
      metres away from the nearest key retail parade on Ilford Lane, and approximately
      550 metres away from the southern end of Ilford Lane Local Centre. The
      development has therefore resulted in the introduction of a main town centre use
      in a location that is not within a defined town or local centre.
6.    Policy LP9 of the Redbridge Local Plan (2018) (the Local Plan) seeks to ensure
      the future vitality and viability of town centres. The policy states that proposals
      outside town centres should demonstrate that all in-centre, and then well
      connected edge of centre options have been assessed for their availability,
      suitability and viability. Policy LP10 of the Local Plan refers to the need to apply a

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009871


         sequential test to planning applications for new town centre uses outside of the
         borough’s town centres.
7.       These policies are in line with Policy SD7 of the London Plan (2021) (the LP)
         which outlines a town centre first approach, requiring the application of the
         sequential test to applications for main town centre uses. The policy is clear that,
         out-of-centre sites should only be considered if it is demonstrated that no suitable
         sites are (or are expected to become) available within town centre or edge of
         centre locations. It is explicit within the policy that applications that fail the
         sequential test should be refused.
8.       The development plan is clear that the onus falls on the applicant to sequentially
         consider alternative sites. I have not been provided with any substantive evidence
         to suggest that there are no other suitable town or local centre sites available, or
         expected to become available within a reasonable period, within nearby local
         centres.
9.       The size of the retail unit falls below the threshold outlined in Policy LP10 of the
         Local Plan which requires an impact assessment. Indeed, I acknowledge that the
         retail floor space arising from the development is modest at around 23m², far
         below a large format or destination retail use.
10. Nevertheless, the size of the unit alone does not eradicate the potential for the
    development to have a material impact on the retail function of nearby local and
    town centres.
11. It is presented that the retail unit would serve its local catchment area as a small
    shop, in the context of the Local Plan justification text which outlines that isolated
    shops are vital for the role they play in serving day to day needs.
12. However, elsewhere it is accepted that the appeal site is within the same local
    walking catchment as Ilford Lane Local Centre and the key retail parades on Ilford
    Lane. The development therefore does not comprise an isolated shop. Instead, it
    potentially competes and detracts from the existing uses within the nearby local
    centres and retail parades. In doing so, it dilutes the function of the nearby local
    centres and undermines their coherence.
13. Despite the modest size of the retail unit, the development contributes towards a
    detrimental effect on the overarching aim set out in the development plan which
    seeks to strengthen and enhance the town and local centres.
14. Consequently, without any substantive evidence to the contrary, I cannot conclude
    that the development does not have a harmful effect on the vitality of designated
    local centres. It therefore conflicts with Policies LP9 and LP10 of the Local Plan as
    well as Policy SD7 of the LP.
Other Matters
15. My attention has been drawn to an appeal decision elsewhere within the London
    Borough of Redbridge1. I accept that there are similarities between that decision
    and the appeal scheme before me, both relating to modestly proportioned
    commercial units.


1
    Appeal Ref: APP/W5780/W/19/3231643 decision dated 21 February 2020


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  2
Appeal Decision 6009871


16. Nevertheless, there are also notable differences. Namely, the potentially affected
    local centres are not the same as the context of the appeal site, and I have limited
    details as to how close that appeal site was to the nearest affected centres. The
    previous appeal decision is therefore not so directly comparable to the appeal
    development that it would lead me to alter my overall findings.
17. I note that no objections were raised in relation to matters of character and
    appearance or highway safety. Whilst the Council suggested that the initially
    proposed opening hours could create issues in relation to neighbouring living
    conditions, this could likely be addressed through the imposition of a planning
    condition. Nevertheless, a lack of harm in respect to these matters does not
    specifically weigh in favour of the development.
Planning Balance
18. Policy S4 of the Framework outlines that development proposals within
    settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by adverse effects, when assessed against the national
    decision-making policies in the Framework.
19. The Framework is clear that, in applying Policy S4 of the Framework, the
    circumstances in which the benefits of approving development are likely to be
    substantially outweighed by adverse effects include a failure to comply with one of
    the national decision-making policies which state that development proposals
    should be refused in specific circumstances.
20. The development has associated economic benefits, representing the efficient use
    of an existing building and offering support for a small business with associated
    employment opportunities. However, owing to the scale of the development, these
    benefits are modest.
21. On the other hand, I have identified that the development likely has a harmful
    effect on the vitality of existing designated local centres. In this respect, the
    development is at odds with Policy TC3 of the Framework which is clear that
    where a development proposal fails to satisfy the sequential test, it should be
    refused.
22. I find that, in the application of Policy S4 of the Framework, the benefits of
    approving the development are substantially outweighed by the adverse effects,
    arising in part from the failure to comply with Policy TC3 of the Framework.
Conclusion
23. I conclude that the development is contrary to the development plan when read as
    a whole, and material considerations do not dictate that a decision should be made
    other than in accordance with the development plan. The appeal is therefore
    dismissed.

L Gardner
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
