Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 July 2026
by Carla Livingstone MA(SocSci) (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 August 2026
Appeal Ref: 6009978
31A Kent Road, Chiswick, Ealing W4 5EY
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission under section 73A of the Town and Country Planning
    Act 1990 (as amended) for the development of land without complying with conditions subject to
    which a previous planning permission was granted.
•   The appeal is made by Matthew Richardson against the decision of the Council of the London
    Borough of Ealing.
•   The application Ref is PP-14216223.
•   The application sought planning permission for rear roof extension incorporating a roof terrace; and
    installation of three rooflights to front roof slope (following demolition of existing rear roof extension)
    without complying with a condition attached to planning permission Ref 221484FUL, dated
    24/06/2022.
•   The condition in dispute is No 2 which states that: The development hereby approved shall be
    carried out in accordance with the drawings and documents outlined above (TOKRA-FFO-XX-XX-
    DR-A-0001; TOKRA-FFO-XX-XX-DR-A-0002; TOKRA-FFO-XX-XXDR-A-0003; TOKRA-FFO-XX-XX-
    DR-A-0010; TOKRA-FFO-XX-XX-DR-A-0011; TOKRAFFO-XX-XX-DR-A-0020; TOKRA-FFO-XX-XX-
    DR-A-0021; TOKRA-FFO-XX-XX-DR-A-0030).
•   The reason given for the condition is: For the avoidance of doubt, and in the interests of proper
    planning.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for rear roof extension
   incorporating a roof terrace; and installation of three rooflights to front roof slope
   (following demolition of existing rear roof extension), without complying with
   condition 2 attached to planning permission Ref 221484FUL, dated 24 June 2022,
   subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: TOKRA-FFO-XX-XX-DR-A-0001; TOKRA-
              FFO-XX-XX-DR-A-0002; TOKRA-FFO-XX-XXDR-A-0003; TOKRA-FFO-XX-
              XX-DR-A-0010; TOKRA-FFO-XX-XX-DR-A-0011; TOKRA-FFO-XX-XX-DR-
              A-0020; TOKRA-FFO-XX-XX-DR-A-0021; TOKRA-FFO-XX-XX-DR-A-0030.
     2)       All external materials to be used in the development shall match the
              appearance of those of the existing building, unless otherwise stated in the
              submitted application form or approved drawings.
     3)       The hereby approved three (3) rooflights to the front roof slope of the building
              shall not project more than 150mm from the plane of the roof slope when
              measured perpendicularly and shall be retained as such for the lifetime of the
              development.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009978


       4)       Prior to the first use of the balcony hereby approved, the privacy screens
                identified on the approved drawings listed above shall be installed. The
                privacy screens shall be retained for the lifetime of the development.
Preliminary Matters
2. The works which are the subject of this appeal are almost completed. This appeal
   seeks to substitute three of the drawings previously approved with amended and/or
   annotated versions, varying condition 2 to ensure that the approved plans reflect
   the development as built. For the avoidance of doubt, my decision is based on the
   amended plans submitted as part of this appeal.
3. The Government published a revised version of the National Planning Policy
   Framework ('the Framework') on 17 August 2026. I have considered its
   amendments against the December 2024 version before the parties for their
   evidence. Although there have been significant amendments to its layout and
   formatting such that previously cited paragraph references are no longer relevant,
   other changes are not substantive or determinative to the outcome of this appeal. I
   have therefore not gone back to the parties to seek any comment.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the amended development on the living conditions of
   the occupants of the ground floor flat at 31 Kent Road in regard to privacy.
Reasons
5. The appeal site is located within a predominantly residential area, comprising two
   storey terraced dwellings. The host building has been divided into two flats in the
   past, and the appeal relates to 31A which is the upper flat.
6. The previous grant of permission1 allowed for a rear roof extension which
   incorporated a roof terrace. The previously approved terrace was accessed via
   triple bifold glazed doors and was bound by a planter and timber cladding that was
   1.7m high from the terrace floor level, with a glazed section at the divide with 29
   Kent Road. The appellant seeks to amend the proposed plans condition in order to
   allow the height of the planter, and timber cladding that surrounds the terrace on
   the rear elevation, to be reduced to 1.45m; the removal of the glazed section so all
   of the perimeter would be timber clad; and for the triple bifold doors to be replaced
   with bi-fold doors.
7. The Council’s concerns are focused on the effect of lowering the cladding and
   planter surrounding the roof terrace on the privacy of the neighbouring occupants of
   the ground floor flat below.
8. Based on the evidence before me, including my site visit, the terrace provides
   sufficient space to provide a small seating area and a modest amount of standing
   space. It is acknowledged that a reduction in the height of part of the cladding and
   planter that surrounds the terrace may allow for increased opportunities for
   overlooking, over the approved height. However, views from the terrace to the rear
   garden of the flat below are significantly restricted by an existing rear extension to
   the building. Furthermore, the existing rear windows of the host property overlook
   part of the rear garden of the ground floor flat. As such, there was a degree of

1
    221484FUL


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6009978


     overlooking prior to the erection of the rear roof extension and terrace; and the
     proposed amendment would not result in a material increase in overlooking
     opportunities over and above the views from original rear windows of the host
     property.
9. The height of the cladding originally approved may have been as a result of
   negotiations between the appellant and the Council. Still, this does not remove the
   appellant’s right to seek the amendment of this element of the scheme at appeal. In
   addition, the scope of amendments allowed under section 73A are not limited to
   only minor non-material amendments.
10. For the reasons detailed above the amended development would not have a
    harmful effect on the living conditions of the occupants of the ground floor flat at 31
    Kent Road in regard to privacy. Therefore, the proposal is in accordance with
    Policies D3 and D6 of the London Plan (2021) and Policy 7B of the Ealing
    Development Management DPD (2013), which require that development delivers
    appropriate privacy for adjacent uses and seeks to maximise the usability of
    outside amenity space.
Conditions
11. Condition 1 of my decision replaces Condition 2 of the 2021 permission and
    includes the revised drawing numbers. This is necessary in the interests of
    certainty.
12. In respect of the other conditions on the 2022 permission, Planning Practice
    Guidance makes it clear that when granting permission under s.73A they should be
    repeated on decision notices unless they have already been discharged. In this
    case Condition 1 of the 2022 permission relates to the time-limit for implementation
    of the development.
13. Condition 3 related to matching external materials, Condition 4 related to the
    installation and retention of appropriate rooflights and Condition 5 related to the
    installation and retention of privacy screens. All of these conditions have not been
    fully discharged and are necessary in order to ensure the scheme reflects the
    character and appearance of the area and does not harm the privacy of
    neighbours.
Conclusion
14. For the reasons given above I conclude that the appeal should succeed. I will grant
    a new planning permission with an amended plans condition, restating those
    undisputed conditions that are still subsisting and capable of taking effect.




Carla Livingstone
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
