Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 10 August 2026
by A Wright BSc (Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 16 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009838
Land on north side of Lodge Lane, Bolney, Sussex RH17 5RR
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•      The appeal is made by Mr John Rowley against the decision of Mid Sussex District Council.
•      The application Ref is DM/26/0317.
•      The development proposed is described as ‘a phased development of up to 9 self build dwellings’.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       The proposal is for permission in principle. The Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
         advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
         housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has two
         stages: the first stage (permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site is
         suitable in-principle; and the second (technical details consent) stage is when the
         detailed development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first of
         these two stages.
3.       The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
         land use and the amount of development permitted1, and I have determined the
         appeal accordingly.
4.       The appellant submitted a revised location plan with the appeal documents,
         showing a blue line indicating other land within his control surrounding the appeal
         site. As this does not change the site boundary, it has no effect on my
         consideration of the proposal for permission in principle which solely relates to
         land within the demarcated red line area.
5.       A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
         August 2026. As this could affect the issues and matters in this case, the Council
         and the appellant were invited to make further comments. A response from an
         interested party was also received. My decision reflects the latest version of the
         Framework, and the responses received on it.
6.       There is reference to the Council’s draft District Plan 2021-2039. As this remains
         at Examination and the Inspector has not yet published a report, it carries only
         minimal weight.


1
    PPG Paragraph: 012 Reference ID: 58-012-20180615

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009838


Main Issues
7.       The main issues in this appeal are:
         •    whether the site would be a suitable location for the land use proposed, having
              regard to the development plan strategy, access to services and facilities and
              the Framework;
         •    the effect of the proposed location, land use and amount of development on the
              character and appearance of the area; and
         •    the effect of the proposed location, land use and amount of development on the
              significance of designated heritage assets.
Reasons
Suitability of the location
8.       The appeal site lies in the countryside, comprising part of a larger field extending
         further west between Lodge Lane to the south and a public footpath to the north.
         Whilst the appellant controls surrounding land, the site boundaries are set in from
         those of the residential properties to the north, east and south and the footpath.
9.       Policies in the Mid Sussex District Plan 2014 – 2031 (adopted 2018) (DP) outline a
         settlement hierarchy and seek to focus housing growth at the larger settlements,
         with some development at the villages. Bolney is identified as a medium sized
         village providing essential services for the needs of its residents and immediate
         surrounding communities. Its defined built-up area boundary includes the more
         tight-knit development at Tythe Barn to the east of the appeal site, but not the field
         on which the site is located or the other larger residential plots nearby.
10. Policy DP6 of the DP allows for the expansion of settlements outside defined built-
    up area boundaries subject to various criteria, including that the site is contiguous
    with an existing built-up area of the settlement. Policy DP15 sets out the
    circumstances in which new homes in the countryside will be permitted, including
    those that meet the requirements of Policy DP6. Policy BOLBB1 of the Bolney
    Neighbourhood Plan 2015 – 2031 (made 2016) (NP) reflects these DP policies.
11. There are references to various dictionary definitions of the word ‘contiguous’ and
    to a court judgement2 which found that there is a degree of flexibility in applying
    terminology such that ‘immediately adjoining’ does not necessarily mean
    ‘contiguous’. However, the DP glossary defines ‘contiguous’ as ‘sharing a common
    border, touching’. Part of the eastern site boundary is around 6m from the built-up
    area of the settlement which the appellant indicates is for landscaped buffers along
    the settlement edge. Nonetheless, the site boundary does not touch nor share a
    common border with the settlement boundary and thus it is not contiguous with it.
    As such, the appeal scheme would not meet the requirements for development
    outside defined built-up area boundaries set out in Policy DP6.
12. The appeal scheme would not provide rural workers’ accommodation, an isolated
    home in the countryside of exceptional quality design or affordable housing.
    Therefore, it would not provide the types of new homes in the countryside allowed
    by Policy DP15.

2
    Corbett v Cornwall Council [2022] EWCA Civ 1069


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              2
Appeal Decision 6009838


13. Policy S5 of the Framework states that only certain forms of development should
    be approved outside settlements. This includes development which would address
    an evidenced unmet need for housing where it meets certain criteria, including
    being physically well-related to an existing settlement (Policy S5(1)(j)).
14. There is no dispute that the Council is unable to demonstrate a five year supply of
    deliverable housing sites referred to in the Framework. The appellant identifies a
    3.38 year supply referred to in an appeal decision from October 20253.
    Consequently, there is an evidenced unmet need for housing in Mid Sussex.
15. Development in the settlement of Bolney is largely centred around The Street with
    some dwellings fronting roads on lanes leading away from it. In contrast, the
    proposed residential development of up to 9 dwellings would have a single access
    point onto Lodge Lane some distance from The Street, with a gap between it and
    the public footpath and nearby properties. As such, regardless of whether it would
    be of a scale which could be accommodated taking into account the availability of
    infrastructure, it would not be physically well-related to the existing settlement.
    Therefore, it would not meet the form of development listed in Policy S5(1)(j) of the
    Framework, and no case is made that it meets any other forms of development set
    out in Policy S5.
16. Amongst other things, Policy DP21 of the DP supports access to services and a
    safe and healthy transport network and sets out several matters to be taken into
    account in decisions on proposals to meet these objectives. This includes whether
    the development is sustainably located to minimise the need for travel, and access
    to safe and convenient routes for walking, cycling and public transport.
17. Policies in the Framework seek to support sustainable patterns of movement,
    enable good accessibility for different users and make the most of existing and
    proposed transport infrastructure. They require transport considerations to be
    integral to the design of development, including giving priority first to walking,
    wheeling and cycle movements and second, so far as possible, to facilitating easy
    access to high quality public transport.
18. There are several facilities in Bolney, including a primary school, public house,
    village hall and recreation ground, with a petrol station and store further away on
    the A272. There are also bus stops around 250m from the site, providing only
    infrequent bus services to local towns.
19. The appeal site does not adjoin the footpath to the north and the only access to it
    would be from Lodge Lane. This is a narrow country road which includes two very
    sharp bends between the site and the village. Lodge Lane has no separate
    footways or streetlights and for the most part is subject to the national speed limit.
    This would deter future occupants of the development from walking along this
    route to access facilities in Bolney.
20. There are examples where Inspectors have accepted that unlit lanes with no
    footpaths may provide acceptable walking or cycling routes in rural locations, and
    in this case walking, cycling and the use of buses would be an option for some
    trips by some people. However, the nature of the route to access village facilities
    and the nearest bus stops and the infrequent bus services serving them would limit
    their attractiveness, particularly for older people, those with reduced mobility or

3
    APP/D3830/W/25/3361729


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009838


         with children and at times of darkness and bad weather. As such, I consider that
         future occupiers of the proposed dwellings would be likely to be reliant on private
         vehicles to access services.
21. The appellant refers to the Council’s recent approval of an outline application for
    up to 200 dwellings at Foxhole Farm, outside the built-up area of Bolney4. That
    scheme includes pedestrian accesses from Cowfold Road, pedestrian and cycle
    accesses onto The Street and accessibility to bus stops providing a wider range of
    services than those closest to the appeal site. It also includes the enhancement
    and improvement of bus services. Thus, future residents of the Foxhole Farm
    development would have better access to a wider range of transport modes than
    would be the case for future occupants of the scheme before me.
22. Therefore, I conclude that the site would not be a suitable location for the land use
    proposed, having regard to the development plan strategy, access to services and
    facilities and the Framework. In this regard, the proposed scheme would conflict
    with Policies DP6, DP15 and DP21 of the DP and Policy BOLBB1 of the NP.
    Further, the proposal would not provide the type of development supported by
    Policy S5 of the Framework.
Character and appearance
23. There is undeveloped, open grassland to the west and a gap separating the
    appeal site from residential properties on the remaining three sides. Nearby
    development around Bolney largely comprises dwellings in grounds adjoining each
    other. The fields and roadside hedgerows give Lodge Lane a verdant, rural
    character, particularly beyond the existing houses.
24. The proposal would not abut current built development to the north, east and
    south. Due to the gap between the proposed scheme and the existing properties,
    the development would appear discordant with the current arrangement of
    adjoining properties, particularly to users of the public footpath to the north.
25. Further, the proposed scheme would extend development further west than the
    existing properties and beyond the natural subdivision of the field marked by a
    small post and wire fence running north to south. Whilst the site is not in a National
    Landscape, the proposal would harmfully infringe on the wider undeveloped rural
    character, especially in views from Lodge Lane and the public footpath.
26. I acknowledge that specific details of the proposed scheme, including the access,
    would be subject to technical details consent. Nevertheless, the removal of part of
    the hedgerow and introduction of a formal vehicular access on this part of Lodge
    Lane would lead to a harmful loss of the lane’s verdant, rural character.
27. Consequently, I conclude that the proposed location, land use and amount of
    development would harm the character and appearance of the area. This would be
    contrary to Policies DP12 and DP26 of the DP and Policies BOLE2 and BOLD1 of
    the NP. Amongst other things, these require development to reflect the distinctive
    character of villages and Bolney’s rural nature, including protection of natural
    landscape features.



4
    Planning application ref: DM/25/1129


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009838


Heritage assets
28. The appeal site is located outside but close to a small part of the Bolney
    Conservation Area (CA) within which lies the grade II listed The Thatched House.
    Durstons is another grade II listed building, located on the south side of Lodge
    Lane. These are all designated heritage assets.
29. As set out in the appellant’s Heritage Statement (HS), the key characteristics of
    the CA are the variety of building lines, the range of ages and styles of buildings,
    the use of traditional materials, attractive walling, countryside views and views into
    and out of the CA.
30. The significance of The Thatched House is derived from its architectural and
    historic value as a 15th century timber-framed building with a thatched roof.
    Further, Durstons has aesthetic and historic value as an L-shaped 17th century or
    earlier timber framed building including tile-hung and weather-boarded walls.
31. The Framework indicates that the significance of heritage assets can include any
    contribution made by their setting. It defines the setting of a heritage asset as the
    surroundings in which it is experienced.
32. The CA is largely experienced as traditional buildings fronting the roads which run
    through it. There are some wider views out into the countryside, particularly further
    south along The Street, and views towards it when travelling into Bolney from
    surrounding country lanes and public footpaths.
33. The Thatched House is primarily experienced set back from but facing The Street
    within an enclosed, landscaped setting, though parts of the building appear in a
    more open rural context from the public right of way and field to the west. Durstons
    is mainly experienced as an historic building on a rural lane, appearing framed
    between hedgerows, traditional style walls and undeveloped land when travelling
    along Lodge Lane.
34. The site is currently a grassed field and its development for residential use would
    change the character of the land from undeveloped to residential in the wider
    hinterland of the heritage assets. This would be particularly evident from the public
    footpath to the north of the site.
35. The Council asserts that the proposal would have an adverse impact on the setting
    of the CA and The Thatched House, and possibly Durstons. It refers to a degree of
    harm but does not put this on a scale.
36. The appellant’s HS outlines that the scheme would not preserve or enhance the
    character or appearance of the CA in any active sense, but nor would it cause any
    material harm, and consequently assesses the impact on the CA as negligible.
    Further, it is contended that there would be a marginal and indirect change to the
    broader context in which The Thatched House and other grade II listed buildings
    sit which does not affect any meaningful aspect of their significance or setting.
    Overall, the HS assesses the heritage harm as being at the very lowest end of less
    than substantial, and it sets out some measures to avoid or reduce this at the
    technical details consent stage.
37. I consider that the change to the character of the area caused by the proposed
    residential development would fail to preserve the setting and thus the significance
    of designated heritage assets, particularly The Thatched House listed building and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6009838


         the CA, although this harm would be limited. There is a statutory duty to have
         special regard to the desirability of preserving the setting of listed buildings5.
         Further, Policy DP34 of the DP requires development to protect listed buildings
         and their settings in a manner appropriate to their significance, whilst Policy DP35
         seeks to protect the setting of CAs and in particular views into and out of them.
38. Policy HE6 of the Framework outlines that any harm to a designated heritage
    asset will be a matter of considerable importance and weight. It states that where a
    development would harm the significance of such an asset, the effect on the asset
    and its significance should be weighed against any public benefits of the proposal.
39. For reasons I go into, there would be modest benefits from the provision of up to
    nine dwellings and only limited benefits from the potential for these to be self-build
    homes. There would also be some limited economic benefits during the
    construction phase and once occupied. Nonetheless, the public benefits would not
    outweigh the considerable importance and weight to be given to the harm to the
    designated heritage assets caused by the proposed scheme.
40. Therefore, I conclude that the proposed location, land use and amount of
    development would fail to preserve the significance of designated heritage assets.
    This would conflict with Policies DP34 and DP35 of the DP and Policy HE6 of the
    Framework.
Other Matters
41. Other matters such as design, layout, impacts on trees and ecology, flood risk,
    drainage and access are not for consideration as part of an application for
    permission in principle.
42. The site area is 0.95ha and there is no indication that the buildings would exceed
    1,000sqm floorspace. As such, the proposal does not comprise major
    development and is within the scope of development which can be subject to
    permission in principle6.
43. The appellant expresses general dissatisfaction with the Council’s communication
    on the planning application. However, this is a matter between those parties, and it
    does not in this instance have any bearing on my determination of this appeal.
Planning Balance
44. The proposal is not a form of development which should be approved outside
    settlements listed in Policy S5 of the Framework. According to this policy, it should
    only be approved in exceptional circumstances, where the benefits of the proposal
    would substantially outweigh the adverse effects, including to the character of the
    countryside and in relation to promoting sustainable patterns of movement.
45. The Framework supports the delivery of a substantial increase in the supply of
    homes. The proposal would contribute up to nine homes towards the general
    supply of housing, meeting an evidenced unmet need for housing in Mid Sussex. I
    give this substantial weight in accordance with Policy HO7 of the Framework.




5
    Under section 66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
6
    Under The Town and Country Planning (Permission in Principle) Order 2017


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  6
Appeal Decision 6009838


46. The appellant refers to self-build projects from elsewhere and to the Council’s legal
    obligations in relation to self-build and custom housebuilding (SBCH)7. Some
    SBCH data from the Council’s area is provided, including the numbers on its
    register and the amount of such dwellings permitted, though it is stated that the
    actual demand may be higher. There is reference to a deficit of 488 SBCH plots in
    the Council’s area as of 30 October 2025. The appellant cites several appeal
    decisions in other areas where Inspectors afforded substantial weight to the
    provision of self-build housing, and the lack of effective DP policies relating to
    SBCH. The proposal is described as self-build dwellings and a draft unilateral
    undertaking (UU) has been submitted. Nevertheless, as the UU has not been
    formally executed, I cannot be certain that the development would be secured as
    self-build homes, which limits the weight I can accord this matter.
47. There would also be some economic benefits during the construction phase when
    the development would provide jobs and once occupied when future residents
    would spend in the local area. However, given the relatively small scale of the
    scheme, these benefits would be limited.
48. In contrast, the site would not be a suitable location for the land use proposed,
    having regard to the development plan strategy, access to services and facilities
    and the types of development supported by Policy S5 of the Framework. Further,
    the proposed location, land use and amount of development would harm the
    character and appearance of the area and would fail to preserve the significance
    of designated heritage assets. These are planning harms which attract
    considerable weight.
49. In this case, the benefits of the proposal would not substantially outweigh the
    adverse effects, and thus there are no exceptional circumstances to justify
    approval of the development under Policy S5 of the Framework.
Conclusion
50. For the reasons given above, the proposal conflicts with the development plan as
    a whole and the material considerations, including the Framework, do not indicate
    that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it. The appeal
    should therefore be dismissed.

A Wright
INSPECTOR




7
    Under the Self-build and Custom Housebuilding Act 2015


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                7
