Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 July 2026
by Andrew Fulford BSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 27 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009442
36 St Kildas Road, Harrow HA1 1QA
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Kiabod Mashad (Urban Roots Housing Ltd) against the decision of the
     Council of the London Borough of Harrow.
•    The application Ref is PL/0548/26.
•    The development proposed is a change of use of 6 bedroom (6 persons) HMO (Class C4) to 7
     bedroom (7 person) HMO (Sui-Generis).

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a change of use of 6
       bedroom (6 persons) HMO (Class C4) to 7 bedroom (7 person) HMO (Sui-
       Generis) at 36 St Kildas Road, Harrow HA1 1QA in accordance with the terms of
       the application, Ref PL/0548/26, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              drawing Nos 200100, 200201, 200202, 200203, 200204, 200205, 200301,
              200302, 200401, 200501 and 200502.
     3)       The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied by more than seven
              persons at any one time.
     4)       The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until space has
              been laid out within the site for bicycle and waste storage as shown on
              drawing No 200202. The facilities shall thereafter be permanently retained
              and maintained for the storage of bicycles and waste.
     5)       The development hereby permitted shall be implemented in accordance with
              the HMO Management Plan (Ref: 194-HA1 1QA) and Noise, Disturbance
              and Antisocial Behaviour Procedure for the lifetime of the development.
Applications for costs
2.     An application for costs was made by Mr Kiabod Mashad (Urban Roots Housing
       Ltd) against the London Borough of Harrow. This application is the subject of a
       separate decision.
Preliminary Matter
3.     On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published. Those parts of the Framework most relevant to this


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009442


       appeal have not been significantly amended. As a result, I have not sought further
       submissions. I have referred to the latest version of the Framework where relevant
       in this appeal.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are:
           •    whether the site location is acceptable for a large HMO use;
           •    the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of the
                occupants of No 34 and 38 St Kildas Road in relation to noise and
                disturbance.
           •    the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of the future
                occupiers in relation to the spaciousness of the living accommodation.
Reasons
Site location
5.     The appeal site is located within a residential street. Based on the evidence before
       me, a high proportion of the properties on St Kildas Road are in use as single
       family dwellings.
6.     Policy HO10 of the Harrow Local Plan 2021-2041 (2026) (HLP) indicates at criteria
       (3) that HMOs will not be permitted within a street characterised by family housing.
       However, in this case the property is already operating as a six-bedroom HMO.
       There is no dispute between the parties on this matter. Consequently, the appeal
       proposal would not alter the number of HMOs within the street. The scheme would
       result in just one additional occupier with no external changes proposed to the
       property. I am satisfied that this minor change in occupancy levels would not result
       in the loss of family housing in the street, would not be readily discernible to
       residents within St Kildas Road and would have no visible impact on the character
       of the area. I return to matters relating to living conditions for future and
       neighbouring occupiers subsequently.
7.     In conclusion the appeal site is a suitable location for a large HMO. The proposal
       therefore accords with Policy HO10 of the HLP. Amongst other matters, this policy
       aims to ensure that large HMOs should not be located within a residential street or
       area characterised by family housing.
Living conditions of adjoining occupiers
8.     The appeal property is an end-of-terrace dwelling within a residential street.
       Consequently, the occupiers of No 34 and No 38 are in close proximity to the
       appeal proposal. The proposed alterations would result in the creation one
       additional bedroom through the conversion of a lounge. Given that a lounge is a
       communal area it would typically be expected to be noisier than a single
       occupancy bedroom. The change of use would therefore not result in an increase
       in noise levels arising from this room.
9.     There would likely be some additional comings and goings associated with one
       additional occupier. However, given the existing use as a six-bedroom HMO, this
       minor increase in the number of occupiers would not discernibly increase levels of
       noise and disturbance for occupiers of the directly adjoining properties.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009442


       Furthermore, given that the property is an end-of-terrace property, only No 38
       shares a party wall with the appeal property further reducing the potential for any
       impact.
10. Concern has been raised over the potential for increased levels of anti-social
    behaviour. There is no evidence before me to suggest that one additional occupier
    would lead to more frequent instances of anti-social behaviour. However, an HMO
    Management Plan and Noise, Disturbance and Anti-social Behaviour Procedure
    have been submitted in support of the appeal. I am satisfied that the
    implementation of these documents via condition would enable the proactive
    management of any anti-social behaviour should an issue arise.
11. An appeal decision (APP/M5450/W/20/3256326) has been referenced by the
    Council but no supporting details have been provided. Nevertheless, given that the
    appeal relates to an increase from six to ten occupiers it is not considered directly
    comparable to this appeal where just one additional occupier would be
    accommodated within an existing HMO. Consequently, that appeal decision has
    not altered my conclusion on this main issue.
12. In conclusion, the proposal would not harm the living conditions of the occupiers of
    Nos 34 and 38. The proposal therefore accords with Policy HO10 of the HLP.
    Amongst other matters, this policy aims to ensure that HMO developments have
    no harmful impact on the amenity of occupiers of neighbouring properties.
Living Conditions of future occupiers
13. The appeal property currently includes a spacious open plan kitchen/dining/living
    room located at the rear of the property. This room includes two cooker/hobs, two
    sinks, two washing machines and two fridges. A smaller separate lounge is located
    adjacent to the main entrance at the front of the property.
14. The appeal scheme seeks to convert the separate lounge to an additional
    bedroom. Consequently, the appeal scheme would reduce the amount of
    communal space and increase the number of occupants utilising the open plan
    kitchen/dining/living room. However, given the large size and range of facilities
    available within the remaining communal space, together with the likely greater
    use of individual rooms by each independent occupier, I am satisfied that one
    additional occupier would be accommodated without any undue impact.
15. Although there is limited evidence before me in relation to the overall floorspace
    measurement for the property, the proposed additional bedroom is similar in size
    to those within the existing HMO and would exceed the minimum size
    requirements for a single bedroom set out within the Nationally Described Space
    Standards. I am therefore satisfied that the bedroom would provide sufficiently
    spacious living conditions for the proposed occupier.
16. In conclusion, the proposal would provide acceptable living conditions for the
    proposed occupiers. The proposal therefore accords with the relevant provisions of
    Policy HO10 of the HLP. Amongst other matters, this policy aims to ensure that
    accommodation is appropriately located, of high quality and well designed with
    rooms of an adequate size for their purpose with an adequate level and type of
    communal facilities.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009442


Other Matters
17. Concerns have been raised by neighbours over the impact of the proposal on
    parking provision. The appeal site is in a sustainable location with good access to
    public transport meaning that occupiers would not be reliant on car use for access
    to local services and facilities.
Conditions
18. In addition to the standard time condition, I have imposed a condition requiring that
    the development is carried out in accordance with the approved plans, for clarity
    and certainty.
19. To maintain an acceptable living environment, conditions are required to limit the
    number of occupiers to seven and ensure waste storage is provided.
20. To encourage the use of sustainable travel modes, a condition requiring cycle
    storage provision is required. Seven long stay and two short stay spaces would be
    provided but the Council considers that a third short stay space is required.
    However, I am satisfied that nine spaces would be sufficient to cater for the needs
    arising from the occupiers and visitors to the appeal property which would have a
    maximum of seven occupiers.
21. To protect the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers a condition is required to
    ensure the implementation of the HMO Management Plan and Noise, Disturbance
    and Anti-social Behaviour Procedure.
Conclusion
22. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the proposal would accord with the
    development plan as a whole and there are no material considerations that
    indicate that the development should be determined otherwise than in accordance
    with it. Therefore, the appeal is allowed.



Andrew Fulford
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
