Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 August 2026
by G Sylvester BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2nd October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009119
456 Southchurch Road, Southend SS1 2QA
•     The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•     The appeal is made by Greta Gashi against the decision of Southend-on-Sea City Council.
•     The application Ref is 26/00116/FUL.
•     The development proposed is to use the existing corner plot as a hand car wash and install a new
      acoustic screened area for car valeting. Retention of existing demountable cabins.

Decision
1.      The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.      I have taken account of the comments received from the main parties on the
        relevance of the revised National Planning Policy Framework ("the Framework"),
        published 17 August 2026 to their respective cases in this appeal. My decision is
        made in the context of the revised Framework.
Main Issues
3.      The main issues in this appeal are: (i) the effect of the proposed development on
        the living conditions of the occupants of nearby residential properties with
        particular regard to noise and disturbance, and (ii) if there are any adverse effects,
        whether the benefits of approving the development would be substantially
        outweighed by those adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-
        making policies in the Framework.
Reasons
4.      The evidence indicates that the use of the appeal site as a hand car wash
        commenced some time ago. A retrospective proposal to continue the use,
        including the proposed construction of a shelter to accommodate car washing
        activities, was dismissed on appeal1 in February 2026. Since the previous appeal
        was decided the jet washer pump and the main vacuum cleaner pump have been
        enclosed within blockwork housings.
5.      The evidence indicates that the main difference between the dismissed appeal
        scheme and the one before me is that the proposed shelter, within which all jet
        washing activities would take place, would have acoustic screening. Because the
        shelter has not been built, I have referred to the appeal scheme as a proposal.


1
    APP/D1590/W/25/3375137

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009119


6.     I undertook an unaccompanied visit to the area of the appeal site. At that time, the
       use was operating at a relatively modest level with no queuing of cars. As there
       were gaps between customer visits when no cars were being cleaned, I was able
       to compare the noise environment with the use operating and without it.
7.     I experienced the noise effects of the existing use when stood close to the noise
       sensitive receptors that are identified in the Noise Assessment. They included
       several nearby residential buildings along Chase Road and what appeared to be
       upper floor apartments on the opposite side of Southchurch Road (“the A13”) with
       window and doors to juliet balconies.
8.     When the use was not operating, I was struck by the relatively low level of
       background noise. In my judgement, this reflects a combination of prevailing traffic
       conditions and the mainly residential character of the surrounding area. There are
       few, if any, industrial or other uses that would be expected to generate noise of
       any significance. Nearby commercial properties are mostly in retail uses.
9.     Although located within an urban area and close to the A13, traffic flows were
       relatively light, and vehicles mostly travelled at low speeds. Consistent with those
       conditions, traffic noise was generally at a low level. There were also frequent and
       often lengthy breaks in the flow of traffic along the A13, and also Chase Road,
       during which road traffic noise became barely audible. It is likely that traffic is
       dispersed across the wider road network.
10. When in operation, the high-pressure jet washer produced a distinctive, sharp,
    high-pitched hissing sound as water was discharged from its nozzle. This was
    accompanied by a lower-pitched sound resembling a coarse roaring or cutting
    noise as the high-velocity jet of water contacted the different surfaces and
    materials of the cars being cleaned. Consistent with customer demand, the jet
    washer was used in an unpredictable but repeated pattern.
11. Although there were interruptions in the use of the jet washer, such as between
    customer visits, the noise from jet washing cars had a distinctive character and
    was intrusive. It reverberated off the rows of nearby buildings creating an echo-like
    effect that seemed to exacerbate the noise effects within the nearby streets. Noise
    from jet washing was the dominant noise source in the surrounding area and was
    clearly audible above the sound of passing traffic. It was especially pronounced
    and intrusive during intervals between passing vehicles on the A13.
12. I acknowledge that a site visit provides only a snapshot in time. However, my
    observations of the noise environment at the appeal site were broadly consistent
    with those described by the Council's Environmental Health Officer and by the
    Inspector in relation to the previous appeal proposal. I note that complaints
    regarding the noise effects of the use have been received by the Council.
13. Restricting jet washing to within the proposed shelter would, according to the
    Noise Assessment, reduce noise levels compared with the existing situation.
    However, because the shelter would be open on the side facing the A13, it is likely
    that, even when a car is positioned within it with adequate clearance from the
    walls, parts of the car, the operative carrying out the cleaning, and the jet washer
    nozzle would either be beyond the shelter or located close to its open edge. This
    would be expected to limit the shelter’s effectiveness in reducing noise levels.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009119


14. In that scenario, I am not satisfied on the information before me that noise from jet
    washing cars within the shelter, particularly the side of a car facing the A13, would
    be markedly different in level and character from that generated by the same
    activity undertaken in the open at the present time. It seems to me that the noise
    generated by jet washing would be likely to reflect from a car’s surface in much the
    same way as it does at present, and reverberate off nearby buildings.
15. As a result, I am not satisfied on the evidence before me that the proposed shelter
    would have anything more than a modest attenuating effect on the noise from jet
    washing. Moreover, I am not satisfied that residual traffic noise would mask that
    noise. The less careful manoeuvring of a car into the shelter by a customer may
    also result in the front and/or rear of the car being partly outside of it when
    undertaking jet washing, thus limiting its ability to reduce noise levels.
16. In terms of reducing the effects of jet washing noise, the previous Inspector
    referred to housing the operation within a soundproofed building. With its long
    open side, I am not satisfied on the evidence before me and my experiences at my
    site visit that the proposed shelter would provide sufficient soundproofing to
    prevent those harmful effects.
17. In my view, the levels and character of noise from jet washing exceed what could
    reasonably be expected in this largely residential urban area, and would be likely
    to do so with the proposed shelter in place. The occupants of several nearby
    residential properties would be exposed to the noise. In my judgement, noise
    modelling alone would not, in this instance, fully capture the qualitative noise
    effects of jet washing cars on those occupants, particularly its distinctive character
    and unpredictable nature.
18. Even if the jet washing noise did not reach the threshold of a significant observed
    adverse effect level in the Noise Policy Statement for England, I consider that it
    would give rise to adverse effects on the living conditions of occupants of nearby
    residential properties Those residents would experience the noise repeatedly
    during the relatively long hours of operation, including at weekends when demand
    for car cleaning is likely to be greater, thus coinciding with residents spending
    more time at home.
19. The noise is likely to affect the way they enjoy their homes, including prompting
    occupants to keep windows and doors closed, requiring conversations to be
    conducted at a louder volume and discouraging the use of gardens where
    available. I therefore consider, on the evidence before me and my experiences at
    my site visit, that the noise generated by jet washing would cause disturbance that
    would harm the living conditions of occupants of nearby residential properties.
20. For the reasons given above, I conclude that it has not been demonstrated that the
    proposed development could be operated without noise and disturbance causing
    unacceptable harm to the living conditions of the occupants of nearby residential
    properties. This would be contrary to Policies KP2 and CP4 of the Southend-on-
    Sea Core Strategy 2007 (“the CS”) and Policies DM1 and DM3 of the Southend-
    on-Sea Borough Council Development Management Document 2015 (“the DMD”),
    insofar as they require high-quality development that protects the amenity of
    immediate neighbours having regard to, amongst others, noise and disturbance.
21. Those policies are consistent with Policy P3 of the Framework insofar as
    development proposals should not give rise to unacceptable levels of noise, and to

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009119


       mitigate and reduce to a minimum the potential adverse impacts resulting from
       noise. For the reasons given above the proposed development would be contrary
       to Policy P3 of the Framework.
Benefits
22. Under Policy S4 of the Framework the development should be approved unless
    the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects
    when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
23. The appeal scheme is an economically beneficial use of the land and operates as
    a meanwhile use pending its redevelopment for commercial space and eight flats
    through an extant planning permission. It generates a modest level of employment
    and provides a service that is clearly in demand. In accordance with Policy L2 of
    the Framework, substantial weight should be given to the benefits of the appeal
    proposal.
24. However, for the reasons given above, those benefits are substantially outweighed
    by its adverse effects and the conflict with Policy P3 of the Framework.
    Accordingly, I am satisfied that the benefits of approving the development would
    be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects identified, when assessed
    against the Framework's national decision-making policies.
25. While concerns are raised that the appeal land may fall into disrepair if the use
    ceases, I am aware that councils have separate powers to deal with untidy land.
    Therefore, such concerns do not weigh positively in favour of the proposal.
Conclusion
26. For the reasons given above, the conflict with Policies KP2 and CP4 of the CS,
    and Policies DM1 and DM3 of the DMD brings the proposal into conflict with the
    development plan as a whole. The material considerations, including the benefits
    of the proposed development and the provisions of the Framework, do not indicate
    that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with the development
    plan. Therefore, I conclude that the proposal is unacceptable and the appeal
    should be dismissed.



G Sylvester
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
