Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 August 2026 by J Kirkaldy BSc (Hons) PGDip MRTPI
Decision by Martin Seaton BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 8th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009587
The Meadows, High Street, Chelmsford, Essex CM2 6FD
•   The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
    Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
    consent.
•   The appeal is made by Property Manager of Smart Outdoor Ltd, against the decision of Chelmsford
    City Council.
•   The application Ref is 26/00190/ADV.
•   The advertisement proposed is for an internally illuminated 2 sided digital signage totem.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. I have taken the description of the advertisement from the Council’s decision notice
   as this provides a fuller, more accurate description than the one provided on the
   application form.
4. Having reviewed the most recent changes to the National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework), I am satisfied that they do not affect the substance of
   the main issue in the appeal. Since they would not therefore be prejudiced, I have
   proceeded without further consultation with the main parties.
Main Issues
5. The main issues are;
     •    the effect of the proposal on the visual amenity of the area, including the setting
          of the Chelmer and Blackwater Navigation Conservation Area (CA); and,
     •    the effect on public safety with particular regard to highway safety.
Reasons for the Recommendation
Amenity
6. The Planning Practice Guidance sets out that in practice ‘amenity’ is usually
   understood to mean the effect of an advertisement on visual and aural amenity

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009587


     within the immediate neighbourhood. In assessing amenity, regard should be had
     to the general characteristics of the locality, including the presence of historic,
     architectural, cultural or similar features of interest.
7. The appeal site comprises part of a surface car park and would occupy an existing
   parking bay close to the vehicular entrance. It is adjacent to High Bridge Road, a
   bridge crossing the Rivers Can and Chelmer, which forms an important route
   linking Springfield Road and Parkway. The surrounding area is predominately
   commercial in character, with the car parks serving the city centre and Meadows
   Shopping Centre.
8. The site lies immediately adjacent to, but outside the CA. The Chelmer and
   Blackwater Navigation Conservation Appraisal (the CAA) published in draft form for
   consultation in 2009, identifies features that contribute to the significance and
   special interest of the CA. The historic waterway, which extends through
   neighbouring districts, resulted in Chelmsford’s expansion and development as an
   industrial centre from the late eighteenth century. It is significant for its structures,
   including 13 locks, landscape character, leisure and recreational value.
9. The CAA describes High Bridge Road as a dominant, elevated concrete structure
   that detracts from views westwards towards the town centre and eastwards
   towards the water meadows. Nevertheless, it also acknowledges that the bridge
   provides an elevated vantage point, affording expansive views across the river
   valley. In this context, the proposal would be readily visible from within the CA and
   in views towards it.
10. High Bridge Road is relatively free from advertisements, aside from a limited
    amount of highway signage, including some digital information signs, and
    commercial signage associated with nearby buildings. Although the surrounding
    area is characterised in part by commercial development, there remains a notable
    sense of spaciousness within the townscape. This is attributable to the elevated
    position of the bridge, the presence of the rivers and areas of open surface parking
    that provide visual relief and breaks within the built form. The absence of significant
    advertising clutter further reinforces the area’s sense of openness resulting in a
    coherent, legible, and uncluttered street scene that contributes positively to the
    character and appearance of the surrounding area.
11. The digital display would be mounted on a base, with the structure positioned
    perpendicular to the edge of High Bridge Road and visible from within the car park
    and above the bridge parapet and side railings. It would be orientated towards
    vehicular traffic travelling along High Bridge Road, as well as vehicles entering the
    car park. It would also be visible to pedestrians. By reason of its considerable
    width, height, overall massing and illumination the totem would appear as a visually
    bulky and conspicuous feature within the street scene. Furthermore, owing to the
    alignment of High Bridge Road and the relative absence of buildings, vegetation or
    other features capable of obscuring views, it would be visible from a considerable
    distance, particularly when travelling towards Springfield Road.
12. As a result, the proposal would detract from views of the riverside corridor and its
    associated trees and vegetation, which the CAA identifies as ‘green fingers’, that
    bring the countryside into the town centre, diminishing the appreciation of features
    that contribute positively to the character and appearance of the area and the
    setting of the CA.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009587


13. Whilst I recognise that the level of illumination could be controlled through a
    planning condition, such measure would not sufficiently mitigate the adverse impact
    on the street scene or address visual intrusion.
14. I therefore conclude that the proposal would harm the visual amenity of the locality
    and would fail to preserve the setting, and consequently the significance of the CA.
15. The Council has drawn my attention to policies DM13, DM23 and S3 of the
    Chelmsford Local Plan (2020) and insofar as they seek to protect visual amenity
    and the historic environment, I have taken them into account as material
    considerations. However, powers to control advertisements under the regulations
    may be exercised only in the interests of amenity and public safety. Accordingly,
    the Council’s policies have not in themselves been decisive in my determination of
    the appeal.
Public Safety

16. The Council, following consultation with the Highway Authority, objects to the
    proposal on the basis that it would impede future inspection and maintenance
    activities associated with the bridge. However, the proposed totem would not be
    physically attached to the bridge structure and given its limited depth of less than 1
    metre and its orientation to the bridge, access to and visibility of the structure would
    be retained.

17. I have also had regard to the appellant's submission that the advertisement would
    be supported by a simple steel structure bolted to a foundation, which could be
    removed if future maintenance or repair works were required. Whilst I have no
    substantive details before me regarding the practicalities of such an operation, the
    evidence before me does not demonstrate that the proposal would materially
    obstruct access to the bridge or prejudice necessary inspection, maintenance or
    repair works. Consequently, I am not persuaded that the proposal would adversely
    affect the safe operation of the bridge or give rise to unacceptable public safety
    concerns.

Other Matters
18. The matter of whether the proposed advertisement would result in less than
    substantial harm as raised by the Council, or harm to the significance of a
    designated heritage asset as it is now referred to in the Framework (August 2026)
    and whether this harm is outweighed by the public benefits, as set out in Policy
    HE6 of the Framework, are not relevant to matters in this appeal, as the policy only
    applies to heritage-related consent regimes under the 1990 Act.
Conclusion and Recommendation
19. For the reasons given above, I conclude that whilst there is no harm to public
    safety, the display of the advertisement would be detrimental to amenity and the
    setting of the CA. Therefore, the appeal should be dismissed.

J Kirkaldy
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009587


Inspector’s Decision
20. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

Martin Seaton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
