Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 5 August 2026
by David Cross BA(Hons) PgDip(Dist) TechIOA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 7 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009208
RCCG Green Pastures Parish, 101 Jarrom Street, Leicester LE2 7DX
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Victor Joel of RCCG Green Parish, Leicester against the decision of
    Leicester City Council.
•   The application Ref is 20251446.
•   The development proposed is construction of second floor extension; installation of balcony to front
    of place of worship (Class F1).

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. In their appeal submissions the appellant uses the description of development as
   given on the planning application form, which differs from that on the Council’s
   decision notice. However, the appellant has indicated their agreement to a change
   in the description of development referred to in an acknowledgement letter from the
   Council. Accordingly, I have used the description given on the Council’s decision
   notice.
3. I have also taken the site address from the plans submitted by the appellant, as I
   consider that this accurately describes the circumstances of the appeal site.
4. Subsequent to determining the planning application, the Council has adopted the
   Leicester Local Plan 2026 (the Local Plan). The policies of the new Local Plan
   supersede the policies referred to in the Council’s reasons for refusal. The Council
   has specified which policies it considers to be relevant to the appeal and the
   appellant has had the opportunity to comment on these. I have therefore had
   regard to the policies of the recently adopted Local Plan in reaching my decision.
5. A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) has
   been published since the appeal was lodged. Both main parties have had the
   opportunity to comment on any relevant implications for the appeal. I have had
   regard to the Framework in reaching my decision.
Main Issues
6. The main issues are the effect of the proposal on the:
       •   Character and appearance of the host building and the area; and
       •   Living conditions of neighbouring residents in respect of privacy.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009208


Reasons
Character and Appearance
7.     The appeal site consists of an understated church building of a traditional pitched
       roof design with a more recent 2-storey flat roofed extension with a relatively
       unorthodox front elevation. Although the traditional church building has had some
       alterations, including modern windows, it retains its original form and scale. The
       site is in a prominent corner location within an area of traditional terraced housing,
       and the traditional church building makes a positive contribution to the streetscape.
8.     The appeal proposal would introduce a second floor above the extant relatively
       modern extension. Although the proposal is set back from the streetscape, this
       upward extension would significantly increase the bulk and massing of the
       building, and its flat roofed box-like appearance would jar with the pitched roof of
       the adjoining traditional church building and nearby terraces. Although the appeal
       site is on a corner location, the proposed extension is set back from the corner,
       and would appear as an awkwardly placed building set away from the main street
       frontages.
9.     Due to the set back from the front elevation, the appellant submits that the
       proposal would hardly be noticed by a casual observer from the street. However,
       views of the obtrusive design of the extension would be enabled above the slope
       of the pitched roof of the traditional church building in views from Jarrom Street.
       The increased height of the flat roofed building would also be apparent above the
       ridge of the pitched roof of the church in views along Jarrom Street. The
       unfortunate bulk and massing of the extension would also be apparent in views
       from Grasmere Street via an open area to the rear of the building.
10. The design of the traditional church building and adjoining extension is distinct
    from the nearby terraces, but this does not justify a design of the obtrusive
    appearance as the appeal proposal. Indeed, the design would unacceptably
    exacerbate the unorthodox appearance of the relatively modern extension. This
    harm would be increased further due to the prominent location of the appeal site
    and the positive contribution that the traditional church building makes to the
    streetscape. The use of appropriate materials would do little to mitigate for the
    harm arising from the design and location of the proposal.
11. Although there is a flat roofed water tower to the rear of the building which is only
    marginally lower than the proposal, this is materially smaller compared to the scale
    and massing of the proposed extension and does not justify the design of the
    proposal.
12. The appellant refers to a number of flat-roofed and other styles of buildings in the
    area. However, these are some distance from the appeal site and do not justify the
    design of the proposal within its immediate context of the terraces and traditional
    church building.
13. Policy L2 of the Framework relates to making effective use of land, including
    creating additional floorspace within settlements by using the airspace above
    existing commercial premises. This includes where it is appropriate to have larger
    buildings, such as at street corners. However, the proposal would be set back from
    the corner, and this arrangement contributes to its incongruous appearance. For
    this reason and those stated previously, the proposal would not be consistent with

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009208


       the overall street scene and would not be a sensitive redevelopment. It would
       therefore conflict with the relevant considerations of Policy L2.
14. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the proposal would lead to
    substantial harm to the character and appearance of the host building and the
    area. The proposal would therefore conflict with the design principles of Policy
    DQP01 of the Local Plan, particularly with regard to integrating well into its
    surroundings. The proposal would also conflict with the design and street scene
    requirements of Policies L2 and DP3 of the Framework.
Living Conditions
15. The proposal originally included windows on the side of a hall on the upper floor
    which would enable an intrusive degree of overlooking of the rear of properties on
    Ullswater Street. However, the appellant has submitted amended plans with the
    appeal which remove these windows. This is acceptable as a minor amendment to
    the proposal and would address the issue of overlooking.
16. On the basis of the amended plans, the proposal would not lead to harm to the
    living conditions of neighbouring residents in respect of privacy. The proposal
    would therefore comply with the privacy and overlooking requirements of Policy
    DQP06 of the Local Plan. The proposal would also comply with the Framework
    which seeks to provide acceptable living standards for residents and neighbours in
    terms of privacy.
17. The Council refers to the Residential Amenity SPD. However, based on the
    submitted documents this relates to house extensions and is not relevant to the
    appeal proposal.
Other Matters
18. The appellant has mentioned a number of benefits arising from the proposal. It
    would contribute to the supply of office space in the Council’s area, but given the
    limited extent of office space proposed this would carry commensurately limited
    weight in favour of the appeal. Although the proposal would provide additional
    accommodation for the uses on the site, this would not outweigh the harm arising
    from the design of the development.
19. The proposal would also provide a new lift which would improve accessibility for
    people with limited mobility. But it has not been demonstrated that this benefit is
    reliant on an extension of the scale of the appeal proposal. In considering this
    appeal I have had due regard to the Public Sector Equality Duty contained in the
    Equality Act 2010 which sets out relevant protected characteristics. However, the
    circumstances of the proposal do not outweigh the significant harm that I have
    identified regarding character and appearance. Following careful consideration of
    these particular matters I am satisfied that the impact of dismissing this appeal is
    proportionate and justified.
Conclusion
20. Notwithstanding my conclusions in respect of living conditions, the proposal would
    conflict with the development plan and the Framework when read as a whole with
    regards to design principles and achieving well-designed places. There are no
    material considerations of such weight that indicate the appeal should be
    determined other than in accordance with the development plan.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009208


21. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

David Cross
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
