Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 September 2026
by C Walker BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009962
Pentire, The Avenue, Worplesdon, Surrey, GU3 3RA
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
     planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Richard Hennity against Guildford Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/P/01670.
•    The development proposed was described in the application form as ‘a rear extension with first floor
     overhang, a forward-shifted main entrance extension, a full loft conversion to the main body of the
     house and removal of the low level pitched roof, and a new side garage linked by an overhanging
     canopy, The design features modern glazing, wrap-around overhangs, and improved access to the
     first floor.’

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed and planning permission is refused.
Preliminary Matter
2.     The appeal has been made against the Council's failure to determine the
       application within the statutory timeframe. However, the Council has indicated that,
       had it been in a position to issue a decision, it would have refused planning
       permission. Therefore, in identifying the main issues, I have had regard to the
       concerns raised by the Council.
3.     While the Design and Access Statement makes reference to replacing the house,
       it also makes clear that existing external walls would be reused. Therefore, like the
       Council, I have assessed the proposal as an extension rather than a replacement
       dwelling.
4.     A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published in
       August 2026, during the appeal process. The main parties have been given the
       opportunity to make representations on this matter, and I have had regard to these
       in reaching my decision.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues are:
     •     whether the development would be inappropriate development in the Green
           Belt having regard to the Framework and any relevant development plan
           policies;
     •     the effect of the development on the openness of the Green Belt; and



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009962


     •     whether any harm by reason of inappropriateness, would be clearly outweighed
           by other considerations, so as to amount to the very special circumstances
           required to justify the proposal.
Reasons
Whether inappropriate development in Green Belt
6.     The appeal site lies within the Metropolitan Green Belt, as defined by the Policies
       Map of the Guildford Local Plan: Strategy and Sites (2015-2034) (2019) (GLPSS).
       Policy 2 of the GLPSS sets out that the Green Belt will continue to be protected
       from inappropriate development in accordance with the Framework.
7.     Policy GB6 of the Framework states that development in the Green Belt is
       inappropriate unless one of several exceptions apply, as set out in its Policy GB7.
       One such exception within Policy GB7 includes (b) the reuse, extension, alteration
       or replacement of an existing building, provided that the existing building is of
       permanent and substantial construction, is lawful in planning terms, and any
       extension or alteration will not result in a disproportionate increase in size
       compared to the original building. Both Policy P2 and the Framework define
       ‘original building’ as meaning either the building as it existed on 1 July 1948, or if
       constructed after that date, as it was originally built.
8.     Neither the Framework nor Policy P2 define what constitutes a "disproportionate"
       increase in size, and the assessment is therefore a matter of planning judgment
       having regard to the particular circumstances of the case. In this regard, the
       Council’s Green Belt Supplementary Planning Document 2023, does not prescribe
       any fixed percentage increase beyond which development would be regarded as
       disproportionate. Instead, it advocates an assessment based on factors including
       the proposal’s mass, bulk, external dimensions, footprint and height, the scale of
       the existing property relative to its plot size and the overall extent of its visual
       perception.
9.     There is a dispute between the parties regarding the extent of the original building.
       The Council contends that the original building had a floorspace of approximately
       242 square metres (sq.m), whereas the appellant submits that it comprised around
       342 sq.m. Having regard to the evidence before me, I am not persuaded that this
       disagreement is fundamental to my assessment.
10. From what I have seen and read, the dwelling is a bungalow that appears to have
    remained largely unaltered from its original form. Moreover, no planning history
    has been identified which would suggest that it has been subject to any significant
    extensions or alterations. The Council indicates that two small outbuildings should
    be treated as domestic adjuncts and included within the assessment of the original
    building. However, those structures would in any event be removed to facilitate the
    proposed triple garage and therefore do not materially affect the overall
    comparison between the existing and proposed development.
11. In these circumstances, I am satisfied that the existing and proposed plans provide
    a sufficiently reliable basis upon which to undertake the assessment. On the
    evidence before me, the building as it presently exists is likely to represent, in all
    material respects, the original building for the purposes of Policy P2 and Policy
    GB7 of the Framework. I have therefore proceeded on that basis.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009962


12. The existing bungalow is modest in its size and scale, comprising a single-storey
    dwelling with a pitched roof reaching approximately 5.59m in height. By contrast,
    the proposed development would substantially alter both its appearance and form
    through the addition of a full upper storey with a flat roof, together with extensive
    ground-floor extensions and garaging. Whilst the proposed height of 6.22m would
    not be significantly greater than that of the original building, and the dwelling would
    remain proportionate to the size of its plot, those factors are not determinative on
    their own.
13. In particular, the additional storey and the extensive horizontal expansion of the
    building would materially increase its bulk and massing. As a consequence, the
    dwelling would have a considerably greater presence than the original bungalow
    and would be perceived as a substantially larger building. Indeed, the proposal
    would transform the modest character of the existing dwelling to such an extent
    that it would be largely unrecognisable as the original building.
14. The parties disagree as to the extent of the increase in floorspace. The Council
    calculates that the proposed dwelling, including the garage accommodation, would
    provide approximately 424 sq.m of floorspace, representing an increase of around
    75% over the original building. The appellant, by contrast, contends that the
    proposal would result in approximately 535 sq.m of floorspace, equating to an
    increase of around 56%. Notwithstanding this discrepancy, both calculations
    indicate a substantial increase in size over and above the original building.
15. Having regard to the proposal's significantly increased bulk, massing and visual
    presence, together with the substantial uplift in floorspace identified by both
    parties, I find that the development would constitute a disproportionate increase
    over and above the size of the original building. Accordingly, it would not fall within
    the exception set out in Policy GB7(b) of the Framework and would therefore
    represent inappropriate development in the Green Belt. This also brings the
    scheme into conflict with Policy P2 of the GLPSS.
    - Grey Belt
16. The appellant contends that the appeal proposal accords with Framework policy
    GB7(g) which excludes development from being inappropriate in the Green Belt
    where all four criteria listed (i to iv) are met.
17. It is advanced that the proposal would meet an evidenced unmet need for the type
    of development proposed, as required by criterion ii) of policy GB7(g). However,
    whilst the Council are unable to meet the necessary five-year housing land supply
    requirement of the Framework, as this proposal is for an extension to a dwelling,
    there would be no net gain in housing. As such, it would have a neutral impact on
    unmet housing need. For the same reasons, I cannot give meaningful weight to its
    advancement as a self-build dwelling, and even if I did, there is no mechanism to
    secure it as such in any event. Therefore, as the proposal does not meet criterion
    ii) of this policy, I do not need to consider it against the other three criteria. This is
    because it would not alter the outcome, as all four criteria must be met for it to be
    considered as an exception to inappropriate development.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009962


Openness
18. The proposed additions would result in a more intensive form of development
    across the site, increasing its bulk and mass and, by their nature, reducing the
    openness of the Green Belt through a narrowing of the gaps between buildings.
    Whilst the development would be well contained and largely screened from the
    roadside by existing mature vegetation, it would nevertheless introduce a
    permanent built form with an increased spatial presence. Limited views of the
    additions would also be possible from public vantage points and the wider
    surrounding area. Consequently, the proposal would erode the openness of the
    Green Belt and conflict with one of its fundamental purposes, namely to keep land
    permanently open, as set out in the Framework.
Other considerations
19. The proposal would facilitate the modernisation of the existing dwelling, which the
    appellant submits does not meet contemporary building standards. The scheme
    incorporates a range of sustainable design measures, including a green roof, air
    source heat pumps and solar photovoltaic panels. These features would improve
    the energy efficiency of the building, reduce its operational carbon emissions and
    make a positive contribution towards sustainable construction. In addition, the
    green roof would provide biodiversity benefits through the creation of habitat and
    enhanced ecological value. Taken together, these measures represent a clear
    environmental benefit of the proposal, to which I attach moderate weight.
20. I am cognisant that the description of development references an improved access
    to the first floor. However, it is not before me how the existing access is deficient
    and I therefore attribute this only limited positive weight.
21. My attention is drawn to other developments in the area, said to have been subject
    to extensive redevelopments, including those at nearby Rye House, Cranmere and
    Woodside. However, I have very limited detail before me to enable any
    comparative analysis, such that they cannot alter my findings.
22. No other very special circumstances have been advanced to justify the proposal.
Conclusion
23. I have found that the scheme constitutes inappropriate development, and that the
    openness of the Green Belt would be compromised by the development. The
    Framework requires that substantial weight should be given to any harm to the
    Green Belt. This weighs heavily against the scheme.
24. Policy GB6 of the Framework is clear that inappropriate development is, by
    definition, harmful to the Green Belt and should not be approved except in very
    special circumstances (VCS). Such circumstances will not exist unless the
    potential harm to the Green Belt by reason of inappropriateness, and any other
    harm resulting from the proposal, is clearly outweighed by other considerations.
25. Collectively I have given moderate weight to the other considerations in favour of
    the development. I am not satisfied that the harm to the Green Belt would be
    clearly outweighed by the other considerations. Consequently, the VSC
    circumstances to justify the scheme do not therefore exist.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009962


26. For the reasons set out above, the proposal conflicts with the development plan
    and there are no material considerations, including the Framework, that would
    outweigh the conflict. I therefore dismiss the appeal.

C Walker
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
