Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 22 July 2026
by Bhupinder Thandi BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18th August 2026
Appeal Ref: 6009620
Flat 1, 5 Darley Road, Eastbourne, East Sussex BN20 7PB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Paul Rudden and Ms Jayne Hendric against the decision of Eastbourne
     Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 250709.
•    The development proposed is described as retention of single storey rear veranda, erect greenhouse
     and open storage area in rear garden. Replace 4 front bay windows.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     At the time of my site visit I observed that the veranda had been constructed at the
       property, but that the greenhouse and storage area had not. The application is in
       part retrospective. I have determined the appeal on this basis. The Council confirm
       that the greenhouse and storage building are not matters in dispute and the
       replacement bay windows have been omitted from the development proposals. As
       such, I have not addressed these matters in my reasoning below.
3.     There is some disagreement between the main parties about the dimensions of
       the veranda. For clarity, I have relied on the dimensions provided by the
       appellants, which they have confirmed in their evidence are correct.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are:
              •    The effect of the development upon the character and appearance of the
                   property and the area; and
              •    The effect of the proposal upon the living conditions of neighbouring
                   occupiers with regard to outlook.
Reasons
Character and appearance
5.     The host property is a three-storey semi-detached building subdivided into flats
       constructed from traditional materials incorporating red brick, timber windows and
       decorative features. The other half of the property; 7 Darley Road, is a residential
       care home and benefits from extensions to the rear. The appeal property
       comprises the ground-floor flat, which opens onto the garden. The veranda
       projects from the rear of a single-storey extension.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009620


6.     I acknowledge that the veranda sits lower than both the extension and No 7.
       Nevertheless, it is a sizeable structure, projecting a notable distance from the rear
       and extending across almost the full width of the property. Its polycarbonate sheet
       roof, substantial support bars, white plastic-clad timber side walls and timber pillars
       emphasise its scale and give it an unduly visually heavy appearance.
7.     In combination with the previous extension, the development has considerably
       extended the original flat. It appears as a disproportionate addition that
       unacceptably dominates the rear of both the flat and the host property.
8.     The veranda’s materiality, including plastic cladding and polycarbonate sheets, jar
       with the traditional materials of the host property. As a result, it appears as an
       unduly incongruous structure that is not in keeping with the design and
       appearance of the host property or surrounding properties.
9.     In coming to my decision, I have taken account of the sustainable management of
       water, the fact that most of the garden would remain undeveloped and available as
       functional outdoor space, and that damp issues may have been addressed. I also
       note that the veranda is not visible from Darley Road and is not a permanent
       structure, which mitigates its impact to some extent. However, these factors do not
       overcome the harm I have identified.
10. The appellant advises that the side cladding could be removed to address
    concerns. However, as these details do not form part of the proposal before me, I
    have not taken this into account when coming to my decision.
11. The appellant has drawn my attention to extensions at No 7 and opposite the
    appeal property, which they consider relevant. However, on the very limited
    evidence before me, there is nothing to suggest that the extension opposite is
    comparable to the appeal scheme. In respect of the alterations to No 7, it is
    evident that they have, in part, replaced previous structures and are considered by
    the Council to be less intrusive.
12. Photographs of nearby properties have also been provided. However, I have not
    been made aware of the individual circumstances that led to those developments
    being constructed. In any event, each application and appeal must be assessed on
    its own merits, as I have done here. These examples do not lead me to reach a
    different conclusion on this matter.
13. As such, the development adversely affects the character and appearance of the
    host property and area contrary to Policy D10a of the Eastbourne Core Strategy
    (2013) and saved Policies UHT1 and UHT4 of the Eastbourne Borough Plan
    (2003) (EBP) which, amongst other things, seek to ensure that visually local
    distinctiveness is not eroded; new development harmonises with the local
    environment; is sympathetic to setting in terms of scale, hight and massing; makes
    a positive contribution to the overall appearance of the area including the use of
    good quality materials and a high standard of finish.
Living conditions of neighbouring occupiers
14. The discordant and incongruous nature of the development draws the eye and
    makes it readily discernible in the private views of neighbouring residents.
    However, given its position and separation from neighbouring properties, it is not
    so overbearing or imposing as to unduly affect their outlook. As such, I am


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009620


       satisfied that the veranda does not unacceptably harm the living conditions of
       nearby occupiers.
15. It, therefore, accords with saved Policy HO20 of the EBP, which, amongst other
    things seeks to ensure that proposals do not cause unacceptable loss of outlook.
Other Matters
16. As the property sits within the Mead Conservation Area (CA) Section 72(1) of the
    Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 is relevant. It
    outlines a duty to pay special attention to the desirability of preserving or
    enhancing the character or appearance of the CA.
17. The significance of the CA is derived from its attractively cohesive yet informal
    townscape characterised by the sweeping esplanades along the sea shore and
    Victorian and Edwardian villas and hotels inland. These properties are, by and
    large, architecturally similar, incorporating red brick, tiled roofs, timber windows,
    decorative features, including half-timber detailing, and prominent gables. Darley
    Road is no exception and, despite some alterations, properties including the
    appeal property make a positive contribution to the significance of the CA.
18. The Council’s Design and Conservation Officer suggests that as the veranda is not
    visible from the streetscene no heritage objection is raised. In this regard and
    based on the available information I see no reason to come to a different
    conclusion. As such, the proposal is not detrimental to the CA and thus preserves
    its significance.
19. The conversations and interactions with the occupier of flat 2 and the Council’s
    Enforcement Officer are not a matter for me in consideration of this s78 appeal.
Conclusion
20. For the reasons set out above the appeal does not succeed.



B Thandi
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
