Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by J J Evans BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6009101
46 Market Square, Witney, Oxfordshire OX28 6AL
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mrs Juliet Druce against the decision of West Oxfordshire District Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01989/FUL.
•    The development proposed is the change of use of an existing single storey building from
     commercial use to a single dwelling and side extension.


Appeal B Ref: 6009103
46 Market Square, Witney, Oxfordshire OX28 6AL
•    The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
     1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•    The appeal is made by Mrs Juliet Druce against the decision of West Oxfordshire District Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01990/LBC.
•    The works proposed are the change of use of an existing single storey building from commercial use
     to a single dwelling and side extension.


Decision
1.     Appeal A: the appeal is dismissed.
2.     Appeal B: the appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
3.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published on 17 August 2026, and the comments of the main parties were sought.
       Consideration has been given to those received in reaching the appeal decisions.
4.     46 Market Square and 44 and 44A Market Square are grade II listed buildings, all
       of which are in the Witney and Cogges Conservation Area. As required by
       Sections 16(2), 66(1) and 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation
       Areas) Act 1990 (the Act), special regard has been paid to preserving a listed
       building or its setting or any features of special architectural or historic interest
       which it possesses, and of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of
       a conservation area.
5.     The appeals building is a single storey outbuilding to the rear of 46 Market Square.
       Known as Long Barn, it has been referred to by the Council as a listed curtilage
       building and as a Non-Designated Heritage Asset. The building is within the same
       ownership of those who own No 46, and historic maps of the area show that it
       existed before 1st July 1948. The outbuilding has a legible ancillary form,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6009101 & 6009103


       appearance and positioning that denotes a physical and functional relationship to
       No 46. Planning and listed building consent applications for the scheme were
       submitted, and the appellant is appealing against the refusal of both.
       Consequently, for the appeals Long Barn has been considered as a listed curtilage
       building.
6.     As set out above, there are two appeals at the property, one of which seeks
       planning permission for the change of use and extension (appeal A) and the other
       listed building consent (appeal B). Each case has been considered on its
       individual merits, although to avoid duplication they have been dealt with together,
       except where otherwise indicated.
Main Issues
7.     The main issues are:
       -   The effect of the scheme upon the character and appearance of the area and
           upon the host building, having particular regard to whether it would preserve
           the character and appearance of the conservation area, and preserve listed
           buildings, their settings, and any features of special architectural or historic
           interest they possess;
       -   The effect upon future occupiers, having particular regard to outlook, light
           levels, overlooking, noise and disturbance;
       -   The effect upon protected species; and
       -   The effect of the change of use upon the vitality and viability of the town centre.
Reasons
Character and Appearance
8.     Long Barn is a stone, brick and concrete tiled single storey building positioned to
       the rear of 46 Market Square (No 46). There is a yard to the north of the building
       that is enclosed by 6 Eagle Industrial Estate and 44 Market Square (No 44). Long
       Barn and No 46 share an access with the industrial estate onto Market Square.
       Within the surrounding area there are a mix of buildings and uses, including
       residential properties at 2 and 6 Church Green (Nos 2 and 6).
9.     Witney is an historic market town, and as described within the Witney and Cogges
       Conservation Area Character Appraisal (2013), it has a bustling and vibrant town
       centre. There are mostly historic houses to either side of Church Green, many of
       which remain in residential use, whilst the Market Square comprises a more varied
       mix of uses that includes shops, services, and offices. There is a noticeable
       contrast between the relative tranquillity of Church Green compared to the more
       bustling, vibrant nature of Market Square. Many of the buildings are two or three
       storey with elegantly mannered appearances, and they form long lines to either
       side of the roads, giving a high status appearance to this part of the town. As
       identified in the Council’s Design Guide (2016) (DG) the repeated use of the local
       stone gives an harmonious visual cohesion to the historic buildings and a distinct
       identity to the town. All these elements are part of the significance of the
       conservation area.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6009101 & 6009103


10. Nos 44, 44A and 46 form part of a group of historic buildings in Market Square that
    make a positive contribution to the character and appearance of the conservation
    area. Constructed predominantly of local stone, No. 46 was formerly an inn and is
    built of coursed and ashlar limestone beneath a stone slate roof, while Nos 44 and
    44A originated as a house. Both properties have elegantly mannered public
    frontages that contrast with the more functional and utilitarian nature of their rear
    elevations. The architectural and historic special interest of these buildings
    derives from their age, historic uses, use of traditional local materials, and their
    evolution over time, including the two rear outriggers to No. 46 and the long brick
    rear extension to Nos 44 and 44A.
11. Long Barn is an historic outbuilding to No 46 that forms the southern boundary to
    the site. Separated from the main building by the gated access into the yard, the
    historic ancillary nature of the building to its host remains evident. The building’s
    significance derives in part through its use of coursed rubble stone, the extensive
    continuity of its southern wall that delineates the property boundary, and that its
    former open frontage remains evident through the retention of the timber and
    stone roof supports. These features, along with the simple, utilitarian linear form of
    the building and its physical and functional subservience, position and relationship
    to No 46 and its yard, are all part of its special historic and architectural interest as
    an ancillary outbuilding. It forms an integral part of the setting of No 46, as well as
    positively contributing to the character and appearance of the conservation area.
12. The change of use of Long Barn would retain the historic rafters and the long,
    unbroken length of walling that defines the southern elevation. The replacement of
    the brick and cladding infill panels with mostly glazing and the retention of the
    timber and stone roof supports, would be positive aspects of the scheme, as it
    would sympathetically reflect the former open frontage of the building and its
    relationship to No 46 and its service yard.
13. Nevertheless, the proposed extension would be a harmful addition to Long Barn
    and one which would detract from its significance and that of No 46. As with
    No 44, the rear of No 46 is characterised by the functionality of its outriggers and
    because of their legible subservience to the main buildings. This is particularly
    evident with No 46 as there is a defined, cascading vertical hierarchy to the
    outriggers as they step down from the host. In such a context the height and size
    of the proposed extension would conflict with this hierarchy. The extension would
    appear as an incongruously dominating addition due to its detached separation
    from No 46 and its strong vertical emphasis that would be exaggerated by the
    presence of cladding upon the first floor. The simple, utilitarian linear form and
    appearance of Long Barn would be overwhelmed by the size and height of the
    extension. Even when seen against the backdrop of the outrigger to No 44, the
    bulky verticality of the extension would appear as an alien introduction that would
    harmfully intrude into and thereby detract from the settings of the nearby listed
    buildings and the historic cohesion of the conservation area.
14. There would be oblique views of the extension above the roof of Long Barn from
    the Market Square, but it would appear particularly conspicuous from within the
    industrial estate. There is a rich tapestry of roof forms to the rear of No 44 and 46,
    and the dormer windows present within nearby buildings, such as within No 46 and
    in No 2, mostly sit within the roof plane rather than extending the wall elevation.
    Those proposed and the protruding window in the gable end would all disrupt the
    vernacular harmony of the settings of the listed buildings and the conservation

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6009101 & 6009103


       area. Furthermore, the limited palette of materials present in the historic buildings
       is a distinctive part of the significance of the listed buildings and the conservation
       area, and consequently the introduction of cladding would serve to exaggerate the
       discordant nature of the extension.
15. Although the yard is a mix of gravel and concrete, it has retained an openness that
    belies its functional, ancillary service relationship to No 46 and to Long Barn. The
    extension would occupy much of the yard, and its size, height and position would
    give it a cramped and constrained relationship with nearby buildings. The
    openness of the yard is an integral element to the historic functioning of the
    property as a whole and remains evident in Long Barn despite the modern brick
    and cladding infill. The extension would result in the loss of this openness, as well
    as compartmentalising it into small areas, thereby eroding the legible purpose of
    this space and the contribution it makes to the setting of Long Barn and No 46.
16. The Framework requires that when considering the impact of a proposed
    development on the significance of a designated heritage asset, substantial weight
    should be given to the asset’s conservation. In this case the proposal would lead
    to harm to the listed buildings and to the conservation area. These harms are of
    considerable importance and must be weighed against the public benefits of the
    proposal, including where appropriate securing the optimum viable use.
17. Two of the three units within Long Barn are unoccupied, and the scheme would
    give the building an ongoing use. This would be an important public benefit. The
    removal of the brick and cladding infill, and the provision of a home in a town
    centre location would be further benefits, as would the economic benefits from the
    spend of future occupiers and the benefits from construction, although the latter
    would be time limited. Nevertheless, these important benefits would not outweigh
    the substantial harms to the designated heritage assets.
18. Although an additional dwelling in a main service centre would accord with
    Policy H2 of the West Oxfordshire Local Plan (2018) (LP), for the reasons given
    the scheme would fail to preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the
    conservation area. It would also harm the special interest of the listed curtilage
    building and fail to preserve the settings of the nearby listed buildings. These
    harms would conflict with the Act and with LP Policies OS2, OS4, EH9, EH10,
    EH11, EH12 and EH16, as these policies require, amongst other things,
    development to be high quality, to conserve and enhance the historic built
    environment, and respect the historic and architectural character of an area. They
    also require development to conserve or enhance the character, and appearance
    of a conservation area, conserve or enhance the special architectural or historic
    interest of a listed building and its setting, and to avoid extensions or alterations
    which would obscure or compromise the form or character of the original building.
Living Conditions
19. Long Barn is to one side of the access lane to the industrial estate. The lane
    provides both vehicular and pedestrian access to Market Square, and it narrows to
    a single carriageway near to the junction with tall buildings to either side. Within
    the industrial estate there are a variety of uses that include a catering supplier,
    takeaway, café, gym, and social club, the latter of which remains open till the early
    hours of the morning on Fridays and Saturdays.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decisions 6009101 & 6009103


20. Given the town centre location of the dwelling, future occupiers would experience
    noise and disturbance from the day-to-day comings and goings associated with
    the industrial estate and from the diverse uses within Market Square. Use of the
    lane and the businesses within the industrial estate would result in noise and
    vibration nuisance to future occupiers.
21. However, the constrained width of the lane would preclude large vehicles passing
    by the building. The dwellings within No 2 have multiple windows looking into the
    lane with some near a speed bump, but apart from the installation of a rooflight to
    serve a bathroom there would be no new openings within the southern elevation of
    Long Barn. The appellant’s Addendum Report (2024) has provided a summary of
    several of the permitted uses within the industrial estate and their opening hours,
    as well as details of the acoustic conditions attached to the conversion of No 2 into
    dwellings.
22. Given the circumstances of this case, including the nature of the building, the town
    centre position of the dwelling, the separation between Long Barn and the social
    club, and that other nearby dwellings have incorporated mitigation measures,
    including those on the opposite side of the lane, conditions for noise and vibration
    mitigation measures would be appropriate to provide acceptable living conditions
    for future residents. Subject to such measures the scheme would accord with
    LP Policy EH8 which requires development to achieve a high standard of amenity,
    including with regard to noise and nuisance.
23. The northern elevation of Long Barn would comprise full height glazing providing
    future occupiers with an outlook into the service yard and onto the tall wall of
    No 44. The orientation of these windows and the enclosed nature of the service
    yard would impact upon levels of sunlight received into the rooms, albeit the extent
    of the glazing would maximise natural light levels. However, the two storey
    extension would significantly compromise light levels to these north facing
    windows. Even with the presence of the glass connecting corridor, the size, height
    and proximity of the extension would result in future occupiers experiencing low
    levels of natural light and an oppressive, constrained outlook.
24. Although there have been no objections to the scheme from neighbouring
    occupiers, there are windows in No 44’s outrigger. Future occupiers of the
    dwelling would be overlooked both from the users of No 44 and from those within
    the outrigger to No 46, with the latter having direct views into the extension.
    Irrespective of the extension providing a degree of screening to the westernmost
    rooms of the dwelling, other rooms would experience overlooking. Whilst the
    appellant has suggested the use of obscure glazing in the first floor bedroom
    window, this would not ameliorate the loss of privacy to other rooms.
25. For these reasons the scheme would fail to provide future occupiers with
    acceptable living conditions, and the suggested conditions would not overcome
    these harms. Consequently, there would be conflict with LP Policies OS2 and
    OS4 and the Council’s supporting DG, which require amongst other things,
    development to be compatible with adjoining uses, and not harm living conditions.
Protected Species
26. The presence of protected species is a matter that should inform the nature of any
    scheme, with Circular 06/2005 – Biodiversity and Geological Conservation (the
    Circular) making it clear that the presence of a protected species is a material

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decisions 6009101 & 6009103


       consideration when development is being considered. The Circular states that it is
       essential that the presence or otherwise of protected species, and the extent that
       they may be affected by proposed development is established before planning
       permission is granted, otherwise all relevant material considerations may not have
       been addressed in making the decision.
27. The appellant’s Protected Species Report (2021) (PS) found the building to have a
    negligible potential to offer shelter to bats as a roost and for breeding, with no
    nesting birds. Recommendations were made to include lighting and enhancement
    measures. However, the survey is now nearly five years old, and it cannot be
    assumed that its findings remain extant, as there is evidence of change within the
    building since the survey took place, such as additional roof tiles missing and two
    of the units having been unoccupied for several years. In the absence of an up-to-
    date survey, pre-commencement conditions would fail to provide sufficient
    certainty that protected species would not be harmed by the scheme.
28. The scheme has failed to demonstrate that protected species would not be
    harmed by the development. There would be conflict with LP Policy EH3, as this
    requires amongst other things, the protection and mitigation of impacts upon
    protected species.
Town Centre
29. The Council has raised no objection to the principle of a residential use in a town
    centre location, albeit LP Policy E1 seeks, amongst other things to retain existing
    employment sites to maintain the sustainability and economic diversity of its towns.
    The policy acknowledges that in some cases a continuing business use may not
    be suitable or economically viable, and there is a requirement to demonstrate that
    the site or premises is not reasonably capable of being used or redeveloped for
    employment purposes.
30. Long Barn comprises three units and a kitchen and toilet facility. The premises are
    well maintained but need updating and modernising, with the appellant’s
    Addendum Report providing a costing for the refurbishment and investment
    payback. Two of the units have been vacant since 2022, with the third having
    been occupied for over ten years on what is described by the appellant as a very
    low rent.
31. However, there is a high and consistent level of occupancy of units in Nos 44 and
    46 and although lettings are achieved via social media or Instant Offices, what has
    not been provided in this instance is the level of interest, if any, for Long Barn,
    including how long it has been marketed and at what price. Given the objectives
    of LP Policy E1 and that the Framework accords substantial weight to supporting
    business growth, these records would demonstrate whether Long Barn is
    economically viable. As such the scheme fails to meet the requirements of
    national and local policy.
32. The appellant has pointed out that other commercial units have been converted to
    residential uses, with that at Nos 2 and 6 being permitted in 2018 and 2021
    respectively. Although to the immediate south of Long Barn, the details of these
    permissions, including why no economic justification was required has not been
    provided to enable a comparison. As regards the other cases cited, given the age
    of these permissions that date from 2010 and 2008, they would have been


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decisions 6009101 & 6009103


       approved under a different development plan regime. Given these differences and
       omissions, none of the comparisons determines the approval of the scheme.
Other Matters
33. The Council has referred to other listed buildings near the site, namely 9 Corn
    Street, 38 & 40 Market Square and the Angel Public House, all of which are grade
    II listed. The outrigger of No 44 forms a tall, high enclosure of the site that
    prevents visibility of 38 & 40 Market Square and the Angel Public House. There
    are views of the top of the roofs of the buildings in Corn Street, but the scheme
    would be seen as part of the rich diversity of roofscapes that characterise the area.
    As such there would be a neutral impact upon the settings of these listed buildings.
34. The appellant has raised several concerns regarding the Council’s handling of the
    applications and appeals, including a lack of communication and opportunity to
    comment at the Planning Committee. Such matters fall to be pursued by other
    means and have no bearing upon the merits of the case.
Planning Balance
35. The Council acknowledges it does not have a five year housing land supply,
    stating a figure of 4.3 years compared to the 2-3 years cited by the appellant.
    Whatever the shortfall, the provision of an additional dwelling in a sustainable
    location and meeting the Framework’s requirements to make an efficient use of
    land would be substantial benefits. Modest benefits from the future spend of
    additional residents, as well as the time limited economic benefits during
    construction.
36. Planning law requires that applications for planning permission be determined in
    accordance with the development plan, unless material considerations indicate
    otherwise. The decision making policies in the Framework are a material
    consideration and should be read alongside policies in the development plan, and
    where policies or parts of them are materially inconsistent with policies in the
    Framework, the Framework requires they should be given very limited weight.
    The Framework seeks to achieve well-designed places, with development
    responding to its context, affording substantial weight to the conservation and/or
    enhancement of the significance of designated heritage assets, and creating
    liveable places to live, which accords with the objectives of LP Policies OS2, OS4,
    EH8, EH9, EH10, EH11, EH12, and EH16. There are also requirements within the
    Framework to minimise impacts upon biodiversity, and the safeguarding of
    employment premises, objectives that are reflected in LP Policies EH3 and E1.
    Consequently, the conflict of the scheme with these development plan policies
    should be given significant weight.
37. Whilst a key aim of the Framework is to significantly boost the supply of housing in
    sustainable locations, when read as a whole the Framework does not suggest this
    should happen at the expense of other considerations. In this case, irrespective of
    the Council’s housing land supply shortfall and the important benefits that accrue
    from the scheme, these are outweighed by the substantial harms that arise to the
    listed buildings, to the conservation area, to biodiversity, to town centre vitality and
    viability, and the significant harms to the living conditions of future occupiers.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decisions 6009101 & 6009103


Conclusion
38. There would be conflict with the development plan when considered as a whole,
    and there are no other considerations, including the requirements of the
    Framework, that outweigh this finding. Thus, for the reasons given above and
    having considered all other matters raised, the appeals are dismissed.

J J Evans
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
