Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 6 August 2026 by F Bradford BA (Hons) MRTPI
Decision by Paul Thompson DipTRP MAUD MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 9 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009451
3A Camden Avenue, Feltham, Hounslow TW13 5AZ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Murdhanya Dave against the decision of the Council of the London
    Borough of Hounslow.
•   The application Ref is P/2026/0025.
•   The development proposed is the demolition of existing porch replace with new enlarged porch.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for an enlarged porch at
   3A Camden Avenue, Feltham, Hounslow TW13 5AZ in accordance with the terms
   of the application, Ref P/2026/0025, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: Location Plan, OAB 01, OAB 03, OAB 05, and
              OAB 06.
     3)       The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
              extension shall match those used in the existing dwelling.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matter
3. The description of development has been amended within the decision in the
   interests of accuracy and clarity.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
   appearance of the host dwelling and surrounding area.
Reasons for the Recommendation
5. Camden Avenue comprises a mix of detached and semi-detached forms, exhibiting
   a range of architectural styles, ages, materials and detailing. Whilst there is no
   single prevailing house type, there is uniformity between some dwellings achieved


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009451


     through the consistency of architectural features such as bay windows and the
     overall scale of dwellings. Together with a strong building line, these factors
     collectively contribute to create a rich and attractive streetscape, contributing
     positively to the character and appearance of the area.
6. The appeal dwelling is single storey and is located between two storey dwellings.
   Although other single storey homes are present within the street, and the appeal
   dwelling adheres to the established building line, its scale and design mean it is
   observably unique within its context. This adds to the varied character and
   appearance of the area.
7. Whilst the porch would be large, the L-shaped design of the dwelling means that it
   would be set back from the main front elevation and would not appear dominant,
   either in relation to the dwelling itself or within the wider street scene. Its mass
   would be noticeably smaller than that of the host dwelling, and it would integrate
   comfortably with the existing roofscape. Furthermore, the proposal would not
   appear as an incongruous addition or diminish the contribution that the dwelling
   makes to the character and appearance of the area.
8. For these reasons, the proposed development would not result in harm to the
   character and appearance of the host dwelling or wider area. Accordingly, I find no
   conflict with Policies CC1, CC2 and SC7 of the London Borough of Hounslow Local
   Plan 2015-2030 which, among other things, aim to ensure that extensions and
   alterations respond sensitively to their context, remain subordinate to the host
   dwelling, and preserve or enhance the established character and appearance of
   the street scene through high-quality design that harmonises with surrounding
   development. I also find the proposal would follow the advice set out within the
   Hounslow Character, Sustainability and Design Codes SPD: Part A5 Residential
   Extension Guidelines (2024) where it sets out that porches should not alter the
   overall appearance of the house or dominate the character of the street.
Conditions
9. In addition to the standard time limit condition, I recommend a condition requiring
   that the development is carried out in accordance with the approved plans. This is
   necessary for enforcement purposes. I further recommend a condition requiring
   that the materials of the development match those used on the dwelling, in the
   interests of the character and appearance of the host and surrounding area.
Conclusion and Recommendation
10. For the reasons given above, I recommend that the appeal should be allowed,
    subject to conditions.

Finlay Bradford                        APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
11. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed.

Paul Thompson                          INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
