Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 30 June 2026
by K Craddock BA (Hons) MAUD MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009547
13 Cairns Street, Liverpool L8 2UN
• The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
  against a refusal to grant planning permission.
• The appeal is made by Dr Hani El-Sabbahy against the decision of Liverpool City Council.
• The application Ref is 26H/0012.
• The development proposed is the installation of a small untethered electric vehicle charging (EVC)
  unit to the external wall of the property.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The Council have provided me with a number of policies from within the
       Development Plan. I have taken these into account only insofar as they are
       relevant to the determination of this appeal.
3.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published on 17 August 2026. The changes to the Framework do not affect the
       merits of this case in a material way and I, therefore, have not consulted the
       parties with regard to these changes.
Procedural Matters
4.     The evidence provided by the appellant indicates that, since the planning
       application was refused, the Council has introduced a scheme supporting the
       installation of cable gullies as a safer and more permanent solution to the issue of
       cables serving EVCs impeding the footway. However, a proposed development
       cannot be amended as part of the Householder appeal process and it is important
       that my determination is made against the same plans that were considered by the
       Council and interested parties at the time of the planning application. To do
       otherwise would be procedurally unfair. Accordingly, I have made my
       determination upon the proposed development as originally submitted.
5.     Furthermore, were I able to consider the cable gully as part of the appeal, details
       of it would need to be included on the plans being considered. This would be
       necessary for imposing a condition to ensure work is carried out in accordance
       with the details shown on the plans. As there are no details shown on the plans, I
       would not be able to include a condition to this effect. Similarly, without such a
       condition, the Council would not have the means to enforce against any future
       breaches.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009547


6.     Based on the correspondence between the two main parties, it seems the Council
       is amenable to a cable gully in relation to the proposed development. However,
       this would have to be subject to a full planning application, which the Council
       would ultimately determine following full consultation.
Main Issue
7.     The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on highway safety, with
       particular regard to pedestrian safety.
Reasons
8.     The appeal property is a mid-terrace house in an urban area predominantly
       characterised by housing, with nearby commercial and community uses. Many of
       the adjacent streets are typified by rows of traditional terraced housing. Parking for
       private vehicles is characteristically on street.
9.     The EVC would be mounted on the front elevation of the house and necessitate a
       cable leading from the charger to the vehicle, across the pavement, for the
       duration of the charging time. It is reasonable for users of the pavement to be able
       to expect a safe, direct and convenient means of access, free of obstructions,
       when using the footway. This is especially pertinent for those with visual, mobility
       or cognitive impairments.
10. The presence of a cable traversing the pavement between the appeal property and
    the carriageway, would result in a trip hazard and obstacle to other pavement
    users. The provision of a cover mat whilst the EVC is in use would introduce a
    secondary change in surface height and maintain a potential safety hazard.
11. For these reasons I conclude that the proposed development would have a
    detrimental effect on the safety of highway users, with particular regard to
    pedestrians and those using the footway. Accordingly, it would fail to comply with
    Policies TP1, TP3 and TP6 of the Liverpool Local Plan (2022), which, amongst
    other things, seek to ensure new development is accessible and safe for
    pedestrians and cyclists to encourage and facilitate walking and cycling.
Other Matters
12. I note that the appellant has raised concerns with the conduct of the Council,
    however, this is a matter that would be dealt with through the Council’s complaints
    procedure and is not a matter for this appeal.
Conclusion
13. For the reasons given above, the proposed development conflicts with the
    development plan, when taken as a whole, and there are no other considerations
    that indicate I should take a decision other than in accordance with it. Accordingly,
    the appeal is dismissed.



K Craddock
INSPECTOR



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
