Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 19 August 2026
by S F Barnes MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1st September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009118
253 Ongar Road, Brentwood, Essex CM15 9DZ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Yuksel Akdag against the decision of Brentwood Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/00814/FUL.
•    The development proposed is Double-Storey Rear Extension Retrospective Full Planning
     Application.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A revised National Planning Policy Framework (Framework) was published on 17
       August 2026 after the statements in relation to this appeal had been exchanged
       and final comments made. However, as the changes that were made are not
       material to the outcome of this decision, the cases of the parties have not been
       prejudiced by not being able to comment on the new Framework. I have therefore
       determined the appeal on the basis of the statements and comments that were
       received with the appeal.
3.     I saw that development of a similar description to the above has been carried out
       at the site. Although the appellant seeks planning permission retrospectively for
       what has been constructed to date, the drawings before me do not accord with
       what has been built. Amongst other discrepancies, the extension along the
       boundary shared with 251 Ongar Road is only offset from that boundary by a short
       distance to allow for an existing flue, rather than by the greater length shown. For
       clarity, I have made my assessment based on the submitted drawings.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of the
       residential occupiers of 251 Ongar Road, with regard to outlook and daylight.
Reasons
5.     The appeal site contains a semi-detached, 2 storey building. Like its counterpart
       semi at 251 Ongar Road (No 251), the appeal building has a commercial unit at
       ground floor with residential use at first floor. The pair forms part of a row of
       similarly arranged buildings on this urban part of Ongar Road, many of which have
       been extended to the rear.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009118


6.     Planning permission was granted at the site in 2023 for a part single, part two
       storey rear extension to provide extra accommodation for an existing self-
       contained flat and fenestration alterations (LPA ref. 23/00725/FUL). That scheme
       forms the appellant’s ‘fallback position’. The proposal is a variation on the design
       of that scheme. As it relates to the main issue, the key difference is that instead of
       the side wall along the boundary shared with No 251 having a sloping profile which
       steeply reduces in height, the appeal proposal would present a straight wall of
       continuous height across its entire length at first floor level.
7.     No 251’s first floor flat is arranged with a living room at the rear and a kitchen in
       the rear addition, respectively served by 1 rear window and 1 small side window.
       Both windows are in close proximity to the shared boundary. Outlook from the
       living room window is broadly directed over the garden with some degree of
       enclosure provided by No 251’s own rear addition, whereas from the kitchen
       window outlook is directly onto the appeal site.
8.     The proposal would have a similar effect on outlook from the kitchen window to the
       fallback position, as views would in either case be directed towards a brick wall. In
       contrast, the proposed height and length of the side wall would form a more
       substantial built presence adjacent to the living room window than the fallback
       position. In combination with the existing rear addition at No. 251, the proposal
       would result in a pronounced experience of confinement between brick walls for
       occupiers when looking out from the sole window of this living room, despite the
       proposal’s modest offset from the boundary. The site’s urban context would not, in
       itself, provide sufficient justification for such conditions. Consequently, the
       proposal would significantly diminish the outlook available to occupiers of No. 251.
9.     The appeal is not accompanied by any detailed daylight and sunlight assessment.
       However, the plans indicate that the proximity and height of the proposal to the
       windows at No 251 would likely significantly reduce the daylight that would be able
       to enter the rooms they serve. This is likely to mean the rooms would be
       experienced as gloomier by its occupants, causing harm.
10. For these reasons, the proposal would have a harmful effect on the living
    conditions of the residential occupiers of No 251, with regard to outlook and
    daylight. The proposal would therefore conflict with the relevant provisions of
    Policy BE14 of the Brentwood Local Plan 2016 – 2033 (2022). Amongst other
    things, this policy seeks to safeguard the living conditions of adjacent residents.
Other Matters
11. Reference is made to extensions at neighbour sites which are said to be similar in
    scale. However, very little detail is before me regarding their planning status or
    circumstances. Therefore, I have based my assessment on the appeal evidence
    and the site’s individual circumstances.
12. The appellant suggests that the approved drawings contain internal
    inconsistencies. Be that as it may, this would not automatically justify the appeal
    proposal and so has not been determinative. I have also had regard to their
    concerns that no opportunity was given to negotiate amendments during the
    application. Nevertheless, as I must consider the proposal based on the drawings
    and evidence before me, this does not directly bear on my assessment.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009118


Conclusion
13. For the reasons given, the proposal conflicts with the development plan and the
    material considerations do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other
    than in accordance with it. Therefore, the appeal should be dismissed.

S F Barnes
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
