Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 August 2026
by E Catcheside BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009147
Unit 4A, Tinsley Lane North, Crawley RH10 9TP
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Andrew Windle (Clipstone Investment Management Limited) against the
     decision of Crawley Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is CR/2025/0344/FUL.
•    The development proposed is change of use from Class B8 (Storage and Distribution) to Class B2
     (General Industrial) and Class B8 (Storage and Distribution).

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for change of use from
       Class B8 (Storage and Distribution) to Class B2 (General Industrial) and Class B8
       (Storage and Distribution) at Unit 4A, Tinsley Lane North, Crawley RH10 9TP in
       accordance with the terms of the application, Ref CR/2025/0344/FUL, subject to
       the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              drawing nos P6155_ORD_ZZ_XX_DR_Z_0004 Rev 02 (Location Plan),
              P6155_ORD_ZZ_XX_DR_Z_0004 Rev 02 (Block Plan), 0001 (Existing and
              Proposed Floor Plans), P6155_ORD_ZZ_XX_DR_Z_0005 Rev 01 (Existing
              and Proposed Landscape Plan).
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     3)       Prior to the first use of the site for any use falling within Class B2 of the
              Schedule to the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as
              amended), vehicle parking spaces shall be laid out in accordance with details
              that have first been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
              authority. Thereafter the vehicle parking spaces shall be retained for the
              parking of vehicles.
     4)       Prior to the first use of the site for any use falling within Class B2 of the
              Schedule to the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as
              amended), bicycle parking facilities shall be provided in accordance with
              details that have first been submitted to and approved in writing by the local
              planning authority. Thereafter the bicycle parking facilities shall be retained
              for bicycle parking.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A parking plan was provided during the application process. The plan is titled as
       ‘illustrative’, and the Council has referred to some inaccuracies in that it does not

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009147


       show the existing security fencing. Whilst I have taken account of the parking plan,
       I have considered it on an illustrative basis and so it is not referenced in the
       conditions.
3.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published on 17 August 2026. The parties were invited to comment on the revised
       Framework, and I have taken account of the comments received.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is whether the proposed change of use would comply with the
       development plan in respect of car parking, and the effect of the proposal on
       highway safety and the amenity of users of the highway.
Reasons
5.     Local car parking standards are set out in the Crawley Local Plan Parking
       Standards Annex to the Crawley Local Plan: Crawley Borough Local Plan 2023-
       2040 October 2024 (the LP). The document includes indicative minimum
       requirements for car parking across a range of residential and non-residential
       uses, including industrial and warehousing.
6.     The documents state that the site is currently vacant, and that the marketing of the
       property has generated interest only for general industrial uses falling within Class
       B2 of the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended), or
       with some flexibility for uses falling within Classes B2 and B8. On this basis, it is
       entirely feasible that the site would be used for a sole B2 use, whereby the parking
       standards indicate a minimum of 51 car parking spaces and 1 lorry space would
       be required. The illustrative parking plan shows how 35 car parking spaces could
       be accommodated, amounting to a shortfall of 16 spaces against the standard.
7.     However, the car parking standards are stated to be indicative, and therefore they
       are not mandatory minimum requirements. Indeed, the Parking Standards Annex,
       which is referenced in Policy ST2 of the LP, provides for a lower level of provision
       where this is justified on site-specific grounds, including where there is evidence
       concerning the accessibility of the location.
8.     The site forms part of the Manor Royal Employment Area, from where there are
       regular 24-hour bus services to several nearby urban centres, including those with
       onward rail services. The Highway Authority, which did not raise any concerns or
       objections to the parking level shown on the illustrative parking plan, commented
       further that the site has excellent access to local walking, cycling, and public
       transport options. It follows that the site is in a sustainable and accessible location,
       where there would be a range of opportunities for travel without reliance on private
       vehicles. This would be likely to have a limiting effect on the need arising for car
       parking spaces associated with the development.
9.     Moreover, the Transport Appeal Statement (TAS) refers to trip generation data,
       which indicates that the development would be likely to generate a maximum
       requirement of 20 car parking spaces at any one time. The Council has not
       disputed the trip generation data, nor has it stated any concerns regarding the
       methodology or conclusions set out in the TAS. Therefore, I have no reason to
       doubt its robustness as evidence of the likely parking demand that would arise
       from the proposed development. Taking account of the accessibility of the location


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009147


       and the findings of the TAS, there is justification on site-specific grounds for the 35
       car parking spaces that are proposed.
10. Several of the parking spaces shown on the illustrative parking plan are existing
    and so have served the site in the past. There is no substantive evidence to
    indicate that vehicular access to those spaces has previously been impeded by
    their siting and alignment. Therefore, they would continue to provide suitable car
    parking opportunities for the proposed development. Moreover, the proposed siting
    of the new car parking spaces shown on the illustrative plan appear to account for
    the position of the security fence insofar as it is shown on the block plan.
11. That said, the parking plan is illustrative; and there are plans and swept path
    analysis in the TAS which show that up to 44 car parking spaces could be
    delivered on this site without impeding the ability of HGVs to access, load/unload,
    and manoeuvre within the site. Consequently, I am satisfied that there would be
    several ways in which 35 cars and 1 lorry would be able to park on this site without
    adversely affecting the operations of future users. Indeed, it is entirely feasible that
    more than 35 car parking spaces could be provided. Details of the final car parking
    layout could be secured through a condition, which would enable the Council the
    opportunity to maximise the parking spaces proposed whilst also ensuring the plan
    accurately accounts for all on-site structures, including fencing.
12. Tinsley Road North and the surrounding roads experience a high degree of
    parking stress, and I observed vehicles parked across footways and verges in the
    surrounding area. However, because the development would provide an
    appropriate level of parking to meet its own need, there would not be a harmful
    exacerbation of parking stress on surrounding streets. It follows that the proposal
    would not lead to unacceptable impacts on highway safety, nor would it harmfully
    alter the character of local roads or the amenity of road and footpath users.
13. Overall, the proposal has demonstrated that an appropriate level of parking would
    be provided on this site in accordance with the Parking Standards Annex to the
    LP. The proposal would therefore comply with the development plan in respect of
    car parking and there would be no harm caused to highway safety or the amenity
    of users of the highway. Consequently, there would be no conflict with Policies
    DD1 and ST2 of the LP which, taken together, expect proposals to provide an
    appropriate amount of car parking, to meet the requirements for circulation,
    manoeuvring, and loading/unloading; and to ensure there would be no
    unreasonable harm to the amenity of the surrounding area.
Conditions
14. In addition to the standard time limit condition, I have included a condition to define
    the permitted drawings to provide certainty.
15. A condition to secure vehicle parking facilities is necessary to safeguard highway
    safety from inappropriate on-street parking, and to ensure that the existing fencing
    would not impede access to the parking spaces. It is not necessary for the
    condition to refer to HGV access and manoeuvring because the TAS has
    demonstrated how up to 44 parking spaces could be delivered without impeding
    future operations. That said, should there be significant changes to the proposed
    parking layout from that shown on the illustrative plan, there would be no
    impediment to the Council seeking the necessary assurance that HGV movements
    would not be inhibited through its consideration of the submitted scheme.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009147


16. A condition to secure bicycle parking facilities is necessary to facilitate travel by
    sustainable modes.
Conclusion
17. For the reasons given above, the appeal should be allowed.


E Catcheside
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
