Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 22 July 2026
by Bhupinder Thandi BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026
Appeal Ref: 6009653
150 Barnhorn Road, Bexhill, East Sussex TN39 4QL
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr P Catt against the decision of Rother District Council.
•   The application Ref is RR/2025/1832/FULL.
•   The development proposed is a new single storey dwelling.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. The Council within their Statement of Case has drawn my attention to consultation
   comments received from National Highways submitted during the application.
   However, these comments did not form part of the case officer’s assessment of the
   application nor are highway matters listed as a reason for refusal.
3. Both main parties have made references to a previous planning application and
   appeal for a new dwelling on the appeal site. Every application and appeal must be
   considered on its own merits. My attention is focused upon the merits of the
   proposal before me rather than the previous scheme and the findings of the Council
   and Inspector. I therefore have not addressed these matters in my reasoning
   below.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are:
           •    The effect of the proposed development upon the character and
                appearance of the area;
           •    Surface water drainage; and
           •    The effect of the proposal upon the living conditions of neighbouring
                occupiers with regard to noise, disturbance, fumes and daylight.
Reasons
Character and appearance
5. The appeal site comprises part of the rear garden of 150 Barnhorn Road; which is a
   two-storey detached dwelling located on the northern side of the A259. The
   immediate context is characterised by detached dwellings set within generous
   grounds, although a number have been substantially altered and extended and
   converted into care homes including neighbouring property 148 Barnhorn Road.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009653


     The size of the plots and extensive gardens positively contribute to the spacious
     character of the area.
6. Whilst the rear garden has been partially subdivided through the laying of a track,
   construction of a retaining wall and an outbuilding it still has a domesticated
   appearance and is still read as forming part of the host property’s garden and
   positively contributes to the area.
7. The proposed development would alter and extend the existing outbuilding to
   provide a dwelling with a parking and garden area. Notwithstanding the presence of
   the outbuilding the proposal would result in an uncharacteristic concentration of
   built form and associated infrastructure to the rear of the host property.
8. The contribution that the garden makes to local character would be eroded by the
   proposal and as it would be set back a considerable distance from the road
   frontage the position of the dwelling would not follow the established pattern of
   development.
9. Based on the submitted plans roughly two thirds of the rear garden would be given
   over to the proposed dwelling, amenity space, parking spaces, as well as the
   access arrangements. As a result, the spacious character that currently exists
   would be somewhat diminished. In addition, the resultant plot sizes would be
   smaller than others in the locality and therefore not in keeping in this regard. The
   appellant has drawn my attention to the resultant plot sizes at the Sunshine Guest
   House, but this does not alter my findings in respect of this matter.
10. The development would significantly change the domestic character and
    appearance of the site having a significant urbanising effect upon it. The proposal
    would not therefore successfully integrate into the area by virtue of its back-land
    position, uncharacteristic tandem arrangement with the host property and small
    plot.
11. Despite it being single storey and not visible from the road the new dwelling would
    be viewed from the windows of neighbouring properties such that the change in the
    built form of the area would be noticeable from a number of private vantage points.
    The incongruous nature of the development would be discernible from the private
    views of neighbouring residents.
12. The proposed dwelling would incorporate locally sympathetic materials, and the
    appellant contends that a larger outbuilding could be lawfully constructed on site
    under permitted development rights. Whilst these matters are noted they do not
    justify a scheme that I have found to be harmful.
13. Front boundary treatments along Barnhorn Road vary considerably in their
    materials, height and relationship with the road. In that context, and notwithstanding
    the height and finish of the proposed wall, I am of the view that it would neither
    appear unduly prominent nor be uncharacteristic of boundary treatments along the
    road.
14. I conclude that the proposed development would adversely affect the character and
    appearance of the area. It would be contrary to Policies OSS4(iii), EN1 and EN3 of
    the Rother Local Plan Core Strategy (2014) (RLPCS) which, amongst other things,
    require development to respect the character and appearance of the area and
    contribute positively to the character of the site and surroundings.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009653


15. The council has referred to Policy DEN1 of the Development and Site Allocations
    Local Plan (2019) in the first and third reasons for refusal, however, I find that with
    specific regard to this appeal I give it negligible weight in coming to my decision.
Surface water drainage
16. In respect of the control of surface water run off the Planning Practice Guidance
    states that the layout and function of drainage systems needs to be considered at
    the start of the design process for new development as integration with road
    networks or other infrastructure could have an impact on developable area. In
    addition, particular types of sustainable drainage features may not be practicable or
    appropriate in some locations affecting solutions to allow surface water to be
    discharged.
17. I acknowledge that the appellant has set out what they believe to be a
    comprehensive drainage scheme and that they contend is an improvement upon
    the current situation, incorporating a number of features including a green roof,
    rainwater harvesting and permeable areas. However, there are gaps in the
    technical information submitted including in respect of infiltration testing and run off
    calculations. In light of these gaps, I am not satisfied that surface water drainage on
    the site would be properly managed.
18. In this particular instance and notwithstanding the one suggested by the Council I
    am not satisfied that the proposed development could be made acceptable through
    the imposition of conditions as the surface water drainage system would have a
    direct bearing upon the layout of the proposal.
19. As such, there is no certainty that surface water drainage resulting from the
    development as proposed would be satisfactorily managed contrary to RLPCS
    Policy SRM2 which, amongst other things, seeks to promote controlled sustainable
    drainage systems.
Living conditions of existing occupiers
20. The track leading to the proposed dwelling would extend between the care home
    on one side and the rear garden belonging to the host property on the other. It
    would pass a number of windows, in the side elevation of No 148, that face the site,
    and which appear to serve individual rooms for those residing in the care home.
    The parking area for the proposed development would be positioned at the end of
    the garden of the host property.
21. There is no doubt that this arrangement would result in comings and goings from
    vehicular movements and residential activity along the track and at the back of the
    site adjoining the host property’s rear garden. However, the access would serve
    just a single dwelling, and, given its small-scale nature I am not persuaded that the
    associated vehicular and pedestrian comings and goings and additional residential
    activity would be so intensive so as to unacceptably impact the living conditions of
    the occupiers of the host property or the care home in respect of noise, disturbance
    and fumes.
22. The appellant is proposing new walls to be constructed on top of existing retaining
    walls to enclose the rear garden of the host property. Whilst facing the track are
    windows serving individual occupier’s rooms, they are to a large degree already
    obscured by an existing boundary fence. The proposed wall would be positioned on


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009653


     the far side of the track set away from this boundary. Despite its height there would
     be adequate separation between the two and the proposal would not result in a
     sense of enclosure or overshadowing or result in an unacceptable loss of daylight
     for the occupiers of the care home.
23. In a similar vein taking account of the position of the wall enclosing the host
    property’s garden I am not persuaded that it would be visually intrusive or that it
    would unacceptably diminish the living conditions of the occupiers in terms of
    daylight and outlook, notwithstanding its height. Therefore, it would not have a
    significant overbearing effect upon the property or garden.
24. As such, the proposed development would not unacceptably affect the living
    conditions of neighbouring occupiers. It would accord with RLPCS Policy OSS4(ii)
    which, amongst other things, seeks to ensure that development does not
    unreasonably harm the amenities of adjoining properties.
Other Matters
25. The alleged conduct of the Council during the the application and inconsistency
    over the application process and the decision not to consult with the Pevensey &
    Cuckmere Water Level Management Board on the application is not a matter for
    me in this appeal.
26. The absence of objections from local residents counts neither for nor against the
    proposed development.
27. The appellant has drawn my attention to new housing granted planning permission
    by the Council and allowed on appeal on Sandhurst Lane which they contend are
    relevant. Based on the limited information before me there is no certainty that these
    examples are materially similar to the appeal scheme or establish a precedent for
    back-land development.
28. Whilst the Council has provided a list of conditions, they are suggested on a without
    prejudice basis and do not necessarily mean that the development could be made
    acceptable through the imposition of planning conditions. In my judgement and
    given my findings above I am not satisfied that conditions would address my
    concerns in respect of the main issues. As such, I give limited weight to this aspect
    of the appellant’s argument.
Planning Balance
29. Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 requires
    planning applications to be determined in accordance with the development plan
    unless material considerations indicate otherwise. Therefore, whilst the
    development plan has primacy in decision making, there are circumstances where
    by material considerations may indicate that a decision otherwise than in
    accordance with the development plan should be taken. The National Planning
    Policy Framework (the Framework) is one such material consideration.
30. The appellant contends that the Council’s deliverable supply of housing sites is in
    the region of 3.04 years as set out in the Council’s Position Statement dated
    January 2026. The Council does not dispute this figure nor that they cannot
    demonstrate a deliverable five-year supply of housing sites. There is nothing before
    me to lead me to conclude that the figure presented by the appellant is not
    accurate.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009653


31. In such circumstances paragraph 11 d) of the Framework, which is a material
    consideration of significant weight, is engaged. It states that planning permission
    should be granted unless any adverse impacts of doing so would significantly and
    demonstrably outweigh the benefits when assessed against the policies in this
    Framework taken as a whole, having particular regard to key policies for directing
    development to sustainable locations, making effective use of land, securing well-
    designed places and providing affordable homes, individually or in combination.
32. In terms of housing supply the proposal would contribute to the area’s housing
    need through the provision of one additional self-build dwelling within an accessible
    location. The proposal would provide a limited amount of short-term employment
    during the construction phase. Future occupiers would help to maintain the vitality
    of services and facilities in the area through increased use and spend. However,
    these benefits would be modest.
33. The proposal would in part reuse an existing building, incorporate green
    technologies and energy efficiency measures, it would be built to adaptable and
    accessible standards, lead to a net gain in biodiversity and would provide a
    satisfactory residential environment for the intended occupiers. I give moderate
    positive weight to these factors in the balance.
34. On the other hand, I have found that the proposed development would adversely
    affect the character and appearance of the area and I am not satisfied that surface
    water drainage would be properly managed. I attach significant weight to these
    matters.
35. The Framework makes clear that good design is a key aspect of sustainable
    development. Decisions should ensure that developments will function well and add
    to the overall quality of the area and are sympathetic to local character. Even taking
    into account the objective to promote the effective use of land and to significantly
    boost the supply of housing and the Council’s housing land supply position, the
    conflict between the proposal and the most important policies in the development
    plan should be given very significant weight in this appeal.
36. In the context of the above, and taking into account the aforementioned other
    considerations, I find that the adverse impacts of the proposed development would
    significantly and demonstrably outweigh the benefits when assessed against the
    policies in the Framework when taken as a whole. The conflict with the
    development plan is not outweighed by other considerations including the
    Framework.
Conclusion
37. For the reasons set out above the appeal does not succeed.



B Thandi
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
