Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by S Ramsden BSc (Hons) MA MA IHBC
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6009674
4 Downland Close, Whetstone, Barnet, London N20 9LB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Evgenia Augustine, of Padel Hub Ltd, against the decision of the Council of
     the London Borough of Barnet.
•    The application reference is 25/3513/RCU.
•    The development proposed is the use of the unit as indoor padel centre (Class E(d) indoor sport and
     recreation) and external alterations to create entrance to unit.

Decision
1.    The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the use of the unit as
      indoor padel centre (Class E(d) indoor sport and recreation) and external
      alterations to create entrance to unit at 4 Downland Close, Whetstone, Barnet,
      London N20 9LB in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref
      25/3513/RCU, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.    Reference to “retrospective” has been omitted from the description of development
      above as it is not a form of development. The application form confirms that the
      appeal site is in use as a padel centre, which I observed on my site visit, and I
      have determined the appeal on that basis.
3.    A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
      published on 17 August 2026. The changes to the Framework do not affect the
      merits of this case in a material way and I, therefore, have not consulted the
      parties with regard to these changes. The appellant has, however, provided further
      evidence relating to changes to the Framework and the Council has had an
      opportunity to comment on them.
Main Issue
4.    The main issue is whether the loss of employment floorspace is justified.
Reasons
5.    The appeal site comprises a commercial warehouse (Use Class B8) located in a
      small industrial estate, accessed from a private road, off High Road in Whetstone.
      The industrial estate is a non-designated employment site. To the west of the
      estate is an overground tube line with a linear park beyond. To the north are
      allotments, whereas to the east and south-east is residential development.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009674


6.    Policy ECY01 of the Barnet Local Plan 2021-2036 (the Local Plan) seeks to create
      a vibrant local economy, by protecting existing office accommodation and light
      industrial uses in the Borough where possible.
7.    Part A of Policy ECY01 contains policies specific to office space; with Part B
      containing policies specific to industrial, storage and distribution space. Part C(b)
      states that in assessing proposals for alternative uses to those outlined in Policy
      ECY01A and ECY01B on non-designated employment sites, one consideration is
      whether premises have been vacant for over 12 months and have no reasonable
      prospect of being occupied, following demonstrable active marketing during this
      period.
8.    The proposed change of use of 4 Downland Close (No 4) is to neither office space
      nor industrial, storage and distribution space and therefore Part C(b) of Policy
      ECY01 is a relevant consideration.
9.    Historically, the use of No 4 has been linked with and ancillary to the adjacent Unit
      3 (No 3). However, in February 2024 they were separated, with No 4 becoming an
      independent unit. Both units had been vacant since 2019; No 3 until 2023 and No
      4 until July 2024, when use as an indoor padel centre started.
10. No 4 was actively marketed, as an independent unit, between February and July
    2024. Prior to that the appeal site was the subject of “low-key” marketing, between
    July 2023 and February 2024. Before that, the whole site (Nos 3 and 4) had been
    actively marketed between 2019 and 2023.
11. Sufficient evidence has been provided to indicate that the appeal property was
    marketed on reasonable terms, in comparison to similar facilities in the area. A log
    of enquiries and viewings has also been presented. The appellant states that, due
    to its ancillary nature to No 3, the limited facilities associated with No 4 present
    operational constraints that limit its commercial attractiveness as a warehouse
    (Use Class B8), in particular the limited access and parking for heavy goods
    vehicles.
12. Whilst the ancillary nature of the appeal property has prevented it being actively
    marketed for a continuous period of 12 months, it has been actively marketed
    between February and July 2024, and between 2019 and 2023, albeit in
    conjunction with No 3. It was also the subject of “low-key” marketing, as an
    independent unit between July 2023 and February 2024.
13. Along with the constraints identified, due to the nature of the appeal site, and the
    long period of vacancy, I am satisfied that sufficiently robust evidence has been
    provided to demonstrate that there is no reasonable prospect of it being occupied
    for Class B8 use. The supporting text to policy ECY01 explains how the market
    demand for an employment site should be tested. However, the supporting text is
    not a policy. Instead it is indicative of how compliance with policy ECY01 should be
    demonstrated. Depending upon the specific circumstances of the case, the
    decision maker has the freedom to decide if the evidence submitted demonstrates
    policy compliance, even where it does not comply with all aspects of a policy’s
    supporting text. I have exercised that discretion in this case.
14. It has been put to me that the number of enquiries made during the period of
    marketing indicate the potential for continued Class B8 use. However those
    enquiries were mainly from occupiers seeking alternative uses, principally within

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6009674


      the leisure sector, with no substantive interest received from conventional B8
      operators. This supports the view that there is no reasonable prospect of No 4
      being occupied for Class B8 use.
15. I am also mindful that the use of the appeal site for indoor sport and recreation
    results in employment opportunities at the facility, contributing to the local
    economy. There are health benefits for the wider community, albeit these are
    limited as the centre operates on a commercial basis. Both of these factors weigh
    in favour of the proposal.
16. Due to the specific nature of the appeal site and the circumstances surrounding its
    vacancy, in this instance I find the loss of employment floorspace is justified. The
    proposal would not, therefore, conflict with Policy ECY01 of the Local Plan, which
    seeks to create a vibrant local economy.
Other Matters
17. Concerns have been raised, by interested parties, around access to the site, with
    regard to highway and pedestrian safety. The site is located at the end of a private
    road on the industrial estate: the road has a 5 mph speed limit and there is a
    continuous, separate pavement from the roadway. As a result, the potential for
    conflict between pedestrians and vehicles is minimal. The Council’s Highways
    officer has considered the proposal, raising no objection, and I see no reason to
    disagree.
18. Concerns have also been raised around impacts on living conditions of the
    occupants of neighbouring residential properties, through disturbance due to noise
    from the proposed use. The Council considered the matter and raised no
    objections regarding such impacts, subject to opening hours being limited by
    condition. On that basis, and having considered the Noise Impact Assessment
    submitted with the application, I see no reason to disagree.
Conditions
19. I have considered the Council’s list of suggested conditions, and the appellants
    comments on them, in light of advice in the Framework and Planning Practice
    Guidance. Where necessary and in the interests of precision and brevity I have
    amended the wording of conditions.
20. I have attached a condition requiring that the development is carried out following
    the approved plans, for the avoidance of doubt and in the interests of certainty.
    However, as the application is already in use as a padel centre there is no need to
    include the standard time condition for commencement of development.
21. In the interests of pedestrian and highway safety, and the promotion of sustainable
    means of transport I have attached conditions relating to the provision of car and
    cycle parking.
22. In order to protect the amenity of the site and ensure refuse is dealt with properly, I
    have attached a condition requiring details of the refuse store to be approved and
    the agreement of a refuse collection point. I acknowledge the appellant’s concerns
    with the proposed condition; however, the location of the bin store makes it highly
    visible on the approach to the site and a condition is necessary to ensure it is
    appropriately screened. It is not necessary to include within the condition that the
    arrangement should not obstruct or materially interfere with refuse collection

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6009674


      access, as this matter would be inherent in the details to be submitted and
      approved. The condition is also necessary to ensure that the refuse store and
      arrangements are maintained as such thereafter.
23. It is necessary to attach a condition to limit hours of operation in order to safeguard
    the amenities of occupiers of adjoining residential properties. The appellant
    asserts that the existing use of the site allows its unregulated use throughout the
    day and night. However, the nature and intensity of the use of the appeal site as a
    padel centre would be markedly different to that as warehouse storage, particularly
    in terms of the nature of noise generated and the likely increased frequency of
    comings and goings.
24. Furthermore, there are now residential properties closer to the appeal site, than
    when the site commenced in use as a commercial warehouse, and any planning
    proposals at the appeal site must consider the current context and any impacts of
    changes to the living conditions of surrounding occupants.
25. I have attached a condition limiting the use to that included in the description of
    development, which was the basis on which the application was made and
    assessed. This will also enable the Council to exercise control of the type of use
    within the category in order to safeguard the amenities of the area.
Conclusion
26. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.

S Ramsden
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6009674


                                           Schedule of Conditions
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              documents and drawings nos.:
               • Floor Plans DOW 001/PA
               • Existing Elevations as of 20/08/25 DOW 003/PA
               • Site Location Plan DOW 004/PA
               • Noise Impact Assessment Report (Auricl Acoustic Consulting, dated 4
                  August 2025)
     2)       Within 3 months from the date of this permission the 22 parking spaces
              including at least 1 disabled parking space, within the parking area as shown
              in drawing no. DOW 004/PA submitted with the planning application, and the
              access to the parking area from the public highway, shall be provided and the
              access to the parking spaces shall be maintained at all times. The parking
              spaces shall be used only as agreed and not be used for any purpose other
              than the parking and turning of vehicles in connection with the approved
              development.
     3)       Within 3 months from the date of this permission, cycle parking spaces, as
              shown in drawing no. DOW 004/PA submitted with the planning application,
              shall be provided in accordance with London Plan cycle parking standards
              and that area shall not thereafter be used for any purpose other than for the
              parking of cycles associated with the development.
     4)       Within 3 months from the date of this permission details of enclosures and
              screened facilities for the storage of recycling containers and wheeled refuse
              bins or other refuse storage containers where applicable, together with a
              satisfactory point of collection shall be submitted to and afterwards approved
              in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The development shall be
              implemented in full accordance with the details as approved under this
              condition and retained as such thereafter.
     5)       The use of the premises shall not be permitted nor be open to members of
              the public before 07:00 or after 22:00 Mondays to Friday, before 08:00 or
              after 22:00 on Saturday, nor before 09:00 or after 22:00 on Sundays and
              Bank and Public Holidays.
     6)       The premises shall be used as an indoor padel centre (Use Class E(d) indoor
              sport and recreation), and for no other purpose (including any other purpose
              in Class E of the Schedule to the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes)
              Order, 1987 (as amended), or in any provision equivalent to that Class in any
              statutory instrument revoking and re-enacting that Order with or without
              modification).
                                       ***END OF CONDITIONS***




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         5
