Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 26 August 2026

by J Bell-Williamson MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State

Decision date:25 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6009808
 58 & 60 Waverley Road, St Albans, Hertfordshire AL3 5PE
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr Khan against the decision of St Albans City & District Council.
 •   The application Ref is 5/25/0057.
 •   The development proposed is redevelopment of site to provide four new dwellinghouses (2 x 3 bed,
     2 x 2 bed) with associated landscaping and parking (revised).

 Decision
 1. The appeal is dismissed.
 Preliminary Matters
 2. The St Albans Local Plan 2024-2041 was adopted on 9 September 2026. As it
    wholly replaces the District Local Plan Review 1994 I have had regard only to the
    policies referred to by the Council from the new Local Plan. I have taken account
    of different policy numbering between the draft and adopted versions of the plan.
 3. A new version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
    published on 17 August 2026. The main parties have been consulted on this with
    regard to the appeal proposal and I have taken account of the comments made.
 4. An application for costs was made by Mr Khan against St Albans City & District
    Council. This application is the subject of a separate decision.
 Main Issues
 5. The main issues are:
    • whether it has been demonstrated that the community use of the site is no longer
      needed;
    • the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the site and
      surrounding area, with particular regard to the amount and layout of
      development;
    • the effect on the living conditions of the occupiers of Nos 62 and 64 Waverley
      Road, with regard to privacy, outlook and sunlight.
    • whether the occupants of the three bed dwellings to the front of the site would
      have adequate outdoor amenity space; and
    • the effect on parking and highway safety.


 https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6009808



Reasons
6. The appeal site has a frontage on Waverley Road, with dwellings to one side and
   shops and commercial premises on the other. The surrounding area is
   predominantly residential in character.
7. The current proposal seeks to respond to a refusal of a previous application for
   similar development comprising five dwellings1. While I note this earlier application
   and decision, this appeal involves a separate proposal which I have considered on
   its own merits.
Community use
8. The site is open, but formerly contained the Waverley Sports and Social Club
   building and car park. While the building has been demolished, there is no
   evidence to suggest that the established use of the site for community purposes
   has formally changed. Consequently, it is reasonable to consider the proposal
   against the requirements of local and national policy concerning such use.
9. Policy SP7 of the recently adopted Local Plan resists the loss of community
   infrastructure, or land or buildings previously used for such purposes, unless there
   is replacement or it can be clearly demonstrated that the building or facility is no
   longer required.
10. Policy HC6 of the Framework similarly resists the loss of key community facilities
    unless it can be demonstrated that there is no reasonable prospect of the use
    being retained, either due to lack of community support, or because it is not viable
    or feasible; or that there is sufficient alternative provision of the type of use in the
    local area.
11. The appellant explains that the former club had experienced financial difficulties
    and that part of the land was sold to build properties on Chene Mews to the rear of
    the appeal site. Continuing financial pressures led to the club’s closure in 2018.
    The property was marketed in 2022 and sold through receivership. Information
    provided through this process indicated a decline in membership to the extent that
    the club was no longer financially viable.
12. I have had regard to the details provided by both main parties, as well as the
    comments of interested parties, relating to the use of the building, particularly
    membership levels. I acknowledge in this regard the Council’s and other parties’
    concerns that different management practices might have resulted in the club
    remaining viable.
13. Based on the available evidence, however, it is not possible to reach a clear
    conclusion about the extent of the influence of the various matters raised on the
    club’s closure or whether it would have remained viable if a different approach to
    running it had been taken. The information before me is that the use of the club
    was no longer viable and it went into receivership and, therefore, there was no
    reasonable prospect of the use being retained.
14. The use of the land for community purposes related to the building that previously
    existed on the site, which met the definition of a community facility in the
1
    Ref 5/2024/0966.



                                              2
Appeal Decision 6009808



        Framework2. There is evidence that there was no reasonable prospect of the use
        being retained due to its lack of viability and, therefore, in the particular
        circumstances of this case I must conclude that it has been demonstrated that the
        community use of the site is no longer needed. Consequently, there is no conflict
        with Policy SP7 of the St Albans Local Plan 2024-2041 or with Policy HC6 of the
        Framework.
Character and appearance
15. The pair of dwellings to the front of the site would be positioned broadly where the
    former building was. Their layout would respect the front and rear building lines of
    neighbouring properties and would infill the gap in the street frontage with a
    characteristic form and scale of development.
16. To the rear of the site the recently built properties comprising Chene Mews are laid
    out on either side of the roadway, with a good degree of separation between the
    groups of dwellings. Nos 7a, 7 and 8 face the location of the former car park, which
    space provides some visual relief between the different elements of the backland
    development and those buildings with street frontages.
17. The proposed dwellings to the rear would be positioned such that they would have
    limited separation to the rear boundary shared with No 62 Waverley Road and
    would be uncharacteristically close to the frontages of Nos 7a, 7 and 8 Chene
    Mews opposite. This would result in a cramped appearance to the dwellings in this
    location. Moreover, they would be positioned well forward of the front building line
    of Nos 1-6 Chene Mews, which would harmfully erode the openness and visual
    relief between the existing buildings currently provided by the rear part of the
    appeal site.
18. The appellant draws a comparison between the appeal proposal and the
    successful appeal for the construction of No 7a Chene Mews3. However, this
    development is not directly comparable to the current proposal as there is greater
    separation to the rear and at the time of the appeal decision No 7a’s frontage faced
    the open car park. Comparison between the size of the appeal site and the amount
    of development at No 56 cannot have a direct bearing as this existing development
    is laid out differently and does not have the same relationship to the existing built
    forms as the appeal proposal.
19. Accordingly, for these reasons, I conclude that the proposal would have an
    unacceptably harmful effect on the character and appearance of the site and
    surrounding area. It is, therefore, contrary to Policies SP12 and DES1 of the new
    Local Plan, which require high quality design, including that development should
    respond positively to its context and be of a layout that takes account of the
    character and pattern of development in the locality.
Living conditions
20. The dwellings to the rear of the site would have shallow gardens resulting in a
    separation distance between their rear elevations and the neighbouring garden of
    No 62 Waverley Road of around 4.5 metres. Consequently, the proximity of the

2
    Policy HC6, paragraph 2.
3
    APP/B1930/W/17/3180306 dated 7 December 2017.



                                                    3
Appeal Decision 6009808



    upper floor bedroom windows to the neighbouring properties would enable direct
    views into the back garden of No 62 and, to a lesser extent, that of No 64.
21. While some views of private gardens from neighbouring dwellings is to be expected
    in residential streets, in this case the position of the proposed dwellings relative to
    the shared boundary in close proximity will enable extensive views into the private
    space. This would result in a loss of privacy, particularly to the occupants of No 62.
    While the views from the bedrooms would be towards the rear gardens and No 62’s
    garden studio rather than habitable rooms of the dwellings themselves, this would
    result in material harm through the effect on the reasonable use and enjoyment of
    the amenity space.
22. I have considered whether it would be possible to mitigate this harm, but the
    bedrooms in both dwellings would be served by single rear-facing windows. As
    such, it would not be conducive to the living conditions of future occupiers to
    require obscured glass in these windows.
23. For the same reasons of proximity of the built form to the rear gardens, the
    proposed dwellings would be an overbearing, dominant presence in views from the
    garden of No 62. The combined effect of the side elevation of No 1 Chene Mews
    and the pair of semi-detached dwellings on the appeal site would give an undue
    sense of enclosure by development, compared to the current views from the
    garden. However, due to the orientation of the proposed dwellings relative to the
    neighbouring gardens, there would be no material harm from overshadowing.
24. I have also had regard to matters raised by the Council about the effect of the
    dwellings to the rear of the site on the living conditions of the occupants of Nos 7a,
    7 and 8 Chene Mews. This did not form part of the reason for refusal concerning
    the effect on living conditions, but is nonetheless referred to in the appeal
    submissions. Due to the limited separation between the proposed and existing
    dwellings, as already found above, there would be a harmful degree of inter-
    visibility and loss of privacy from the facing windows, which could not readily be
    mitigated.
25. Therefore, based on these findings, I conclude that the proposal would cause
    material harm to the living conditions of neighbouring occupants due to loss of
    privacy and outlook. Consequently, the proposal is contrary to Policies SP12 and
    DES4 of the Local Plan, which require a high standard of amenity for existing and
    future occupants.
Amenity space
26. According to the Council’s amenity space standards in its Design Advice No1
    guidance, the three bedroom dwellings to the front of the site preferably should
    each have gardens of 80m2. This standard is now included in the supporting text to
    Policy DES4 of the new Local Plan. The actual size of the two gardens would be
    36.5m2 and 37.5m2.
27. The neighbouring property, No 60 Waverley Road, has a similar sized garden to
    those proposed. There are also examples of small gardens, notably at the Chene
    Mews properties, although the size of these gardens is constrained by their
    proximity to the road frontage, which is not the case with the appeal site.



                                             4
Appeal Decision 6009808



    Moreover, these examples appear not to be representative of the characteristic size
    of gardens in Waverley Road and surrounding streets. While the established
    gardens are of different depths, the general character is of spaces to the rear of
    properties that are larger than those proposed.
28. I acknowledge that there is public open space available nearby, but the proposed
    gardens would be both materially smaller than the standard included in the Local
    Plan and smaller than the size of established gardens that are characteristic of the
    surrounding area. Consequently, I conclude that they would not provide adequate
    outdoor amenity space for future occupants of the proposed dwellings. The
    proposal is, therefore, contrary in this regard to Policy DES4 of the Local Plan,
    which requires that new residential development must provide sufficient private
    amenity space for future occupants.
Parking and highway safety
29. I have had regard to the Council’s contention that the appellant’s Transport
    Statement should not be taken into account due to procedural unfairness to other
    parties. However, the statement appears to have been provided with the initial
    appeal submissions. As such, there was an opportunity to make it available for
    comment, including seeking the views of the Highway Authority (HA). In any case,
    this main issue is not determinative for the outcome of the appeal because of the
    conclusions on other issues above. In considering this issue I have had regard to
    the representations made by interested parties.
30. The Transport Statement shows that it would be possible for an estate-sized
    vehicle to enter and exit the parking spaces for the two dwellings to the rear. A
    number of parties contend, however, that the turning area associated with parking
    for the former sports and social club would no longer be available. The planning
    condition which was imposed on the development of the Chene Mews dwellings,
    required the area to remain ancillary to the club, but this is no longer present on the
    appeal site and I have found above that it has been demonstrated that the
    community use of the site is no longer needed.
31. Therefore, the intention is that the necessary manoeuvring arrangements for
    vehicles, including those resulting from deliveries or visits to the proposed
    dwellings, would occur on the parking area to the rear of Nos 56 and 56a, which is
    in the appellant’s control, but outside the appeal site. It is unclear, however,
    whether such movements would always be possible due to the use of this area for
    parking and other purposes associated with the retail uses. A Grampian condition
    to ensure the land’s availability would not be appropriate as this type of condition
    should relate to land that is not controlled by the applicant. Furthermore, there is
    no planning obligation before me with regard to controlling its use.
32. In these circumstances, it is possible that the concern of some residents of Chene
    Mews, that their parking spaces and front gardens will be used more frequently for
    turning movements with associated noise and disturbance, could be realised.
    Moreover, with more vehicles using the roadway as a result of the greater intensity
    of residential use, there is more opportunity for vehicle conflict given the
    constrained nature of the road, including on-street parking.




                                             5
Appeal Decision 6009808



33. In response to the HA’s concerns, the appellant states that the requisite visibility
    splays will be provided, with appropriate boundary treatments. In addition, relevant
    road signs would be relocated and parking provision will avoid the utilities cabinet
    to the front of the site. However, no further details are provided, including plans to
    show how these matters will be addressed and, therefore, in the absence of such
    details there is no certainty that the requirements can be achieved.
34. Taking these findings as a whole, I conclude that it has not been sufficiently
    demonstrated that the proposal will not result in material harm to highway safety.
    As a result, it is contrary to Policy TRA1 of the Local Plan, which states that
    development should only be prevented or refused on highways grounds if there
    would be an unacceptable impact on highway safety.
Other Matters
35. I have had regard to all the representations made by interested parties. These do
    not, however, raise any additional matters in relation to the main issues that would
    lead me to reach a different overall conclusion.
Planning Balance
36. The proposal is contrary to the recently adopted Local Plan with regard to four of
    the five main issues addressed above. Consequently, the appeal should not
    succeed unless material considerations indicate otherwise.
37. National decision-making policies in the Framework are a material consideration in
    making decisions and should be read alongside policies in the development plan.
    Policy P3 requires the application of a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. Policy P4 states that development within settlements, as proposed
    here, should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in the Framework.
38. The proposal would provide four dwellings in circumstances where there is 1.12
    years supply of deliverable housing sites compared to the five years required by the
    Framework. Substantial weight is given to this benefit in accordance with Policy
    HO7. It is contended that the proposal would make efficient use of land. However,
    while Policy L3 promotes this, it also requires well-designed, attractive places.
    Consequently, I give limited weight to this suggested benefit in the context of the
    appeal scheme, given the harm found with regard to character and appearance
    and living conditions, which does not reflect good design principles.
39. There would be some short-term economic benefit from the construction of the
    dwellings and in the longer term for the local economy from their occupation. This
    benefit attracts moderate weight. I give limited weight to biodiversity net gains as
    these are not specified and some gains are required in any case.
40. The adverse effects include harm to local character and living conditions, as well as
    lack of sufficient amenity space. The proposal would, therefore, be contrary to
    Policy DP3(1), which requires development to respond to its context, including the
    character of the site and setting, so that it integrates with and enhances the
    surroundings. I give this adverse effect substantial weight, particularly as the



                                            6
Appeal Decision 6009808



    Framework states at DP3(3) that proposals should be refused if, without clear
    justification, they conflict with paragraph 1 of the policy.
41. As it has not been sufficiently demonstrated that the proposal will not result in
    material harm to highway safety, there is a conflict with Policy TR3(1)(c). This
    adverse effect should attract significant weight.
42. The principal benefit of the proposal is that it would contribute to housing supply
    where there is a substantive shortfall in provision. There would also be some
    limited benefit to the local economy. Given the number of adverse effects and the
    weight attributed to them, these benefits are not of sufficient weight to overcome
    the extent of the conflict with the development plan and the Framework. Therefore,
    I conclude that in this case the adverse effects of granting permission substantially
    outweigh the benefits.
Conclusion
43. The proposal is contrary to development plan policies and to the Framework as it
    would cause unacceptable harm. The presumption in favour of sustainable
    development does not apply and there are no other material considerations that
    outweigh the conflict with the development plan. Accordingly, it is concluded that
    the appeal should be dismissed.



J Bell-Williamson
INSPECTOR




                                             7
