Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 1 September 2026
by Andrew Fuller BSc (Hons), Dip TP, MA, MRTPI, IHBC
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010349
5 Silverwood Road, Peterborough PE1 2JE
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr M Arif against the decision of Peterborough City Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01209/FUL.
•    The development proposed is described as ‘Retrospective change of use from granny annexe to
     1no. bedroom flat’.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     Reference to ‘retrospective’ in the description of the application is not a form of
       development. However, permission was granted for the original annex under
       reference 18/00056/HHFUL and the appellant has confirmed that the completion
       certificate for the build was issued by the Council in February 2019. Due to the
       death of the intended occupant of the annex, a family moved in during 2018 and
       commenced occupancy of the annexe as a separate one-bedroom flat. I was able
       to see the development on my site visit. I have determined the appeal on this
       basis.
3.     Despite the address referring to the appeal development as No 5 Silverwood
       Road, the site location plan submitted with the application refers to it as No 5a
       Silverwood Road. This reflects the property numbering I saw on my site visit. As
       such, hereafter the original street facing house is referred to as No 5, with the
       appeal site at No 5a hereafter being referred to as the ‘development or appeal
       site/property’.
4.     The Council’s notice of refusal identifies natural light with regard to the living
       conditions of the development. The officers committee report also includes matters
       of overshadowing, outlook and privacy. As the applicant has had sight of the
       officers committee report in making this appeal, I am satisfied that they have had
       the opportunity to address this in their appeal statement. Accordingly, in making
       my decision on the main issue of living conditions of the existing and future
       occupants, I have included sunlight, outlook and privacy in addition to daylight.
5.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published on 17 August 2026. The changes to the Framework do not affect the
       merits of this case in a material way and I, therefore, have not consulted the
       parties with regard to these changes.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010349


Main Issues
6.     The main issues are:
       •   the effect of the development on parking, with particular reference to highway
           safety on Silverwood Road;
       •   whether the development provides satisfactory living conditions for existing and
           future occupiers, with regards to daylight/sunlight, outlook and privacy; and
       •   the effect of the development on the living conditions of neighbouring
           occupiers, with particular regard to privacy.
Reasons
Parking - Highway safety
7.     The appeal site comprises an annexe currently being used as a separate dwelling,
       located to the rear of No 5 Silverwood Road. No 5 has a single, detached, rear-
       side garage with a driveway forwards of it capable of parking two cars in tandem.
       Plans submitted with the application indicate a fourth parking space on the narrow
       paved front garden. Whilst there are few parking restrictions along Silverwood
       Road, it is a busy suburban street with both on and off-street parking forming a
       relatively congested highway.
8.     As separate residential dwellings, both the appeal property and No 5 rely on the
       garage and driveway for off-street parking. In line with Policy LP13 of the
       Peterborough Local Plan 2016 to 2036 (2019) (Local Plan), Appendix C sets
       minimum parking requirements for dwellings. Whilst the total requisite combined
       parking of three spaces can be achieved for the two dwellings, the layout and
       access inhibit independent ingress and egress. The narrow access and tandem
       arrangement of the driveway has resulted in a scenario where a vehicle relating to
       one of the properties can block another vehicle relating to the other property
       without any possibility to manoeuvre around it.
9.     The appellant asserts that, to date, there has been no conflict over parking
       between the properties, with No 5 managing the parking on behalf of both
       properties. In the future, the relations between the occupants of these properties
       may no longer be amicable, and as such the existing arrangement cannot be
       guaranteed to continue.
10. In the absence of satisfactory independent off-street parking for the properties,
    there is nothing in the evidence before me to demonstrate how the proposal would
    not worsen the congestion evident to me on my site visit along Silverwood Road.
    Despite it being a weekday morning, I found there to be very limited on-street
    parking available and numerous vehicles were partly mounted on the pavement to
    park. As such, the development generates significant potential to add further
    pressure to on-street parking. Irrespective of the low levels of accidents recorded
    in Silverwood Road, the development creates a greater risk of conflict between
    road users to the detriment of highway safety.
11. For the reasons outlined above, I conclude that the development would harm
    highway safety on Silverwood Road. As such, it conflicts with Policy LP13 of the
    Local Plan which requires, amongst other things, for development to ensure that it


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010349


       will only be granted if the proposal makes appropriate and deliverable parking
       provision in accordance with the standards.
Living conditions of existing and future occupiers
12. The appeal development comprises a detached building with accommodation sat
    close to the rear of the plot. Two habitable room windows (to the dining and living
    rooms) face towards a tall wall which extends along the rear boundary of the
    property. As an independent dwelling, these rooms are the only internal living
    spaces available to existing and future occupants. To the front is a bedroom
    window facing into the front yard area and towards the backs of existing
    neighbouring properties at No 3, 5 and 7 Silverwood Road.
13. On my site visit I accessed the narrow gap between the appeal property and the
    rear boundary, and despite it being a sunny day, found this space to have limited
    daylight and sunlight. The window to the living room is its only natural source of
    daylight and is limited by its close proximity to this boundary wall. Whilst sunlight
    cannot be guaranteed to a window, I find the low daylight levels here to be harmful
    to the living conditions of this space. The dining room is larger and benefits from a
    degree of dual aspect from some daylight and sunlight admitted by the glazing
    either side of the front door which leads directly into this space. However,
    considering the depth of this room and the restricted levels of natural light entering
    the main window, the living conditions to the rear of this deep space are also very
    poor.
14. In the case of both of these rooms, the rear boundary wall creates a blank
    interface in close proximity to the windows, significantly harming outlook. Some
    sky is visible when standing at these windows and looking upwards, otherwise the
    wall is a prominent feature at a similar height to the head of these windows and is
    oppressive. As a separate dwelling, with no reliance on the house at No 5 to
    provide principal living spaces, the outlook is extremely poor considering these are
    rooms where occupants could reasonably be expected to spend significant periods
    of time.
15. The front bedroom window is in close proximity to the rear elevation of No 5
    Silverwood Road. Despite the privacy fence between them, occupants of No 5 are
    capable of gaining clear views from first floor windows down into this bedroom
    window. As either existing or future occupants of this bedroom are entirely
    independent of the occupants of No 5, I find its privacy significantly compromised.
16. For the reasons outlined above, I conclude that the development harms the living
    conditions of the existing and future occupiers, with particular regard to daylight,
    outlook and privacy. As such, it conflicts with Policy LP17 of the Peterborough
    Local Plan 2016 to 2036 (2019) (Local Plan) which requires, amongst other things,
    for existing and future occupiers of development to be provided with adequate
    natural light and amenity.
Living conditions of neighbouring occupiers
17. The appeal building is located to the rear of No 5 and has a front elevation
    comprising of a central doorway (with obscure glazed lights) along with a kitchen
    window to one side and a bedroom window to the other. It faces towards the rear
    of No 5 and obliquely towards the properties either side at No 3 and 7 Silverwood
    Road.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010349


       No 3 Silverwood Road
18. No 3 comprises a two-storey house, set to the side and forwards of the appeal
    development. The majority of the rear of the property has been extended over at
    both ground and first floor leaving only one original first floor window in the closest
    section of the rear facing elevation to the appeal site. Within the new extension, a
    single further first floor window is positioned on the far side of the property.
19. From within the appeal site the far side first floor window to this neighbour is at an
    oblique angle and at some considerable distance, whilst also being partly
    screened by the roof forms beneath it. The original first floor window closer to the
    boundary is mostly screened by the detached garage to the rear-side of No 5’s
    driveway. As such, there is only clear visibility from the appeal developments
    kitchen window towards the closest first floor window of this neighbour. However,
    due to the upwards orientation and angle of the viewers perspective there is no
    significant loss of privacy to this window.
       No 5 Silverwood Road
20. The rear elevation of No 5 faces the appeal property directly over a close board
    privacy fence which subdivides the gardens. The rear elevation is in close
    proximity to the appeal property and has both ground and first floor habitable room
    windows facing directly towards it.
21. From both the bedroom and kitchen window of the appeal development, it is
    possible to gain some views towards all of these windows. However, the impact on
    privacy to the first floor windows is minimal considering the upwards orientation of
    the view from either window. Furthermore, from the same windows, very limited
    views can be gained into the top window lights of the ground floor windows of No 5
    by virtue of the fencing.
       No 7 Silverwood Road
22. A large two-storey extension to the rear of No 7 has two first floor windows
    positioned at an oblique angle above the appeal site. Again, the acute upward
    angle from the nearest window (the bedroom) of the development would result in
    no significant loss of privacy to these rooms. A conservatory and side windows are
    also screened by boundary fencing with only the upper window lights being visible
    from the appeal site windows and thereby preserving privacy.
23. For the reasons outlined above, I conclude that the proposed development would
    not harm the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers, with particular regard to
    privacy. As such, it complies with Policy LP17 of the Local Plan which requires,
    amongst other things, for development not to result in an unacceptable impact on
    nearby properties including the loss of privacy and loss of light.
Other Matters
24. In making my decision I have had regard to Policy L2 of the Framework which
    seeks to make efficient use of land, including the delivery of additional units within
    residential curtilages. However, the development fails to meet (d)(ii) which requires
    development to maintain safe access and egress for occupiers, as well as
    acceptable living standards for residents in terms of daylight, sunlight and privacy.
    As such, this does not alter my findings on the main issues above.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010349


25. The appellant has confirmed that the current occupants of the development are a
    homeless family with a child. No detailed information has been provided in
    evidence around their circumstances or indeed what constraints have inhibited
    their access to alternative accommodation. I have had regard to the rights of the
    occupants of the development under Article 8 of the European Convention on
    Human Rights as incorporated into the Human Rights Act 1988. Article 8 affords
    the right to respect for private and family life and home, including the best interests
    of children. It is a qualified right, and interference may be justified where that is
    lawful and in the public interest. The concept of proportionality is crucial.
26. Nonetheless, whilst I sympathise with the position the family finds itself in, having
    regard to my assessment above, there is no over-riding reason to allow the
    development to address the occupants personal circumstances. As such, this does
    not amount to a material consideration of significant magnitude to outweigh the
    primacy of, and conflict found with, the development plan.
27. There have been no objections from third parties and there is no dispute between
    the main parties over a number of issues. These include, the principle of
    residential development, design, character and appearance, floorspace outdoor
    living area, cycle parking or bin space provision. However, the absence of harm in
    these matters does not alter my overall finding on the main issues above.
28. Whilst I note that there are other detached annexes to adjacent properties, this
    proposal is for the use of the annex as a separate dwelling. As such, the matters
    under consideration are different.
29. The appellant asserts that every effort was made to alleviate concerns raised by
    the Council. The discussions between the main parties weigh neither for nor
    against the appeal scheme; my decision is necessarily based on the scheme
    before me.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
30. The proposal would provide acceptable living conditions for neighbouring
    occupiers, but it would cause harm to existing and future occupiers of the
    development as well as harm to highway safety. The proposal therefore conflicts
    with the development plan, taken as a whole.
31. Policy S4 of the Framework sets out that development proposals within
    settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, and assessed against the
    national decision making policies in the Framework.
32. Policy H07 of the Framework states that substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community, as identified through needs assessments
    prepared for the area of the local planning authority and other relevant evidence.
    The Council does not have a five year supply of housing, and I accept it would add
    a single dwelling to the overall supply of homes in line with the aims of the
    Framework.
33. However, in providing a single additional dwelling, the proposed accommodation
    would conversely conflict with other policies of the Framework, including P3 in
    respect of living conditions and TR4 in respect of access and parking. I find the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010349


       benefits of the proposal would be substantially outweighed by its adverse effects
       when assessed against the national decision-making policies of the Framework.
       As such, Policy S4 of the Framework does not point to permission being granted in
       this instance.
34. In the final balance, material considerations in the proposal’s favour are not of
    sufficient weight to suggest the decision should be made other than in accordance
    with the development plan. Therefore, for the reasons given, and having regard to
    all other matters raised, the appeal should be dismissed.

Andrew Fuller
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
