Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by Richard Snow BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 09 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010783
6 University Road, Leicester LE1 7RB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) against
     a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr M Patel against the decision of Leicester City Council.
•    The application Ref is 20251380.
•    The development proposed is the change of use of property from offices (Class F1) to offices (Class E)
     and rear dormer to the property.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The description of development differs between the application form and the decision
       notice. I have no evidence that the appellant agreed to a change in the description, so
       I have used that on the application form in the banner heading above. I have removed
       the word “retrospective” as this is not an act of development.
3.     The appellant submitted a revised plan with the appeal (drawing ref: 6UR-A0-003 Rev
       B, dated 4 June 2026). This plan more accurately depicts the dormer extension as
       built. As the differences from the plan considered by the council are not substantial
       and do not fundamentally alter the development, accepting this plan would not result
       in procedural unfairness to any party. On this basis, I consider the plans to be
       sufficiently accurate to consider the appeal.
4.     The council adopted the Leicester Local Plan (2020-2036) (the LP) on 9 June 2026.
       The LP replaced the Leicester Core Strategy (2014) and the saved policies of the
       Leicester Local Plan (2006) referred to in evidence. I have accordingly had regard to
       the policies of the LP in reaching my decision. Both parties have addressed the
       policies of the LP in submissions.
5.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (‘the new Framework’) was published on
       17 August 2026 after the statements in relation to this appeal had been exchanged
       and final comments made. However, as the changes to the new Framework do not
       materially alter the assessment before me, the parties have not been prejudiced by
       not having a further opportunity to comment.
Main Issue
6.     Given my findings above in respect of the accuracy of the submitted plan, and my
       decision on the appeal, the matters addressed in the council’s first reason for refusal
       have fallen away. Both parties accept that the principle of the change of use of the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010783


       premises from offices associated with higher education (Use Class F1) to offices (Use
       Class E) accords with the policies of the LP and is not a matter in dispute. I have no
       reason to reach a different conclusion.
7.     Accordingly, the main issue for this appeal is the effect of the dormer extension on the
       character and appearance of the host property and the New Walk Conservation Area
       (CA).
Reasons
8.     The appeal site is within the New Walk CA, designated in 1969 and subsequently
       extended in 1974 and 1980. Based on the evidence before me, including the New
       Walk CA Character Appraisal (2020), insofar as it relates to this appeal, the
       significance of the CA as a whole is largely derived from the architectural and historic
       importance of the 18th and 19th century building stock, the planned nature of the area
       and the significance of The Walk itself, described as a nationally rare example of a
       Georgian promenade. In the vicinity of the appeal site, the majority of the buildings are
       in office use with many associated with the University of Leicester. The majority of
       buildings within the CA are constructed from brick with slate roofs.
9.     In determining this appeal, I have had regard to my statutory duty under Section 72(1)
       of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act) to pay
       special attention to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or
       appearance of conservation areas.
10. The appeal property is a 3-storey building dating from the mid-19th century, of brick
    and slate construction. As an imposing and architecturally attractive property
    displaying many of the characteristics of the CA described above, the property
    contributes positively to the character of the CA and thus to its significance as a
    designated heritage asset.
11. The rear of the property presents as part of a terraced row of properties of a similar
    scale and appearance. The dormer extends across the majority of the rear roof plane
    and is a dominant and intrusive feature. Whilst dormer extensions are evident on a
    number of properties in the terrace, these are smaller, include pitched roofs and are
    proportionally in scale with the respective properties. In comparison, the dormer
    extension, by reason of its flat roof design, the scale and proportion of fenestration,
    and the presence of external safety railings, reads as an unduly modern and bulky
    intervention. It contrasts harmfully with the traditional appearance of the host property
    and results in the harmful erosion of its architectural integrity.
12. The dormer extension is visible through gaps between buildings along Salisbury
    Road. Salisbury Road Backways provides vehicular and pedestrian access to
    numerous office buildings and is a semi public-private space dominated by the scale
    of the surrounding properties, which, despite presenting their rear elevations to this
    space, provide an attractive environment and contribute to the significance of the CA.
    Accordingly, the positive contribution that the property makes to the character and
    appearance of the CA has been harmfully eroded by the presence of the dormer.
    Taking account of the above, I find that the proposal would result in a low level of
    harm to the significance of the New Walk CA.
13. Policy HE6 of the new Framework confirms that substantial weight should be given to
    the conservation of designated heritage assets and that any harm caused will be a
    matter of considerable importance and weight. The policy confirms that where a

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010783


       development proposal would harm the significance of a designated heritage asset, the
       effect on the asset and its significance should be weighed against any public benefits
       resulting from the proposal.
14. For the reasons above, the development, insofar as it relates to the dormer extension,
    fails to preserve the character and appearance of the CA, and harms its significance
    as a designated heritage asset. The appellant advances that the public benefits of the
    development are associated with the economic benefits of delivering an active use of
    the property suitable for small or start-up businesses through the provision of flexible
    office space in a sustainable location. The development would assist with the long-
    term occupation, maintenance and viability of the property, would improve passive
    surveillance of the rear parking area through the additional windows, and would
    regularise unauthorised development including the ability to impose control through
    planning conditions. The dormer extension specifically is advanced as a practical
    adaptation of the building to support its effective use as offices.
15. I am not satisfied that regularising harmful development is a public benefit. The
    parking area is already overlooked by several rear facing windows and whilst the
    economic benefits, maintenance and viability associated with the use of the building
    as offices weigh in favour of the appeal, I am not persuaded that these benefits are
    contingent on the retention of the dormer extension. Accordingly, the public benefits
    identified are not sufficient to outweigh the harm to the CA as a designated heritage
    asset, and the substantial weight to be given to its conservation.
16. Taking all of the above into account, the dormer extension harms the character and
    appearance of the host property and fails to preserve or enhance the character or
    appearance of the New Walk CA. The proposal is therefore contrary to Policies HE01
    and CHA09 of the LP, insofar as it relates to the dormer extension, which are
    consistent with the Framework and seek to prevent harm to designated heritage
    assets generally and the New Walk CA specifically, requiring conservation led
    development which protects heritage assets.
Other Matters
17. The appeal site is located within the wider surroundings of Grade II listed buildings;
    113 Princess Road East and Nos 146-154 Upper New Walk. Mindful of the statutory
    duty set out in s66(1) of the Act, I have had special regard to the desirability of
    preserving their settings. The historic built surroundings of these buildings, of which
    the appeal site forms part, positively contribute to their significance. Nevertheless,
    given the location and extent of the dormer extension, positioned to the rear of the
    appeal building, together with the distance and intervening built form and trees, I
    consider that it would preserve the settings of these listed buildings and the
    contribution they make to their significance. I note that the council had no concerns in
    this regard either.
18. Suggested planning conditions advanced by the appellant to control materials used in
    the construction of the dormer extension and any works of making-good, and to
    restrict the use of the premises to offices within Use Class E, would not overcome the
    substantial harm to the CA identified above. The suggested condition to require the
    undertaking of other, unspecified works which may be considered necessary to
    ensure the appearance of the dormer extension is acceptable is not precise and
    would not meet the tests of Policy DM6 of the new Framework.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010783


19. The appellant has drawn my attention to other development in the CA at 116 and 130
    Regent Road, 4 University Road, 1B Salisbury Road and 113 Princess Road East
    which are advanced as precedents in favour of the appeal proposal. However, I have
    limited information in respect of these developments, which in some cases appear to
    have been approved many years ago under a different policy framework. I am
    accordingly not satisfied that these other developments are directly comparable, and I
    give them little weight in my assessment.
20. Two appeal decisions have been brought to my attention by the appellant. It is
    suggested that appeal ref APP/W/2465/W/25/3372574 is of relevance to the first
    reason for refusal relating to the submitted plans. That decision related to an appeal
    against a condition imposed on a planning permission. That is not the case here and I
    am not convinced of its relevance to this appeal. I note that the Inspector determining
    appeal ref APP/W2465/Z/25/3375956 concluded that public benefits in that case
    outweighed the harm caused to the CA. For the reasons I have addressed, I do not
    reach the same conclusion here. I find therefore that the two appeal decisions
    provided are not determinative in this case.
21. The appellant raises frustration with the council’s handling of the application. Such
    issues do not constitute matters relevant to the determination of the appeal. The
    appellant queried why the council, in identifying no concerns with the change of use,
    did not issue a split decision on the application. Elsewhere in evidence however, the
    appellant contends that the dormer extension is intrinsically linked to the efficient use
    of the property and given this contradiction, I have likewise determined the appeal
    proposal as a whole.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
22. The dormer extension harms the character and appearance of the host property and
    the significance of the New Walk CA, a designated heritage asset. The proposal
    therefore conflicts with the development plan, taken as a whole.
23. Policy S4 of the new Framework sets out that development proposals within
    settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in the Framework.
24. I have found that, having considered the public benefits of the development, the
    proposal results in harm to the CA and I have afforded that harm considerable
    importance and weight. As such, I find that the benefits of the proposal are
    substantially outweighed by its adverse effects when assessed against the policies of
    the Framework. Policy S4 does not therefore point to permission being granted in this
    instance.
25. In conclusion, the proposal conflicts with the development plan as a whole and there
    are no other considerations that outweigh this conflict. The appeal should accordingly
    be dismissed.



Richard Snow
INSPECTOR



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
