Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 20 July 2026
by C Cooper-Young MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 01 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010166
Nectar Haze, Bounds Cross, Pyworthy, Devon EX22 6LH
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mrs Claire Marsh against the decision of Torridge District Council.
•    The application reference is 1/0003/2026/FUL.
•    The development proposed is demolish stables and erect a new dwelling in lieu of 1/0368/2025/FUL.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
      published in August 2026. In the interest of natural justice and to ensure neither of
      the main parties were prejudiced by this matter, I consulted both parties on the
      changes to the Framework. Any comments I have received have been considered
      in my determination of the appeal.
Main Issues
3.    The main issues in this appeal are:
      •    whether the proposal would be in a suitable location for housing, having regard
           to local and national policies; and
      •    whether sufficient information has been submitted to demonstrate a suitable
           and sustainable drainage scheme for the proposed development can be
           achieved.
Reasons
Location of development

4.    Policy ST07 of the North Devon and Torridge Local Plan 2011-2031 (the LP) sets
      out the spatial strategy for development across the district. Development will be
      supported, in accordance with the settlement hierarchy, to achieve an
      economically resilient and active rural area. This is in broad compliance with the
      Framework which seeks to promote sustainable patterns of development.

5.    I saw that the appeal site is located some distance outside of Pyworthy and
      outside any other identified settlement boundaries and is therefore considered to
      be in the countryside for policy purposes. LP Policy ST07 sets out that in the
      countryside, beyond Local Centres, Villages and Rural Settlements, development

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010166


         will be limited to that which is enabled to meet local economic and social needs,
         rural building reuse and development which is necessarily restricted to a
         countryside location.

6.       The proposed development does not meet any of the identified countryside
         exceptions, therefore the proposal conflicts with LP Policy ST07.
Drainage
7.       Policy DM02 of the LP requires that development must not result in unacceptable
         impacts in relation to the pollution of surface or ground water.
8.       The proposal includes integrated SuDS block paving to a section of the access
         drive and parking areas and associated soakaway, and the installation of a
         package treatment plant (PTP), located on nearby land. The evidence indicates
         that the proposed discharge into the ground is acceptable to South West Water,
         whilst the PTP is acceptable to the Council’s Environmental Protection Team,
         subject to the review of percolation test results, location, and area of drainage.
         Moreover, the evidence indicates that a similar drainage strategy for the
         conversion of the stable block1 into a dwelling on the appeal site was deemed
         acceptable. This permission is extant.
9.       Therefore, I find that there is no substantive evidence before me to suggest that
         drainage matters or ground conditions have materially changed since the extant
         scheme was approved, there would be unacceptable impacts on pollution of
         surface or ground water and that an appropriate drainage scheme could not be
         secured and successfully implemented. Therefore, from the evidence before me I
         am satisfied that, had I been minded to allow the appeal, a suitably worded
         condition could be imposed that required adequate testing to inform a surface
         water drainage strategy, and that an appropriate drainage strategy could be
         achieved. On that basis, with appropriate mitigation, the proposal would accord
         with the requirements of LP Policy DM02.
Planning Balance
10. Section 38 (6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 (the Act) sets
    out that applications should be determined in accordance with the development
    plan unless material considerations indicate otherwise.
11. Policy S3 of the Framework sets out that decision on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development and goes on to
    state that in all locations proposals that accord with both an up-to-date
    development plan and the decision-making policies in the Framework should be
    approved without delay.
12. For development proposals outside settlement, such as in this case, Framework
    Policy S5 stipulates that only certain forms of development should be approved,
    which are listed in 1(a) to (j), unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in the Framework.




1
    Planning approval reference 1/0368/2025/FUL.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           2
Appeal Decision 6010166


13. Both parties acknowledge that the Council cannot demonstrate a 5 year housing
    land supply (5YHLS). The Council has confirmed that it is able to demonstrate a
    housing land supply of 4.61 years.
14. With a lack of a 5YHLS and an unmet need, the most applicable criteria is sub-
    paragraph 1(j) of Framework Policy S5. This would allow that development which
    would address an evidenced unmet housing need (as in this case) where the
    development is physically well-related to an existing settlement and of a scale
    which can be accommodated taking into account the existing or proposed
    availability of infrastructure.
15. Even though the appeal site is close to a few other houses, I have already found it
    is not well-related to an existing settlement. It therefore does not fall within
    category 1(j) or any other category in Framework Policy S5.
16. Policy S5.4 goes on to state that development proposals which do not fall within
    one of the categories set out in Policy S5 should only be approved in exceptional
    circumstances, where the benefits would substantially outweigh the adverse
    effects, including to the character of the countryside and in relation to promoting
    sustainable patterns of development. I now turn to whether there are any
    exceptional circumstances.
17. The proposal would provide one residential unit. Even as a windfall site or self-
    build dwelling, the proposal would make only a modest contribution towards
    addressing the shortfall. There would be some limited social and economic
    benefits arising from the construction phase and future occupiers would bring
    some trade and benefit to facilities and services to the wider area. The proposal
    would result in some modest ecological benefits including bat boxes, bee bricks
    and additional native hedge planting, resulting in a biodiversity net gain.
18. LP Policy ST07 is broadly consistent with the strategic aims of the Framework
    which seek to direct housing towards sustainable locations and maintain a plan-led
    approach to growth, to which I attach substantial weight. Whilst there are benefits
    that weigh in favour of the proposal, they do not, alone or cumulatively, amount to
    exceptional circumstances to warrant a departure from the development plan.
19. The main parties draw my attention to the extant permission for the conversion of
    the former stable block to a dwelling as a fallback position. However, the policy
    support afforded to the conversion of redundant rural buildings is fundamentally
    different from that applying to the erection of a new dwelling in the open
    countryside.
20. Notwithstanding this, for a fallback position to be a relevant material consideration,
    the basic principle is that it must be a real prospect. For the prospect to be real,
    there must be a greater than theoretical possibility that the development might take
    place.
21. I am satisfied there is a reasonable prospect that the fallback scheme would be
    implemented, and that the same type of accommodation would be provided. This
    is evidenced by the existence of the extant permission, and email correspondence
    regarding the current lifespan of the roof structure of the former stables.
    Consequently, the extant permission represents a viable fallback position.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010166


22. However, for significant weight to be afforded to a fallback position there needs not
    only to be a real possibility of it being carried out, but it would also need to be
    equally or more harmful than the scheme for which planning permission is being
    sought.
23. On this basis the appellant considers that the appeal scheme would be appropriate
    in scale and character to its surroundings and comparable to nearby development
    decisions2. However, these are for; the replacement of an existing fire-damaged
    building; alterations to already approved designs and raising the height of the roof;
    and varying conditions relating to materials. The Council’s decision to allow the
    replacement of a barn with a dwelling at Polvennick3 was determined considering
    a different policy context. Therefore, these decisions are not directly comparable to
    the appeal proposal.
24. Whilst other decisions are capable of being a material consideration and
    consistency in decision-making is important, I must determine the appeal before
    me on its own merits.
25. The proposal would have a similar footprint than the extant proposal, although it
    would be rectangular rather than L-shaped. However, the new suburban style
    dwelling would have a greater floor area as it would be two storeys that would
    make the building more visually prominent compared to the low-key, single storey
    stable building that would be simply converted with minimal door and window
    openings, thus retaining much of its agricultural appearance in this rural location.
26. The palette of materials for the proposed dwelling would complement the mix of
    brick and render used on other nearby properties, but the extant scheme would
    use the existing building and its materials. A new dwelling may well be made more
    energy efficient but there is no substantive evidence before me to demonstrate
    that this would be overwhelmingly significant. Both proposals could be
    appropriately landscaped and incorporate similar biodiversity and ecological gains.
27. The appeal scheme would have a larger curtilage. Even if some of this land could
    be used for enhanced biodiversity gains, the result would be the increased
    potential for domestic paraphernalia and encroachment into the countryside. The
    access, parking and turning arrangements are similar, even if some areas are
    moved marginally away from Nectar Haze.
28. The siting of the fallback scheme to convert the stable building into a dwelling
    would be less harmful than the scheme for which planning permission is being
    sought, namely demolition of the stable building and erection of a new dwelling.
    Hence the fallback scheme cannot be afforded significant weight.
29. Drawing all the points together, the proposal would be contrary to the development
    plan and undermine the Council’s spatial strategy for promoting sustainable
    patterns of development, although the shortfall of housing reduces the weight to
    this conflict. Nonetheless, this would be an adverse effect of granting planning
    permission and would also be contrary to the Framework’s aims of promoting
    sustainable patterns of development. There are no exceptional circumstances that
    would substantially outweigh the adverse effects. The fallback scheme is not of


2
    Appeal Ref: APP/W1145/W/16/3149186; and Local Planning Authority refs: 1/0740/2023/FUL; 1/0030/2024/FUL.
3
    Local Planning Authority ref: 1/0653/2022/FUL.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               4
Appeal Decision 6010166


      significant weight, and hence this material consideration does not outweigh the
      harms I have identified.
Conclusion
30. For the above reasons, I have found the proposal would conflict with the
    Development Plan, read as a whole and the material considerations, discussed
    above, do not to have sufficient weight to warrant a decision otherwise than in
    accordance with the Development Plan. I therefore conclude that the appeal
    should be dismissed.

C Cooper-Young
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
