 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 5 August 2026
 by Lynne Evans BA MA MRTPI MRICS
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 29 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010710
 18 Georgia Road, Thornton Heath, CR7 8DQ
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mrs Binar Harris against the decision of Croydon Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00643/FUL.
 •    The development is change of use of the property from a Class C3 dwelling house to a Class C4
      HMO for 6 persons.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for change of use of the
   property from a Class C3 dwelling house to a Class C4 HMO for 6 persons at 18
   Georgia Road, Thornton Heath CR7 8DQ, in accordance with the terms of the
   application, Ref: 26/00643/FUL, subject to the conditions set out in the schedule at
   the end of this decision letter.
Preliminary Matters
2. The information provided on the application forms state that the development had
   been completed prior to the date of the application submission. However, at the
   time of my site visit, the internal layout did not correspond in a number of respects
   with the submitted plans, including in terms of the number and layout of the rooms.
   I shall therefore treat this as a proposed development, rather than an application for
   development already carried out, as I am required to do.
3. Amended plans were submitted during the course of the application and my
   consideration is based on the plans as determined by the Council. The Council also
   amended the description of development to include reference to 6 persons. As this
   relates to the proposal before me, and adds clarity, I have used the amended
   description in my decision.
4. The appeal property is subject to an Article 4 Direction which removes the
   permitted development rights for the change of use from a single dwelling (C3) to a
   Small House in Multiple Occupation (HMO) (C4).
5. A new National Planning Policy Framework (Framework) was issued on 17 August
   2026, which replaces the previous Framework published in December 2024 and all
   other iterations. I have therefore written to seek the views of the Appellant and the
   Council on the revised Framework as pertinent to this appeal and have taken their
   further representations into account in my determination of this appeal.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6010710


Main Issues
6. The main issues in this appeal are:
         •    Whether the proposed development would result in the loss of a three
              bedroom dwelling house contrary to development plan policy;
         •    Whether the proposed development would make adequate provision for
              vehicle and cycle parking and the effect on highway and pedestrian safety;
              and
         •    Whether the proposed development would be satisfactory in terms of Fire
              Safety.
Reasons
Loss of 3 bedroom property
7. The appeal property is a semi-detached property on the south side of Georgia
   Road and within a predominantly residential area, primarily with pairs of semi-
   detached dwellings and terraces of similar scale dwellings. The appeal property
   has previously been extended, including with a single storey rear extension and two
   storey side extension. As a result, the property as existing is shown on the
   submitted plans with 6 bedrooms across the first floor and within the roof space.
   The proposal seeks to change the use of the property to an HMO for up to 6
   occupants.
8. Under the London Plan, the definition of a family home is one that contains three or
   more bedrooms. Policy SP2 of the Croydon Local Plan 2018 (Local Plan) seeks to
   provide a choice of housing, including in terms of mix and tenure, including at
   SP2.7 a. setting a target for 30% of all new homes up to 2036 to have three or
   more bedrooms, and further details are set out under Policy DM1. Policy DM1.2
   states that the Council will permit the redevelopment of residential units where it
   does not result in the net loss of 3 bedroom houses (as originally built) or the loss
   of homes smaller than 130m2. The supporting text at paragraph 4.21 explains that
   three bedroom residential units are needed to house families and the existing stock
   retained to assist provision.
9. In terms of floorspace the existing property, on the basis of the figures provided by
   the Appellant, has a gross internal floor area of 213m2. In terms of size, it is
   therefore significantly in excess of the floorspace figure of 130m2 set out under
   Policy DM1.2, where there would be a presumption against its loss.
10. From the information provided by the Council, and in particular the plans relating to
    the 1986 planning permission for the two storey side extension at the appeal
    property, the house as originally built had 3 bedrooms. However, the property as it
    now exists is considerably larger in terms of its floorspace and its number of
    bedrooms. The refusal of permission for this proposal would not result in the
    retention of a three bedroom house, but a considerably larger house with 5-6
    bedrooms.
11. I have had regard to the Council’s Monitoring Report 2023/24 which shows that the
    Council was not meeting its target to ensure that 30% of new homes should have 3
    bedrooms or more. However, the property would be retained in residential use and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      2
 Appeal Decision 6010710


     would provide diversity and choice in the housing market, in accordance with the
     objectives of Policy SP2 of the Local Plan.
12. There would be some conflict with Policy DM1.2 of the Local Plan in that the appeal
    property as originally built had 3 bedrooms and for which there is a presumption
    against its loss. However, given the current form, scale and size of the property,
    refusing planning permission for the proposal before me would not result in the
    retention of a 3 bedroom property. I do not therefore find, in the very particular
    circumstances of this case, that the limited harm from the conflict with the precise
    wording of Policy DM1.2 would justify withholding planning permission.
13. The Council and the Appellant have referred me to a number of other decisions
    both as determined by the Council and at appeal in respect of changes of use of
    residential properties to HMOs in respect of this matter. Each proposal must be
    considered on its individual merits but in so far as the information has been made
    available to me, I have taken them into account. However, none of them appear to
    be directly comparable with the proposal before me, in terms of property size and
    circumstance, and they do not therefore lead me to a different view.
Vehicle and Cycle Parking and Highway Safety
14. The Council’s reason for refusal states that the parking layout would be impractical
    and unsafe and would therefore be detrimental to pedestrian and highway safety.
15. The submitted plans show provision for 2 parking spaces on the existing front
    driveway as well as storage for up to 8 cycles within the existing garage, using a
    type of racking system. The front driveway would also accommodate the bin
    storage area. As a result of my site visit and given the size of the front forecourt, I
    consider that there would be sufficient space on the existing driveway to
    accommodate a minimum of two cars and to access the garage for the cycle
    parking in a safe and convenient manner.
16. Although I agree that the future residents would be living independently compared
    with a family unit and would therefore be likely to be entering and exiting the
    property at different times to each other, I am satisfied that there would be sufficient
    space on the driveway, even with two cars parked on the driveway, that the future
    residents could access both the house and the garage. There would remain a clear
    line of sight from the pavement and road to the front door and to the garage.
    Furthermore, further details could be submitted through the imposition of an
    appropriate planning condition to ensure a satisfactory layout for the parking
    spaces as well as details of the cycle parking arrangements.
17. Off-street car parking in front of the properties is a common feature in the
    immediate vicinity along Georgia Road, for between 1 and 3 cars, and pedestrians
    as well as cyclists and car uses will be aware that parking takes places on
    forecourts along the road. Furthermore, further details could be submitted through
    the imposition of an appropriate planning condition to ensure a satisfactory layout
    for the parking spaces, including visibility splays, taking account of the boundary
    walls on either side of the forecourt.
18. The Council’s reason for refusal further states that it has not been demonstrated
    that the development would not result in additional on street parking demand that
    would adversely affect highway operation and safety and has indicated that a
    parking survey should have been undertaken.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      3
 Appeal Decision 6010710


19. The Appellant has referred to The Department for Communities and Local
    Government’s ‘Residential Car Parking Research’ (May 2007) which found a direct
    correlation between tenure and car ownership, with non-owner households owning
    fewer cars than owner-occupied households. Whilst neither the Council nor the
    Appellant have pointed to any more recent research or evidence, I understand the
    Council’s reluctance to rely on this evidence given that it is now almost 20 years
    old.
20. The number of cars associated with the proposed use are not known and may
    change over time, as may be the case with a wide range of developments. Policy
    DM30 a) of the Local Plan states that the Council seeks to reduce the impact of car
    parking in any development located in areas of good public transport accessibility
    or areas of existing on-street parking stress. No parking survey has been provided
    and so there is no information before me to indicate whether the appeal property is
    situated in an area of parking stress. Therefore, there would be some conflict with
    Policy DM30 a) as it is not possible to conclude against this requirement in the
    absence of appropriate evidence.
21. As I saw on my site visit, the availability of on-street parking on Georgia Road itself
    is reduced where there is off-street parking spaces in front of housing, but there are
    more parking opportunities available on the various side streets that cross Georgia
    Road. However, this is only a snapshot of conditions and not a parking survey.
    Nevertheless, even if the proposed development did result in additional on-street
    parking demand, given the small scale of the proposal and its siting in a residential
    road with on-street parking available, it is unlikely to result in a significant adverse
    impact on highway operation and safety.
22. Furthermore, whilst I note that the site is stated to be in an area with a PTAL rating
    of 2, which suggests that the site has poor access to public transport links, I noted
    at my site visit, that there are a number of shops, including convenience stores
    along Green Lane and a bus stop with a frequent route towards West Croydon.
23. Taking account of the small scale of the development, the proposed on-site vehicle
    and cycle parking provision, and subject to a condition to require more detailed
    layouts for this provision, as well as the location of the site in a residential area and
    the proximity to shops and a bus stop, the vehicle and cycle parking provision
    would be adequate and would not result in a severe adverse impact on the
    transport network or an unacceptable impact on highway and pedestrian safety.
    While there would be some conflict with Policy DM30 of the Local Plan, Policy TR6
    4. of the Framework indicates that the proposal should not be refused on highway
    grounds. There would be no conflict with Policies T4, T5 and T6 of the London Plan
    and Policies SP8 and DM29 of the Local Plan and the London Cycle Design
    Standards (2014), as well as Policies TR3 1. c. and TR6 4. of the Framework, all of
    which, amongst other matters, seek to ensure highway and pedestrian safety and
    control parking provision and encourage adequate and safe cycle parking
    provision.
24. The Council and the Appellant have referred me to a number of other appeal
    decisions in respect of parking related issues. Each proposal must be considered
    on its individual merits but in so far as the information has been made available to
    me I have taken them into account. However, none of them appear to be directly
    comparable with the proposal before me and they do not therefore lead me to a
    different view.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     4
 Appeal Decision 6010710


Fire Safety
25. Policy D12 of the London Plan seeks to ensure that all development proposals
    achieve the highest standard of fire safety and sets out criteria to be taken into
    account. The development does not fall into the category of a major development
    proposal for which a Fire Statement is required, but Part A relates to all
    developments.
26. Although the Appellant submitted at the application stage a Reasonable Exception
    Statement together with the Fire Risk Assessment which the Appellant holds in
    relation to the HMO Licensing requirements, these do not in my view waive the
    importance of complying with Policy D12 of the London Plan to ensure that the
    highest standard of fire safety is achieved in all developments.
27. However, the Council has indicated that this matter could be addressed by
    condition and I agree that in the particular circumstances of this case this would be
    the correct approach to follow to accord with Policy D12 of the London Plan and
    would also accord with Policy DM6 of the Framework.
Conditions
28. Conditions are required to provide further details for the provision of car parking,
    secure cycle parking and refuse storage to ensure a satisfactory development to
    protect the amenities of existing and future residents and to respect the character
    and appearance of the local area, as well as highway safety. A Fire Statement
    should also be provided to ensure that the highest standard of fire safety is
    achieved. The approved plans should be listed for the avoidance of doubt and in
    the interests of good planning.
29. I do not consider that additional conditions are required in respect of the future
    management of the property as this would fall to be addressed under HMO
    licensing requirements. No external works are proposed and so conditions in
    respect of materials or hard and soft landscaping are not required.
30. However, a condition should be imposed to restrict the occupancy to six residents
    at any one time for the avoidance of doubt and to accord with the terms of the
    application. The Council has suggested that a condition on occupation should refer
    to a maximum of 6 occupiers in 6 separate bedrooms, but the submitted plans only
    show 5 bedrooms, and I have therefore only referred to the number of persons
    which also accords with the amended description of development.
Conclusion
 31. The development proposal would result in some conflict with Policies DM1 and
     DM30 of the Local Plan, but these conflicts would be outweighed by specific
     materials considerations as addressed under my main issues. Therefore, for the
     reasons given above and having regard to all other matters raised, the appeal
     shall be allowed.



L J Evans
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     5
 Appeal Decision 6010710




                                           Schedule of Conditions

     1)      The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
             date of this decision.
     2)      The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
             the following approved plans: GR01; GR02; GR03 Rev A; GR10 Rev A;
             GR11 Rev A; GR12; GR13; GR14.
     3)      Prior to the first occupation of the development hereby permitted, further
             details shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
             Authority, in respect of:
             a) Storage arrangements for cycle parking for 8 bicycles within the existing
                garage;
             b) A minimum of 2 parking spaces on the forecourt together with visibility
                splays,
             c) Refuse and recycling storage provision
             The approved details shall be provided prior to the first occupation of the
             development hereby permitted and thereafter retained and maintained for
             use by occupiers of the property.
     4)      Prior to the first occupation of the development hereby permitted, a Fire
             Safety Report shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
             Planning Authority. The details approved shall be provided and completed in
             accordance with this condition prior to the first occupation of the development
             hereby permitted and thereafter retained and maintained.
     5)      The property known as 18 Georgia Road, Thornton Heath CR7 8DQ shall not
             be occupied by more than six (6) residents at any one time.


                                                  End of Schedule




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             6
