Appeal Decision
Hearing held on 18 August 2026
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by T Bennett BA(Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21st September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010187
Wagtails Farm, Okehurst Road, The Haven, Billingshurst RH14 9BW
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Miss Joanne Littlewood against the decision of Horsham District Council.
•    The application Ref is DC/25/1803.
•    The development proposed is siting of temporary rural workers’ dwelling and associated works.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.     On 17 August 2026, the Government published a revised National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework). Prior to the Hearing both main parties had the
       opportunity to consider the relevance of the Framework to this case and
       discussions were had during the Hearing regarding the relevant policies of the
       revised Framework. I have considered the comments made in the determination of
       this appeal.
Main Issue
3.     The main issue is whether there is a functional need for a dwelling to
       accommodate a rural worker.
Reasons
4.     The appellant’s business is focused on the development of a small-scale mixed
       livestock enterprise comprising poultry and breeding ewes, managed in
       accordance with organic and sustainable farming principles. The appellant is
       seeking temporary permission to continue residing in a mobile home on the site for
       three years whilst establishing and expanding the agricultural enterprise.
5.     Policy 20 of the Horsham District Planning Framework 2015 (HDPF), supports new
       housing for rural workers outside built-up areas provided there is a functional need
       for the dwelling, its occupation is to support the established business use and
       there is evidence to demonstrate the viability of the rural business for which the
       housing is required.
6.     Although concerns were raised by the Council’s agricultural consultant regarding
       aspects of the appellant’s business plan and the viability of it, these did not
       translate into a reason for refusal. This reflected the Council’s recognition that, as

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010187


         the proposal is for a temporary dwelling, it would be for the appellant to
         demonstrate at the end of the three year period that the business was viable. I
         have dealt with the appeal on this basis.
7.       Regarding the Framework, policy S5, paragraph 3, sets out that development
         proposals comprising isolated homes, which are those lying outside settlements or
         groups of houses, should not be approved other than in accordance with policy
         HO11.
8.       At the Hearing, the parties agreed that policy HO11 of the Framework, relating to
         isolated homes in the countryside, was applicable in this case. Policy HO11,
         paragraph 1.a. sets out that the development of isolated homes in the countryside
         should be avoided other than in circumstances which include where there is an
         essential need for a rural worker to live permanently at or near their place of work
         in the countryside.
9.       Whilst the term essential or functional need is not defined in either the Framework
         or the HDPF, the Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)1 sets out some of the
         considerations that may be taken into account when assessing the need for an
         isolated new home in the countryside for a rural worker. This includes evidence of
         the necessity for a rural worker to live at, or in close proximity to, their place of
         work to ensure the effective operation of a rural enterprise. For instance, where
         farm animals or agricultural processes require on-site attention 24-hours a day and
         where otherwise there would be a risk to human or animal health or from crime, or
         to deal quickly with emergencies that could cause serious loss of crops or
         products.
10. The enterprise extends to a 25 acre site divided into four paddocks between which
    the livestock is proposed to be rotated frequently. By year three, the poultry would
    include 400 quails, 4,000 laying hens, 300 rare breed hens and 1,200 broiler
    chickens which would reside in mobile coops. There would also be 25 breeding
    ewes. The enterprise currently comprises approximately 200 laying hens, 35 rare
    breed hens and 45 quails.
11. Both parties agree that there are no other available properties on the site. At the
    Hearing I heard that the settlements of Rudgwick and Billingshurst are
    approximately a 10 to 15 minute drive away. However, the appellant considers that
    living in those locations would be too far from the site to fulfil the functional need.
12. The appellant maintains that it is necessary to have a permanent presence on site
    to ensure the welfare of the livestock, to respond quickly to any problems or
    emergencies that may arise, including predator attacks, as well as for security
    reasons.
13. I understand that day-to-day activities include feeding the livestock, monitoring
    water supplies, collecting and packing eggs (where relevant), checking animal
    health and securing the poultry in their coops at the end of the day. Whilst these
    activities may include some degree of early morning and late evening work, I find
    these activities could likely be carried out without a rural working residing on site
    24/7.



1
    Paragraph: 010 Reference ID: 67-010-20190722


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           2
Appeal Decision 6010187


14. I heard that young birds require regular visitation and that living on site enables the
    appellant to hear the chicks if they are in distress and to respond quickly. I also
    heard that broilers can be vulnerable to suffocation, panic and smothering
    incidents which can result in the loss of a high number of birds in a short period of
    time.
15. Within the appellant’s submissions, reference was made to the incubators and
    heat lamps having a high tendency to experience technical malfunctions and
    therefore a quick response is necessary should an incident occur. I do not doubt
    that if an incubator were to fail it could have a significant impact. However, there is
    limited substantive evidence before me that such occurrences are frequent, indeed
    the appellant stated that they had never experienced a malfunction.
16. The appellant has suggested that the poultry would be susceptible to changes
    caused by extreme weather conditions which are becoming increasingly common.
    However, it has not been demonstrated that they occur with a frequency that
    would justify a continuous on-site presence. Extreme weather events are rarely
    unexpected and closer supervision of the birds at such times could be planned for
    to minimise potential issues.
17. Any emergencies clearly need to be dealt with quickly in order to protect the birds
    and minimise losses and such events could happen outside normal working hours.
    However, there is limited substantive evidence before me as to the frequency or
    severity of such incidents, or why a combination of remotely operated CCTV,
    alarm and/or automation systems could not be used to alert the owner to limit and
    mitigate against any potential risks to the birds’ health, none of which are currently
    in use. I find that it has not been adequately demonstrated that such risks can only
    be mitigated by a permanent on-site presence.
18. I acknowledge that Avian Flu is a recurring problem amongst bird flocks and that
    daily checks must be undertaken. The appellant considers that in the event of an
    outbreak, strict visitor controls would be necessary and can only be managed by
    living on-site. The evidence does not indicate that there would be frequent
    comings and goings from other visitors, or that the appellant would be prohibited
    from accessing the enterprise if living off-site in the event of an outbreak of Avian
    Flu. Provided that appropriate biosecurity measures are implemented, I am not
    persuaded that the possibility of Avian Flu justifies a permanent on-site presence.
19. Turning to the ewes, limited information has been provided in terms of their likely
    day to day needs, although I was made aware that they are vulnerable to issues
    such as fly strike and foot rot. However, it is unclear why routine daytime checks
    would be insufficient to identify and deal with such issues.
20. It is common ground that during lambing, which the appellant indicated would take
    place in spring, an on-site presence is necessary because round-the-clock
    supervision of the ewes is required. However, the Council’s agricultural consultant
    advised that, given the small flock size, it would be relatively easy to ascertain
    when the ewes were due to give birth and that the requirement for supervision
    would accordingly be over a relatively short seasonal period. I see no reason to
    disagree and find that temporary seasonal accommodation over the lambing
    period could meet the welfare needs of the ewes and lambs, and would not require
    a year round on-site presence.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010187


21. At the Hearing, the appellant also set out that a 24/7 on-site presence was
    necessary to deter predators and to respond quickly in the event of an attack.
    Reference was made to a recent predator attack on the rare-breed hens, which
    sadly resulted in the loss of several birds. However, it became apparent at the
    hearing that the coop had not been protected by electric netting, which could assist
    in deterring predators. I was informed that the coop housing the laying hens is
    protected by such netting and has not, to date, experienced a predator attack. I am
    therefore not satisfied that alternative reasonable measures to protect the animals
    from predator attacks have been fully explored by the appellant.
22. I note that the submissions indicate that the South East experiences some of the
    highest levels of rural crime in the UK, with livestock and equipment being
    targeted. It is possible that the presence of the appellant within sight and sound of
    the enterprise at most times could assist in reducing the risk of crime. However, at
    the Hearing, the appellant referred to two recent incidents that occurred overnight
    whilst they were residing on-site, one of which resulted in the police being called
    after a break in attempt at the caravan. This suggests that an on-site presence has
    not, in itself, deterred criminal activity. Moreover, other than residing on-site, the
    appellant does not appear to have utilised other security measures, for example,
    CCTV cameras and/or alarm systems. Consequently, there is little firm evidence to
    indicate that these measures would not provide an effective means of deterring
    potential criminal activity without the need for a permanent on-site presence.
23. A concern raised by the Council was that the appellant had not demonstrated the
    business required a full time worker based on the estimated working hours.
    Neither Policy 20 of the HDPF or the Framework explicitly require a full time
    worker. Therefore, I find the number of hours in themselves are not determinative.
    However, at the Hearing, the parties agreed that hours should nevertheless be
    taken into account when reaching a balanced judgement as to whether there is an
    essential functional need for a dwelling to accommodate a rural worker, as they
    can provide an indication of the scale and operational requirements of the
    enterprise.
24. The evidence submitted by the appellant indicates that there may be sufficient
    work to support a fulltime worker. However, there are too many uncertain variables
    within the evidence for me to conclude with confidence that this would definitely be
    the case, particularly given the business is still at an early stage and concerns
    were raised at the Hearing regarding the hours per head assigned to the broiler
    chickens. The parties agreed that it is challenging to predict precise hours given
    the current stage of the business.
25. Even if I were to agree that there would be enough hours to support a full time
    worker, I am not persuaded, having considered all of the evidence, that it has been
    sufficiently demonstrated that there is an essential functional need for a rural
    worker to live on site 24/7 for animal welfare purposes, or for the effective
    operation of the enterprise. I am also not persuaded that other alternatives to living
    on-site, in order to manage and mitigate the risks associated with security and
    animal safety, have been fully explored.
26. Whilst a temporary permission can be appropriate for new enterprises, this is so
    that confidence can be gained as to whether a viable business can be built, before
    allowing for a permanent dwelling. However, this does not remove the need to


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010187


       demonstrate an essential functional need for someone to live on the site in
       connection with the rural enterprise.
27. For the reasons above, I conclude that it has not been demonstrated that there is a
    functional need for a dwelling to accommodate a rural worker. The development is
    therefore in conflict with Policy 20 of the HDPF. Since the development is not
    essential to its countryside location to support the needs of agriculture there is also
    conflict with Policies 1,3, 4 and 26 of the HDPF, which collectively seek to
    strategically direct development to appropriate locations and to protect the
    undeveloped nature of the countryside outside of built-up areas against
    inappropriate development. The development would also conflict with policies
    HO11 and S5 paragraph 3 of the Framework.
Other Considerations
28. The appeal site is situated within the Sussex North Water Supply Zone, where
    additional development through water extraction has the potential to have an
    adverse effect on the integrity of the Arun Valley Special Area of Conservation,
    Special Protection Area and Ramsar site. It is a European Designated Site
    afforded protection under the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations
    2017 (as amended) (the Habitats Regulations).
29. The Council undertook an Appropriate Assessment and concluded that the
    proposal would not adversely impact the integrity of the Arun Valley habitats site
    alone, or in combination with other plans or projects. If I were to allow the appeal, I
    would be required, as the competent authority, to consider whether the
    development would result in any likely significant effects on the integrity of the site.
    However, as I am dismissing the appeal for other reasons, it has not been
    necessary to consider this matter further since it does not impact the outcome of
    the appeal.
30. The Council is only able to demonstrate a 1 year housing land supply. The
    development would therefore contribute towards an evidenced unmet need.
    However, this alone is insufficient to garner support from policy S5 paragraph 1.j.
    of the Framework, as the development must be physically well-related to an
    existing settlement. As it is common ground that the dwelling would be isolated,
    this criterion is not met. As the proposal would be in conflict with policy HO11 and,
    consequently, policy S5, the appeal proposal does not benefit from the
    presumption in favour of sustainable development as set out in policy S3 of the
    Framework.
31. A single dwelling would nevertheless make a limited contribution towards
    improving the existing housing supply. However, as the dwelling would only be
    permitted for a temporary period and would be tied to a rural worker, this benefit is
    afforded very limited weight and would not outweigh the harm arising from the
    conflict with the development plan and the Framework.
32. In support of the appeal, the appellant has drawn my attention to policies E2 and
    E4 of the Framework. Policy E2 requires substantial weight to be given to the
    economic benefits of proposals for commercial development which allow
    businesses to invest or expand and for benefits for domestic food production,
    animal welfare and/or the environment.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010187


33. Policy E4 of the Framework, supports the sustainable growth of businesses in rural
    areas through the application of policy E2. This includes the development of
    agricultural businesses. The rural enterprise would make a small contribution to
    the local rural economy. However, given it has not been demonstrated that there is
    an essential functional need for the dwelling, the appeal proposal itself carries only
    very limited positive socio-economic benefits in supporting the rural enterprise.
    There is no compelling reason why, without the dwelling, the agricultural enterprise
    could not grow and prosper, or that the absence of a permanent on-site presence
    would jeopardise its viability.
34. Notwithstanding the substantial weight to be afforded, the limited scale of the
    proposal means any resulting economic benefits would be limited and would not
    outweigh the conflict with the development plan.
35. No material harm would arise from the dwelling to the character and appearance
    of the area, the living conditions of any nearby occupiers or to highway safety.
    However, an absence of harm is a neutral consideration, weighing neither for nor
    against the proposal.
Conclusion
36. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    Therefore, for the reasons given, I conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

T Bennett
INSPECTOR




APPEARANCES

FOR THE APPELLANT:

Ms Jo Littlewood: Appellant
Henry Doble: Director, Acorus Rural Property Services, MRICS


FOR THE LOCAL PLANNING AUTHORITY:

Sam Nye: Planning Officer, BSc MSc
Tamara Dale: Principal Planning Officer, MRTPI

Olivia Wojniak: Rural Planning Associate, Reading Agricultural Consultants, BSc(Hons)
AssocRICS MSAg




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
