 Appeal Decisions
 Site visit made on 3 August 2026
 by Les Greenwood MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 25 August 2026


 Appeal A Ref: 6010818
 Footpath outside 60 High Street, West Wickham BR4 0NH
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne for BT Group PLC against the decision of the Council of the
      London Borough of Bromley.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00417/FPA.
 •    The development proposed is installation of 1No BT Street Hub unit and associated advertisement
      panels on either side of the unit.

 Appeal B Ref: 6010823
 Footpath outside 60 High Street, West Wickham BR4 0NH
 •    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
      Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
      consent.
 •    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne for BT Group PLC against the decision of the Council of the
      London Borough of Bromley.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00464/ADV.
 •    The advertisement proposed is 2 digital 75 inch LCD display screens, one on each side of the Street
      Hub unit.

Decisions
Appeal A: Ref 6010818
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal B: Ref 6010823
2. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary matters
3. Although not specified in the stated description of the proposed development, the
   proposals are put forward as a replacement for an existing phone kiosk which is
   located a couple of streets away on Station Road.
4. The Council’s decision notice for the advertisement application (Appeal B) seems
   to say that only 1 digital screen is proposed. The submitted documents make it
   clear, however, that 2 screens are proposed.
5. A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
   published on 17 August 2026. Having regard to the changes in the Framework and
   the comparatively minor scale and nature of these appeal proposals, I consider that
   further consultation on this matter is not necessary.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
    Appeal Decisions 6010818 and 6010823


Main Issues
6. For planning applications and appeals (Appeal A), decisions must be made in
   accordance with the plan unless material considerations indicate otherwise1.
   Advertisement proposals (Appeal B) are, in contrast, subject to control in the
   interests of amenity and public safety only, bearing in mind material provisions of
   the development plan and any other relevant factors2.
7. With these requirements in mind, the main issues for both appeals are the effects
   on: (i) the amenity of the local area, in terms of both visual character and physical
   convenience; and (ii) the safety of public highway users.
Reasons
Amenity
8. This part of the A232 High Street is a busy local centre, lined mainly by shops and
   other commercial premises. The street hub unit would be an approximately 3m high
   by 1.2m wide by 0.35m deep structure, providing communications services and
   carrying illuminated digital advertising screens.
9. The pavement in this area contains various items of street furniture and café
   seating, creating a cluttered environment. The proposed unit would be aligned
   perpendicular to the street so that it would become a highly prominent feature,
   occupying a substantial proportion of the pavement width. Although this is a
   commercial shopping area with street lighting and other illuminated signs, I saw no
   similar digital signs in the immediate vicinity. The proposals, due to their size,
   unsympathetic siting and illumination would be a visually intrusive feature, adding
   to the already highly cluttered street scene here.
10. The Council, on the advice of Transport for London, states that the installation
    would restrict the effective width of the public pavement here to 1.2m. It explains
    that the remaining pavement width next to the shops is private space rather than
    public highway. Although the hub unit would sit in front of an optician’s which
    appears to have no forecourt signage, it is possible that future businesses could
    make use of this private pavement space. The effective width for the public, once
    the hub unit was installed, would therefore just be just the 1.2m suggested by the
    Council.
11. This comparatively narrow pedestrian space would be restricted further by the
    design of the hub unit, with users needing to interact with a screen on the
    pavement end of the unit, standing within the gap. The available width could
    therefore at times be less than a metre - much too little for pedestrians to pass
    comfortably on a busy shopping street like this.
12. The appellant refers to the Department for Transport’s guidance in Manual for
    Streets, that the minimum unobstructed width for pedestrians should generally be
    2000mm for lightly used streets, and in Inclusive Mobility which says that ideally the
    width of the footway should be 2000mm to facilitate 2 people in wheelchairs
    passing each other comfortably. These documents reinforce my view that the
    proposals would leave insufficient space for pedestrians on this heavily used
    stretch of pavement, creating a bottleneck.

1
     Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004
2
     Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007, Regulation 3

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              2
 Appeal Decisions 6010818 and 6010823


13. I conclude that the proposals would unduly harm the amenity of the local area, in
    terms of both visual character and physical convenience. They conflict in this
    respect with policies 37 and 102 of the Bromley Local Plan 2019 (BLP) and policies
    D8 and T2 of the London Plan 2021 (LP), which expect developments and
    advertisements to contribute positively to the street scene, with street furniture
    complementing the use and function of public spaces.
Public safety
14. As set out above, the space available for pedestrians would be insufficient if the
    hub unit was installed. The obstruction created by the new installation would
    potentially cause some pedestrians to step into the carriageway on this busy
    stretch of road, putting themselves at risk.
15. I agree with the appellant that, subject to suitable conditions controlling the
    luminance and images of the display the sign should not cause a significant
    distraction to drivers or hinder visibility. The obstruction to the pedestrian flows
    close to the carriageway is nevertheless sufficient reason for me to conclude that
    the safety of highway users would be unduly prejudiced. The proposals therefore
    conflicts in this respect with policies 32, 33 and 102 of the BLP and policy T2 of the
    LP, which expect developments and advertisements not to cause a hazard to road
    users.
Other matters and planning balance
16. The telephone kiosk proposed for removal is far away from the appeal site on a
    different street. It is set well back from the carriageway and main pavement in a
    relatively discrete position where it has no significant effect on pedestrian
    movement. It therefore has very little visual or highway safety impact. Its removal
    would not compensate for or off-set the harm caused by the proposed new hub
    unit.
17. The appellant cites a large number of other decisions nationally where planning
    permissions and advertisement consents have been granted for similar units.
    Those decisions are all based on the specific circumstances of each case. I have
    assessed these proposals on their own merits, in light of local circumstances.
18. I take account of the Framework’s support for the expansion and upgrading of
    telecommunications infrastructure - in ways which limit an unnecessary proliferation
    of equipment and respect important environmental safeguards. The proposed unit
    would provide telecommunications benefits including emergency calls and
    telephone and internet services, and could also potentially be used for
    environmental monitoring and community purposes. These benefits would,
    however, be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects on amenity and
    highway safety of these poorly sited proposals, with reference to Framework
    policy S4.
Conclusion
19. For the reasons set out above I conclude the appeals should not succeed.
Les Greenwood
INSPECTOR



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
