 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 17 August 2026
 by Chris Couper BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 17 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010401
 Windmill Farmhouse, Carlton Road, Wilbarston, North Northamptonshire LE16 8QE
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Brad Giles (Giles Property Group) against the decision of North
      Northamptonshire Council.
 •    The application Ref is 25/01457/FUL.
 •    The development proposed is the demolition of agricultural buildings and the erection of two
      dwellings with associated access and landscaping.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matter
2. In August 2026, after the Council issued its decision, a new version of the National
   Planning Policy Framework was published (‘the Framework’). I gave the principal
   parties an opportunity to comment on the Framework, and I have taken their
   representations into account in my decision.
Main Issue
3. The main issue is whether or not this is a suitable location for the proposal, having
   regard to policies which direct housing to existing settlements and the site’s
   accessibility to services and amenities; and to the scheme’s design and its impact
   on the character and appearance of the area.
Reasons
4. Considered collectively, Policies 11, 13 and 29 of the North Northamptonshire Joint
   Core Strategy 2011-2031 (2016) (‘NNCS’) seek to direct most development to
   urban areas and settlements and to protect the open countryside. NNCS Policy 13
   allows some exceptions to that spatial strategy, and states in broad terms that
   whilst permission will not normally be granted for new built residential development
   away from established settlements, individual dwellings of exceptional quality or
   innovative design, or dwellings for rural workers, may be allowed.
5. Policy S5 of the Framework also only permits certain forms of development outside
   of settlements. The appellant acknowledges that the proposal does not fall within
   any of the listed categories at Policy S5(1). Policy S5(4) continues that proposals
   which do not fall within one of those categories should only be approved in
   exceptional circumstances, where the benefits of the proposal would substantially


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
    Appeal Decision: 6010401


       outweigh the adverse effects, including to the character of the countryside and in
       relation to promoting sustainable patterns of movement.
6. The appeal site lies some distance beyond the Wilbarston settlement boundary,
   with fields and open areas in between. Notwithstanding the presence of Windmill
   Farm a little distance to the west and Windmill Barns to the east, the site is not
   closely associated with that settlement. It lies in the open countryside. Although
   Wilbarston has a limited range of services, there is no roadside footpath or street
   lighting between the site and the village, and the future occupants of the proposed
   dwellings would be largely reliant on the private car to meet their day-to-day needs.
7. The scheme would involve the demolition of two vacant steel-framed agricultural
   structures, one a Dutch barn with a domed roof, and the other a taller structure with
   a ridge. Although of no architectural merit, they are typical of agricultural buildings
   in the countryside, and they do not therefore appear incongruous in the context of
   the area. These structures would be replaced by two detached dwellings, which
   would be sited on the same footprints, and which would utilise the existing access
   point from Carlton Road.
8. The appellant contends that the proposed dwellings would be of a similar design to
   Windmill Barns. However, although the scheme draws from a similar palette of
   facing materials, the proportions of the proposed buildings would be significantly
   different, and I agree with the views expressed by interested parties that their
   substantial size, their width and extensive shallow pitched roof would give them an
   awkward and bulky form, such that they would fail to resemble those traditional
   agricultural buildings that they purport to emulate. The scheme would not be of
   good design quality, and it would fail to respond to its local context.
9. Moreover, the proposed dwellings would be broadly similar to each other in terms
   of their scale, design, form and materials; they would be located in close proximity
   to one another, with tall timber fencing on some boundaries; and with double
   garages with pyramidal roofs and extensive tarmacked areas between them and
   the road. That layout and design would give the scheme a markedly suburban
   appearance, which would be at odds with the site’s rural setting.
10. The site slopes down from Carlton Road, where there is a boundary hedgerow. As
    a result, the scheme would be screened, to some degree, from the public realm.
    However, it would still be seen through the gap at the access point and,
    notwithstanding the use of planning conditions requiring the submission of a
    landscaping scheme, I cannot be certain that the screening affect would be similar
    in different seasons and in the future compared to what I observed at the time of
    my visit.
11. The appellant has drawn my attention to an appeal decision at Chapel Farm1,
    where an Inspector found that the erection of five dwellings following the demolition
    of agricultural buildings would cause only limited harm to the area’s character and
    appearance due to screening. However, I have few details of that scheme in order
    to make any meaningful comparison and, unlike here, that Inspector did not find
    harm as a result of the scheme’s layout and design.
12. For the above reasons, the scheme would conflict with the NNCS spatial strategy,
    and it would cause significant harm to the character and appearance of the area. It

1
    APP/F2415/W/24/3347442


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          2
    Appeal Decision: 6010401


       would therefore conflict with NNCS Policies 11, 13 and 29; along with its Policy 8
       which requires development to respond to the site’s context and local character;
       and with Policy 1 which supports sustainable development that complies with other
       relevant NNCS policies. It would also conflict with Framework Policy DP3 which
       seeks well-designed, visually attractive development, which responds to its context,
       and integrates with and enhances its surroundings.
13. By reference to a previously submitted Structural Engineers Report, the Council
    describes the existing structures on the site as dating from the 1960s. Although of
    a functional appearance, they are clearly of some age, and I see no cogent reason
    why they may not be considered ‘historic farm buildings’ for the purposes of Policy
    RS5 of the Kettering Site Specific Part 2 Local Plan (2021). Given that the scheme
    would involve their replacement, and it has not been demonstrated that their
    retention is not possible, the scheme also conflicts with that policy.
       Other considerations
14. The appellant points out that the Dutch barn benefits from prior approval for its
    conversion into two dwellings under Class Q of Part 3 to Schedule 2 of the Town
    and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as
    amended) (‘the PAS’)2. I do not doubt that the PAS has a real prospect of
    implementation. It constitutes a lawful fallback, to which I attribute significant
    weight.
15. However, whilst the PAS would result in residential development of two dwellings
    on part of the appeal site, and those occupants would be equally dependent on the
    private car compared to this scheme, it would involve the re-use of an existing
    structure. That structure is of a form, design and appearance typical of rural
    countryside locations. Moreover, the PAS has a very tightly drawn residential
    curtilage, with a small area for cars to park discretely to the rear of the building.
16. In contrast, the scheme before me involves the erection of two entirely new
    buildings, one of which would be taller with a greater visual impact than the Dutch
    barn, and which I have found would have an incongruous design. The proposed
    dwellings would also be on much larger plots, and with larger areas of hardstanding
    and fencing.
17. I recognise that this scheme would involve a comprehensive redevelopment of the
    whole site, including the replacement of both structures, which would resolve a
    rather awkward juxtaposition in the PAS between the converted barn and the
    retained building. However, considered as a whole, and for the above reasons,
    compared to the PAS, the scheme before me would have a significantly more
    harmful impact on the character and appearance of the area.
18. In its favour, the scheme would contribute to the Council’s housing supply, but
    given that it would deliver only two units, and that the PAS would deliver a similar
    quantity, I attribute only limited weight to that benefit. There would also be limited
    benefits to the economy during construction, and as a result of biodiversity net gain.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
19. Summing up, I have found that the scheme would conflict with the spatial strategy
    for the area which seeks to direct housing to locations in urban areas and
2
    NK/2025/0006


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
 Appeal Decision: 6010401


     settlements with easier and more sustainable access to services and facilities. In
     that regard, its impact would be similar to the fallback of the PAS.
20. However, compared to the PAS, this proposal would have a significantly more
    harmful impact on the character and appearance of the area. In regard to this
    harmful impact, it would conflict with the development plan.
21. The scheme’s limited public benefits would not outweigh the significant harm that it
    would cause. Having regard to Framework Policy S5(4), the scheme’s limited
    benefits and the fallback of the PAS, do not amount to exceptional circumstances
    which would substantially outweigh its adverse effects on the character of the
    countryside.
22. The scheme would conflict with the development plan, and material considerations,
    including the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other
    than in accordance with it.
23. For these reasons, and having regard to all other matters raised, including
    representations by interested parties, the appeal is dismissed.

Chris Couper
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       4
