Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 24 August 2026
by T Bennett BA(Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 27 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010362
Rear Of 291 Whippendell Road, Watford WD18 7NN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Shafiq Rehman against the decision of Watford Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/00827/FUL.
•    The development proposed is Change of use of rear part of ground floor from commercial (Class E)
     to a residential studio flat (Class C3) with internal reconfiguration.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     Amended plans were submitted with the appeal showing refuse and cycle storage
       facilities. The Council and interested parties have had an opportunity to comment
       on these as part of the appeal process and I am satisfied that it would not result in
       any prejudice to such parties. Consequently, and as the amendments do not
       fundamentally alter the appeal proposal, I have accepted the revised drawings and
       determined the appeal on this basis.
3. On 17 August 2026 the Government published a revised National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework). The mains parties have had an opportunity to
   consider the relevance of the Framework to their case. I have considered any
   comments made in the determination of this appeal.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues in the appeal are:
           •    whether suitable living conditions would be provided for future occupants of
                the proposed development, with particular regard to the provision of internal
                space, outdoor amenity space, outlook and light;
           •    whether the proposal would provide appropriate space for refuse and cycle
                storage;
           •    the effect of the proposed parking on highway safety, and
           •    the effect of the proposal on the vitality and viability of the Local Centre.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010362


Reasons
Living conditions
5.     The submitted floor plan is annotated stating that the internal floor area would be
       38.15 sq. metres (sq.m). The Council refute this stating it would be 34.4 sq.m,
       however the Council have provided limited substantive evidence detailing how that
       figure was derived.
6.     Policy QD6.4 of the Watford Local Plan 2031-2038 (LP) and the Council’s
       Residential Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document 2014 (SPD) require
       that new buildings should implement the technical internal space standards. The
       proposal is for a one bed, one-person studio flat. The Nationally Described Space
       Standards (NDSS) require a minimum of 39 sq.m for a dwelling of this type and 1
       sq.m of internal storage. The scheme would therefore fail to meet this. However,
       the NDSS sets out that where there is a shower room this may be reduced to 37
       sq.m.
7.     Although the submitted plans are annotated with a bathroom, I observed on my
       visit that the room would likely only be able to accommodate a shower. Therefore,
       the internal area of the flat would only need to meet a minimum floor area of 37
       sq.m. Taking the appellants floor area calculation, and factoring in space for 1
       sq.m of internal storage, despite this not being annotated on the plans, the
       proposal would meet the minimum floor space standards set out in the NDSS.
8.     Policy HO3.11 of the LP requires a minimum of 5 sq.m of private outdoor amenity
       space for the size of dwelling proposed. The supporting text to the policy
       recognises the importance of such space to health and wellbeing. No such outdoor
       space is proposed.
9.     Whilst the site is in an accessible location, close to a range of local amenities
       where socialising could take place, such facilities are not the same as private
       outdoor amenity space. Whilst the appellant considers that small studio units
       commonly operate without large private external spaces, I have not been provided
       of any examples, thus cannot be sure how they compare to the proposal.
10. The proposed dwelling would have two windows located close to each other at one
    end of the living space. However, given the length of the room, a large area at the
    rear of the proposed dwelling, partially created from the commercial unit, would be
    unlikely to materially benefit from the natural light afforded by the windows and
    would also have an extremely limited outlook. This would result in a gloomy
    environment with a likely reliance on artificial light. Moreover, there would be a lack
    of defensible boundaries between the dwelling and street scene, with one window
    directly adjacent to the pavement. This would mean that blinds or curtains would
    more than likely be partially or fully closed on this window to ensure adequate
    privacy, which would further limit natural light into the room. Drawing these
    considerations together, I find that the proposal would provide a poor quality living
    environment.
11. Even though the minimum floor space standards would be met, due to the lack of
    external amenity space and poor internal layout, the proposal would not provide
    suitable living conditions for future occupiers. The proposal would conflict with
    Policy QD6.4 of the LP in so far as it seeks buildings to be designed to provide
    internal and external spaces that support the health and wellbeing of all those who

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010362


       use and experience them. It would also conflict with Policy HO3.11, the aims of
       which I have already set out.
12. Policy QD6.2 of the LP has been cited on the decision notice in relation to this
    main issue; however, as this policy relates more to place-making and external
    design, I find it has not been determinative.
Refuse and cycle storage
13. Policy QD6.4 requires refuse and recycling bins to be located within the building
    envelope. Where this cannot be achieved then a bin store should be provided that
    is carefully positioned and easy to use. This reflects similar guidance outlined with
    paragraphs 7.3.26 and 7.3.27 of the SPD.
14. Policy ST11.4 of the LP requires on site cycle parking facilities in line with the cycle
    parking standards detailed in Appendix D of the LP.
15. The amended plan details the position of refuse and recycling bins and cycle
    storage. The original plan showed a car parked parallel to the road in this area.
    Whilst the car is not shown on the amended plan, it is nevertheless labelled as a
    parking area and throughout the appellants submissions this area is referred to as
    a parking area. The space is constrained in size and thus if a vehicle parked
    parallel to the road, it would likely need to perform several manoeuvres. On the
    basis of the information before me, I cannot be satisfied that with a car
    manoeuvring and parking in this area, that the refuse and cycle storage could be
    satisfactorily positioned as shown on the amended plans. Given the space
    limitations, I consider that a planning condition would not overcome this.
16. For the above reasons, I cannot be satisfied that cycle parking facilities and
    suitable bin storage could be achieved. The proposal therefore conflicts with
    Policies ST11.4 and QD6.4 of the LP, the requirements of which I have already set
    out.
Parking
17. Policy ST11.5 requires proposals to provide car parking in compliance with the car
    parking standards set out in Appendix E of the LP. This details that up to 1 car
    parking space should be provided for a residential use. The original plans detail a
    car parked on an area of hardstanding immediately adjacent to the footway.
18. The Highways Authority (HA) state that in these circumstances they require a
    minimum width of 9.6 metres by 3.5 metres deep to ensure there is enough space
    to safely manoeuvre the vehicle across the pavement. The area of hardstanding
    falls substantially short of this width. The HA also raise concern that a larger vehicle
    would require several turning manoeuvres on Queens Avenue.
19. Notwithstanding these concerns, Queens Avenue is a 20mph classified secondary
    distributor road, that is not traffic sensitive and is straight in alignment. The access
    point is set away from the junction with Whippendell Road. Considering these
    factors, highway users already on or turning into Queens Avenue would therefore
    have good visibility and sufficient warning of a vehicle performing any parking
    manoeuvre. I observed no discernible obstructions near to the entrance of the
    parking area on my site visit and given the straight alignment, drivers attempting to
    park or exit would have good visibility of other highway users. I therefore find that


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010362


     the parking proposed would not detrimentally interfere with the free and safe flow of
     other highway users.
20. Moreover, I also note that the area has been used for a number of years previously
    for parking and that there have been no accidents within the vicinity of the site in
    the last five years.
21. Drawing the above together, I am satisfied that the level of parking required could
    be provided in a manner that would not have an adverse effect on highway safety.
    It would therefore accord with Policy ST11.5 of the LP and Policy TR6, paragraph 4
    of the Framework. It would also accord with the general thrust of Policy 5 (b) of the
    Local Transport Plan (2018) which seeks to ensure access arrangements are safe
    and suitable.
Local centre
22. Policy VT5.3 of the Watford Local Plan 2031-2038 (LP) states, amongst other
    things, that new development must contribute positively to the function, vitality, and
    viability of District and Local Centres and that this will include sufficient provision of
    local shops and services to meet day-to-day needs of local communities. It then
    goes onto state that proposals for commercial, business and service uses, or
    appropriate community uses, will be supported and that development proposals
    should maximise the proportion of the ground floor fronting a street as a positive
    and/or active frontage.
23. The policy does not state that uses not falling into the above categories will be
    refused. The change of use to residential would result in the loss of a small area of
    trading commercial space at the rear of the unit. Although the appellant has not
    justified the loss of the floor space, there does not appear to be any policy
    requirement to do so. Notwithstanding this, given the small size of the area at the
    rear of the commercial unit that would be lost, I am not persuaded that this would
    undermine the viability of the commercial unit. The active frontage of the unit
    would also be retained ensuring the vitality of the centre would not be undermined.
24. On this issue, I conclude that the proposal would not harmfully undermine the
    vitality or viability of the Local Centre and there would be no conflict with Policy
    VT5.3 of the LP or Policy HC6 of the Framework which amongst other matters
    seeks to ensure facilities and services are not lost.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
25. Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 requires that
    applications for planning permission must be determined in accordance with the
    development plan unless material considerations indicate otherwise.
26. I have concluded that the proposal would conflict with development plan policies
    QD6.4, HO3.11 and ST11.4. The development plan read as a whole is not
    complied with.
27. The Framework is a material consideration. Policy S3 of the Framework applies a
    presumption in favour of sustainable development requiring Policy S4 of the
    Framework to be applied. Policy S4 sets out that development proposals within
    settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in this Framework.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010362


28. The proposal would not have an adverse impact on highway safety, the character
    and appearance of the area, neighbouring living conditions or the vitality and
    viability of the local centre. However, a lack of harm is of neutral weight in the
    planning balance.
29. It is agreed between the parties that the principal of development in this location is
    acceptable subject to consideration of the proposal against other relevant policies
    of the development plan. The proposal would provide an additional dwelling,
    boosting the supply of residential accommodation in an accessible location and
    would represent an efficient use of land. Whilst these are matters to which I afford
    substantial positive weight as directed by Policy L2 of the Framework, it would
    result in only a single unit of accommodation. This is a modest benefit, albeit one
    which attracts substantial weight.
30. Notwithstanding the above, the proposal would be providing accommodation that
    would have significant deficiencies with regards to its living conditions which would
    be experienced by all future occupants. This would constitute poor design which
    would be contrary to the approach of Policy DP3 of the Framework. It would also
    conflict with Policy L2(1)(d)(ii) of the Framework which seeks, amongst other
    matters, acceptable living standards for residents in terms of external amenity
    space.
31. In this instance, the modest benefits of the proposed development would be
    substantially outweighed by the identified adverse effects of the proposal, when
    assessed against the national-decision making policies of the Framework as a
    whole.
32. Accordingly, the identified conflict with the development plan would not be
    outweighed by the material considerations. I therefore conclude that the appeal is
    dismissed.

T Bennett
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
