    Appeal Decision
    Site visit made on 5 August 2026
    by N McGurk BSc (Hons) MCD MBA MRTPI
    an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
    Decision date: 28 August 2026


    Appeal Ref: 6010180
    Pavement o/s 19-23 Market Street, Huddersfield, HD1 2EH
    •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
        against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    •   The appeal is made by BT Telecommunications PLC against the decision of Kirklees Council.
    •   The application Ref is 2026/62/90569/W.
    •   The development proposed is installation of 1 BT Street Hub, incorporating 2 digital 75-inch LCD
        advert screens and associated BT phone kiosk removal (within a Conservation Area).

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. This appeal relates to the Council’s refusal of planning permission for the
   installation of a BT Street Hub incorporating advertising screens and the removal of
   2 existing BT payphones located at the junction of Market Street and Cloth Hall
   Street, Huddersfield. A related application for advertisement consent for the two
   digital display advertising screens (Ref 2026/64/90570/W) was also refused by the
   Council and is the subject of a separate appeal (Ref 6010183) which does not form
   part of this decision.
3. The appeal site lies within the Huddersfield Town Centre Conservation Area and
   the Council, in its officer’s report, draws attention to a Listed Building adjacent to
   the appeal site. Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation
   Areas) Act 1990 requires that special attention be paid to the desirability of
   preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of a Conservation Area and
   Section 66(1) of the same Act requires special regard to be paid to the desirability
   of preserving a Listed Building and/or its setting.
4. A previous application1 for the installation of a communications hub was refused
   and subsequently dismissed at appeal in 2019.
Main Issues
5. The main issues in this case are the effect of the proposed development on the
   character and appearance of the Huddersfield Town Centre Conservation Area,
   including the setting of any nearby Listed Buildings; and its effect on highway
   safety.



1
    Reference: 2019/91616.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6010180


Reasons
Character and appearance
6. The appeal site comprises a section of pavement on Market Street in Huddersfield
   town centre. Market Street in this location is a very busy, well-used pedestrian and
   vehicular route. The appeal site lies close to a pedestrian crossing and to Market
   Street’s signalised junction with Cloth Hall Street. There is a parking bay alongside
   Market Street, between the road and the appeal site.
7. The appeal site is located within the Huddersfield Town Centre Conservation Area,
   characterised by a mix of historic commercial buildings, many of which retain
   attractive decorative stonework and traditional detailing. These historic buildings
   combine to provide a strong sense of townscape quality. As one moves through
   and past the site along Market Street, the eyes are drawn to the presence of
   attractive stone buildings, both nearby and in the distance.
8. The appeal site is also located adjacent to and within the setting of Number 21
   Market Street, an attractive stone-built Grade II Listed Building with notable sash
   windows and stone decoration.
9. During my site visit, I observed there to be a range of existing street furniture,
   including illuminated shop signage and commercial displays, reflecting the area’s
   function as an active, modern town centre. However, I also noted that the appeal
   site itself appears open and spacious, with minimal street furniture providing for a
   pleasant, uncluttered appearance.
10. The proposed BT Street Hub would comprise a modern free-standing structure
    measuring 1.23m wide, 0.35m deep and 2.98m high, with two digital advertisement
    display screens - one to either side - and a user interface panel. The main casing
    would be aluminium, and the advertisement displays would be set behind tempered
    and laminated glass. The application also proposes the removal of two existing BT
    payphones on the opposite side of Cloth Hall Street, some distance away from the
    appeal site itself.
11. Whilst, as above, the surrounding streetscape already contains a variety of modern
    features, including illuminated signage and commercial displays, the introduction of
    the tall, solid, illuminated BT Hub with its changing images would represent a new
    and prominent addition to what is otherwise a generally spacious and uncluttered
    section of Market Street.
12. The removal of the two existing payphones would represent a modest reduction in
    street furniture elsewhere in the town centre. However, those payphones are not
    located at the appeal site, such that their removal would not offset the effect of the
    proposed development on the appeal site itself, where no comparable feature
    currently exists.
13. The BT Street Hub’s significant height, reaching almost 3 metres and in particular,
    its illuminated, changing digital advertisement screens, the very purpose of which is
    to draw attention to themselves, would result in a development of such scale and
    prominence as to appear as an incongruous and unduly dominant feature. The
    proposal would dominate its surroundings and would appear in contrast with the
    historic quality of nearby historic buildings, to the detriment of the character and
    appearance of the Huddersfield Town Centre Conservation Area.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
    Appeal Decision 6010180


14. The harm arising would be less than substantial in terms of the proposal’s effect on
    the significance of heritage assets. Nevertheless, in accordance with the
    Framework, any harm to a designated heritage asset is a matter of considerable
    importance and should be weighed against the public benefits of the proposal. I
    have taken into account the range of benefits put forward by the appellant,
    including free ultrafast public Wi-Fi, free phone calls, an emergency contact facility,
    wayfinding information, device charging, the potential for future air quality and
    traffic sensors, community messaging capability and the replacement of ageing
    phone kiosks. These are genuine and, cumulatively, not insignificant benefits.
    However, they are generic benefits that would arise from the Street Hub model
    wherever it were sited, rather than comprising benefits specific to this particular,
    sensitive location within the Conservation Area. I do not consider that they amount
    to a clear and convincing justification that together, outweigh the harm that I have
    identified.
15. Taking all of the above into account, I find that the proposed development would
    harm the character and appearance of the Huddersfield Town Centre Conservation
    Area, contrary to the National Planning Policy Framework and to Policies LP17(a),
    LP24(a) and LP35 of the Kirklees Local Plan2, which together amongst other
    things, seek to protect local character.
Highway safety
16. The appeal site is located close to a pedestrian crossing and to the signal-
    controlled junction of Market Street and Cloth Hall Street. The immediate area
    comprises a very busy part of the town centre.
17. The proposed BT Street Hub would incorporate large digital advertisement screens
    displaying changing images specifically designed to attract attention. The screens
    would be sited close to the pavement edge in an area where drivers and
    pedestrians need to concentrate on the operation of the roads, the junction and on
    each other’s movements.
18. I find that the illuminated and eye-catching nature of the proposal would result in it
    being likely to distract the attention of both drivers and pedestrians. Further, this
    risk would be exacerbated by the volume of movement – by both pedestrians and
    vehicles - in this busy town centre location where there are multiple places where a
    pedestrian might seek to cross a road.
19. Given the above, I find that the proposed development would harm highway safety,
    contrary to the National Planning Policy Framework and to Policy LP21 of the
    Kirklees Local Plan, which seeks to protect highway safety.
Conclusion
20. For the reasons given above, the appeal does not succeed.

N McGurk
INSPECTOR




2
    Kirklees Local Plan (2019).


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
