 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 7 August 2026
 by B J Sims BSc (Hons) CEng MICE MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date:19 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010903
 Glebe Motors, Glebe Road, Finchley, Barnet, N3 2AX
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by JBR Investors Limited against the decision of Barnet London Borough
      Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/1098/FUL.
 •    The development proposed is the demolition of existing car repair garage and construction of a two-
      storey building plus rooms in the roof space and lower ground floor to provide 9 No self-contained
      residential units with associated amenity space, cycle parking and refuse storage.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for demolition of existing
     car repair garage and construction of a two-storey building plus rooms in the roof space
     and lower ground floor to provide 9 No self-contained residential units with associated
     amenity space, cycle parking and refuse storage at Glebe Motors, Glebe Road, Finchley,
     Barnet, N3 2AX, in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 26/1098/FUL,
     and subject to the conditions set out in the Schedule appended to this Decision.
Procedural Matter
2. The description above is taken from the refusal notice as best identifying the appeal
   proposals.
Main Issue
3. The sole main issue is the quality of accommodation that would be provided by the
   present scheme for nine apartments compared with a previously approved proposal
   for seven units for which planning permission remains extant.
Reasons
Previous Approval
4. The former Glebe Motors building is closed and extant planning permission exists
   for its replacement by a block of seven dwelling units which would front Glebe Road
   between existing residential frontage properties. The extant permission was
   granted at appeal Ref 6000305 after the refusal of application Ref 24/5159/FUL
   and provides a clear material planning fallback position to be taken into account.
5. In the present proposal, two additional one-bedroom units are introduced by
   variation of the previously approved ground and lower ground floor layouts.
   Understandably, the cases for the Council and the Appellants in the present appeal

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
    Appeal Decision 6010903


       are based around comparisons between the standards of ground and lower ground
       floor accommodation achieved in the disputed nine-unit scheme, as against those
       accepted as not subject to Council objection by the Inspector who allowed the
       earlier appeal1.
6. Importantly however, the present appeal is for fresh determination based not on
   whether the quality of the accommodation now proposed would be better or worse
   than in the approved scheme but on a fresh appraisal of the nine-unit scheme on its
   individual merits under current planning policy and guidance.
Quality of Accommodation
Council Concerns
7. The Council has no objection in principle to nine dwellings in place of the seven
   approved. Its objection is focussed upon changes made to the ground and lower
   ground floors of the proposed building to accommodate five units instead of three
   as previously approved.
8. The Council is particularly concerned that: kitchen-living areas would be placed at
   lower ground floor level and bedrooms positioned on the principal frontage at
   ground floor street level; ground floor Flat 5 would have a single-aspect directly
   facing a 1.8m high boundary fence 2m away; the lower ground floor living area of
   Flat 3 would have an outlook facing a 2.6m high wall, 3.8m away across a
   courtyard less than 4m wide; and the lower ground floor living area of Flat 4 would
   have separation between 1.9m and 3.4m from a 2.6m wall.
9. The Council maintains that these arrangements would result in a constrained and
   contrived layout, with ground floor bedrooms subject to a low degree of privacy as
   well as exposure to street noise and activity, whilst ground floor Flat 5 would have
   an unsatisfactory outlook. Further concerns are that the lower ground floor living
   areas would be served by courtyards divided from each other by 1.8m fences,
   making for a poor sense of openness, worsened by boundary treatments and
   outbuildings above the 2.6m outer wall. It is the view of the Council that these
   factors would create an oppressive, enclosed environment with overall poor outlook
   and residential quality.
Appellant Response
10. The Appellant company points out that appropriate standards of privacy, ventilation
    and light are achieved in the present design, supported by a submitted daylight
    assessment, and maintains that the outdoor spaces and outlook available to the
    ground floor and lower ground floor flats would be reasonable and not exceptional.
    The Appellants further maintain that the proposed outdoor spaces are compliant
    with adopted standards and also that street boundary landscape planting would
    defend the privacy of the frontage bedrooms.
Policy and Guidance
11. Barnet Local Plan (BLP) Policy CDH01 and London Plan Policy D3 promote high-
    quality architectural design for new housing development to make the most efficient
    use of land by optimising site capacity; also, to provide a good standard of amenity,
    allowing for acceptable levels of natural lighting, privacy and outlook

1
    Appeal Decision Ref 6000305 para 32


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
 Appeal Decision 6010903


12. London Plan Policy D6 sets housing standards, including a minimum of 5sqm of
    private outside space for a two-person home and minimum dimensions of 1.5m by
    1.5m.
13. The Council relied initially upon its Sustainable Design and Construction
    Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) 2016. This has recently been updated
    but without variation affecting this appeal. The current SPD supports the foregoing
    policies by accentuating the importance to health of a comfortable and enjoyable
    home environment with adequate natural lighting, ventilation, privacy, outlook and
    outdoor amenity space, with minimal noise impact and acceptable air quality. All
    new homes should provide a good standard of outlook from habitable rooms and a
    sense of space, where nearby walls and buildings do not appear overbearing and
    there is an adequate level of privacy.
14. Taken together, this policy and guidance set a test for this appeal that, as part of
    the requisite high-quality design, the living environment of the proposed new
    ground and lower ground floor dwellings must provide acceptable and appropriate
    standards of outlook, privacy and open outdoor amenity space. Whether they would
    do so is a matter of judgement for the decision maker. This is, therefore, the
    approach I take in my fresh appraisal of the main issue of the quality of the
    accommodation proposed in this case.
Appraisal
15. Whilst lower ground floor bedrooms might be preferable to the Council, there is no
    hierarchy in policy or guidance applied to the different types of sleeping or living
    spaces designated as habitable rooms, which accordingly are assessed on an
    equal basis. There are many examples elsewhere of bedrooms facing adjacent
    streets. Whether they are acceptable in practice depends upon the specific
    circumstances. In this case, the street level bedrooms would be set back from the
    road edge and screened by landscape planting. Glebe Road is a relatively tranquil
    residential street, especially now that Glebe Motors is closed and likely to be
    replaced by more dwellings. I therefore consider that the location of the ground
    floor front bedrooms would be acceptable with respect to peace and privacy.
16. The ground floor Flat 5 would have a somewhat constrained outlook towards the
    1.8m fence separating it from an area of communal private open space to the west.
    However, the Appellants admit to the 1.8m height annotation on the drawings being
    in error and suggest that it be reduced to 1m by condition. Tthe 2m-wide amenity
    space meets minimum dimensional standards and there is nothing to prevent the
    fence being reduced to suit future occupiers, depending on their preference for a
    longer outlook or greater privacy. In the circumstances, I find that the private space
    and outlook at Flat 5 would be acceptable as proposed and that the suggested
    condition is unnecessary.
17. Regarding the lower ground floor accommodation; I see some advantage in the
    living-kitchen areas being directly connected at the same level to the respective
    private outside spaces. There is no question that the spaces comply with
    established design guidance in size. The 2.6m outer boundary wall is no higher
    than the internal ceilings. The 1.8m dividing fences are of the usual height to
    provide mutual privacy, such that their suggested reduction to increase openness
    would not be appropriate in my view. The ambience of the outside spaces would be



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
 Appeal Decision 6010903


     softened by green material lining the back wall. And occupiers could have shared
     use of the communal private space at the western end of the site.
18. Even so, the Council was entitled to its view that the private lower ground floor
    courtyards would feel unacceptably oppressive. Nevertheless, despite the potential
    for boundary features and buildings atop the 2.6m wall adding to its effective
    height, in my own assessment these areas would provide an acceptable and
    appropriate standard of outlook, privacy and open outdoor amenity space to serve
    the respective lower ground floor accommodation as proposed.
19. I reach the same conclusion on review of the proposed development as a whole. It
    follows that the quality of the living accommodation proposed in the appeal scheme
    for nine dwellings meets the requirements of the relevant development plan policies
    and supplementary guidance summarised above.
20. Moreover, the contribution of two additional small homes to the housing stock,
    making more efficient use of this brownfield site, would amount to a material
    planning benefit in favour of the appeal.
Other Matters
21. Local objections relate to the amount and character of development proposed and
    fears of traffic congestion due to on-street parking by residents of the additional
    dwellings, as well as potential for noise and disturbance, including during
    demolition and construction. There are local views that there has been insufficient
    consultation and consideration with respect to existing residents, coupled with
    concern over property values and overriding profit motive on the part of the
    developer.
22. I agree with the Council that the present proposal would not have any appreciable
    external effect on the locality in terms of the overall scale and appearance of the
    replacement building, compared with the scheme already approved.
23. The development is designated car free, with good public transport connections
    likely to obviate the need for new residents to rely on private cars. Glebe Road is of
    reasonable width and I see no likelihood that any present on-street parking
    pressure would increase due to the addition of two small dwellings over the seven
    already permitted. And given the intensely urban location, I do not consider that the
    construction or occupation of two additional modest dwellings would add
    significantly to noise or disturbance to existing residents.
24. Regarding public consultation, I see no evidence that due process has not been
    followed in connection with the appeal proposal. Finally, neither any effect on
    property value nor profit motivation is a matter for planning.
Overall Conclusion and Planning Conditions
25. For the reasons explained, I find that the appeal proposals are compliant with the
    statutory development plan as a whole and I have reached the conclusion that this
    appeal should be allowed and the permission sought granted.
26. Despite effective limitations on the scope of the issues in this appeal due to the
    fallback position, it is important that the full conditions controlling the development
    as a whole, as applied to the previous approval, be carried forward to the new
    permission, as set out in the Schedule appended below. Apart from standard

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     4
 Appeal Decision 6010903


     conditions on time for commencement, compliance with approved drawings and
     use of appropriate finishing materials, I am satisfied that these conditions are all
     necessary and reasonable to ensure use as Class 3 accommodation as proposed,
     suitable ground and floor levels, services, accessibility, remediation of ground
     contamination, sound insulation, control of carbon emissions, landscaping, water
     supply, cycle and refuse storage, and with respect to the safeguarding of amenity,
     privacy, trees, biodiversity and avoiding light pollution and flood risk.



B J Sims
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    5
 Appeal Decision 6010903


                                           APPENDIX
                            SCHEDULE OF PLANNING CONDITIONS


1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
date of this decision.

2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in only accordance with the
following approved plans:

Existing Ground Floor Plan                  (Drawing no. PA-618-101 Rev 06)
Existing Roof Plan                          (Drawing no. PA-618-104)
Existing Side Elevation                     (Drawing no. PA-618-112)
Existing Side Elevation                     (Drawing no. PA-618-112 Rev 06)
Existing Front and Rear Elevation           (Drawing no. PA-618-110 Rev 06)
Proposed Site Plan                          (Drawing no. PA-618-150 Rev 06)
Proposed Lower Ground Floor Plan            (Drawing no. PA-618-200 Rev 06)
Proposed Ground Floor Plan                  (Drawing no. PA-618-201 Rev 06)
Proposed First Floor Plan                   (Drawing no. PA-618-202 Rev 06)
Proposed Second Floor Plan                  (Drawing no. PA-618-203 Rev 06)
Proposed Front Elevation                    (Drawing no. PA-618-212 Rev 06)
Proposed Rear Elevation                     (Drawing no. PA-618-213 Rev 06)
Proposed Side Elevation A                   (Drawing no. PA-618-210 Rev 06)
Proposed Side Elevation B                   (Drawing no. PA-618-211 Rev D)
Proposed Section AA                         (Drawing no. PA-618-300 Rev 06)
Proposed Section BB                         (Drawing no. PA-618-301 Rev 06)

3) No development (other than demolition and below ground works) shall take place
until details of the materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of
the development hereby permitted have been submitted to and approved by the Local
Planning Authority. The development shall be carried out only in accordance with the
approved details.

4) No development shall take place until details of the levels of the buildings,
roads and footpaths in relation to the adjoining land and highway and any other
changes proposed in the levels of the site have been submitted to and approved
in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The development shall be implemented
in accordance with the details as approved under this condition and retained as
such thereafter.

5) No development shall take place until a Demolition and Construction
Management and Logistics Plan has been submitted to and approved in writing
by the Local Planning Authority. Such Plan shall include the following: i. details of
the routing of construction vehicles to the site, hours of access, access and egress
arrangements within the site and security procedures; ii. site preparation and
construction stages of the development; iii. details of provisions for recycling of
materials, the provision on site of a storage/delivery area for all plant, site huts,
site facilities and materials; iv. details of wheel washing; v. the methods to be used
and the measures to be undertaken to control the emission of dust, noise and
vibration arising from demolition and construction works; vi. a suitable and
efficient means of suppressing dust, including the adequate containment of

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      6
 Appeal Decision 6010903


stored or accumulated material so as to prevent it becoming airborne at any time
and giving rise to nuisance; vii. noise mitigation measures for all plant and
processors; viii. details of car parking arrangements for the duration of demolition
and construction; ix. details of a community liaison contact for the duration of all
works associated with the development. The approved Demolition and
Construction Management and Logistics Plan shall be adhered to throughout the
demolition and construction period for the development.

6) No development shall take place until a Tree Protection Plan and a method
statement detailing precautions to minimise damage to trees in accordance with
Section 6.1 of British Standard BS5837: 2012 (Trees in relation to design, demolition
and construction - Recommendations) has been submitted to and approved in writing
by the Local Planning Authority. No development shall take place until the temporary
tree protection shown on the Tree Protection Plan approved under this condition has
been erected around existing trees on site. This protection shall remain in position until
after the development works are completed and no material or soil shall be stored
within these fenced areas at any time. The development shall be implemented in
accordance with the Tree Protection Plan and method statement approved.

7) No development (other than demolition works) shall take place until details of the
location, extent and depth of all excavations for services (including but not limited to
electricity, gas, water, drainage and telecommunications) in relation to trees on and
adjacent to the site have been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
Planning Authority. The development shall thereafter be implemented in accordance
with details approved.

8) No development shall take place until an assessment of the risks posed by any
contamination, carried out in accordance with British Standard BS 10175: Investigation
of potentially contaminated sites - Code of Practice and the Environment Agency‚ Land
Contamination Risk Management (LCRM) (or equivalent British Standard and Model
Procedures if replaced), has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local
planning authority. If any contamination is found, no development shall take place until:
i. a report specifying the measures to be taken, including the timescale, to remediate
the site to render it suitable for the development hereby permitted has been submitted
to and approved in writing by the local planning authority; ii. the site has been
remediated in accordance with the approved measures and timescale; and
iii. a verification report has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local
planning authority. If, during the course of development, any contamination is
found which has not been previously identified, work shall be suspended until:
i. additional measures for the remediation of the site have been carried out in
accordance with details that shall first have been submitted to and approved in
writing by the local planning authority; and ii. a verification report for all the
remediation works has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local
planning authority.

9) No development (other than demolition and below ground works) shall take
place until details of mitigation measures to show how the development will be
constructed so as to provide sufficient air-borne and structure-borne sound insulation
against internally and externally generated noise and vibration has been submitted to
and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. Such sound insulation shall
ensure that the levels of noise, as measured within habitable rooms of the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     7
 Appeal Decision 6010903


development, shall be no higher than 35dB(A) from 7am to 11pm and 30dB(A) in
bedrooms from 11pm to 7am. The report shall include all calculations and baseline data
and shall be set out so that the Local Planning Authority can fully audit the report and
critically analyse the content and recommendations. The mitigation measures approved
shall be implemented in their entirety prior to the first occupation of the development
and retained thereafter.

10) Prior to first occupation of the development hereby approved, a scheme of hard and
soft landscaping, including the green roof, shall be submitted to and approved in writing
by the Local Planning Authority. Such scheme shall include details of all existing trees
and hedgerows on the land, identify those to be retained and set out measures for their
protection throughout the course of the development. All work comprised in the
approved scheme of landscaping shall be carried out before the end of the first planting
and seeding season following occupation of any part of the buildings or completion of
the development, whichever is sooner, or commencement of the use. Any existing tree
shown to be retained or trees or shrubs to be planted as part of the approved
landscaping scheme which are removed, die, become severely damaged or diseased
within five years of the completion of development shall be replaced with trees or
shrubs of appropriate size and species in the next planting season.

11) Prior to first occupation of the dwellings hereby permitted, they shall all have been
constructed to have 100% of the wholesome water supplied to them by the mains water
infrastructure provided through a water meter and comply with the Building Regulations
optional requirement of a water consumption rate of no more than 110 litres per person
per day. Any use of grey water and/or rain water systems shall be separate from the
potable (wholesome) water system and shall meet the requirements and guidance set
out in Part G of the Building Regulations. The dwellings shall be maintained as such in
perpetuity.

12) Prior to first occupation, the development hereby approved shall be constructed to
incorporate carbon dioxide emission reduction measures which achieve an
improvement of not less than 10% in carbon dioxide emissions when compared with a
building constructed to comply with the minimum Target Emission Rate requirements of
the 2010 Building Regulations. The development shall be maintained as such in
perpetuity.

13) Prior to first occupation of the development hereby approved, a minimum of
14 (long stay) cycle parking spaces in accordance with the London Plan Cycle
Parking Standards and London Cycle Design Standards shall be provided and
thereafter shall not be used for any purpose other than parking of cycles in connection
with the approved development.

14) Prior to first occupation of the development hereby approved, details of the boilers
to be installed shall be submitted to the Local Planning Authority for approval. The
boilers shall have dry NOx emissions not exceeding 40 mg/kWh (0%) and shall be
installed in full accordance with the details approved.

15) Prior to first occupation of the development hereby approved, details of the
Biodiversity Enhancement Plan shall be submitted to and approved by the Local
Planning Authority. Such Plan shall sate the location, height, orientation, specification
of all ecological enhancement feature including 2 x integrated bat roost box


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     8
 Appeal Decision 6010903


(Woodstone or similar alternative); 1 x swift brick nest box; and 1 x Woodstone Build-in
House Sparrow Nest Box; all to be installed on the building and/or trees nearby in
accordance with guidance in 'Designing for Biodiversity A technical guide for new and
existing buildings (RIBA)'.

16) Prior to first occupation of the development hereby approved, details of a Low
Impact Lighting shall be submitted to and approved by the local planning authority. Any
artificial lighting scheme designed for the development, including off-street lighting,
shall accord with Bats Conservation Trust Guidance Note 08/23 Bats and artificial
lighting in the UK Bats and the Built Environment series.

17) Prior to first occupation of the development hereby permitted, copies of
Pre-completion Sound Insulation Test Certificates shall be submitted to the Local
Planning Authority, confirming compliance with Requirement E of the Building
Regulations 2010 (or any subsequent amendment in force at the time of
implementation of the permission).

18) Prior to the occupation of the development hereby permitted, the recommendations
set out within the Flood Risk Assessment (Flo Consulting Engineers Project No 1091
March 2026 Revision C) shall be implemented and shall be maintained/ adhered to in
perpetuity.

19) Prior to first occupation of the development hereby permitted, details of enclosures
for the storage of recycling containers and wheeled refuse bins, together with a
satisfactory point of collection shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the
Local Planning Authority. The development shall be implemented in full accordance
with the details as approved and retained thereafter.

20) Prior to first occupation of the development hereby permitted, details of privacy
screens to be installed for the balconies shall be submitted to and approved in writing
by the Local Planning Authority. The screens shall be installed in accordance with the
details as approved and retained thereafter.

21) Prior to first occupation of the development hereby permitted, the proposed
windows identified as ‘obscured’ in the first-floor rear elevation (Drawing no. PA-618-
202 Rev 06) shall be fitted only with obscure glass and fixed shut save only for a
fanlight opening and permanently retained as such thereafter.

22) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
mitigation and compensation measures set out in ‘Preliminary Ecological Appraisal
(Love Design Studio March 2026 0854_08).’

23) The dwellings hereby permitted shall not be occupied until the relevant criteria
of Part M4(2) of Schedule 1 to the Building Regulations 2010 for accessibility and
adaptability have been complied with.

24) No construction work resulting from the planning permission shall be carried
out on the site at any time on Sundays, Bank or Public Holidays, or before 8.00am or
after 6.00pm on other days.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    9
 Appeal Decision 6010903


25) The dwellings hereby permitted units shall be used only as self-contained units as
shown on approved drawings under Class C3(a) and for no other purpose (including
any other purposes in Class C3 or C4 of the Schedule to the Town and Country
Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987, or in any provision equivalent to that Class in any
statutory instrument revoking and re-enacting that Order, with or without modification).

26) Aside from the outdoor amenity terraces shown on the Proposed First Floor
Plan (Drawing No PA-618-202 Rev 06) and Proposed Second Floor Plan (Drawing
No PA-618-203 Rev 06) the roof of the development hereby permitted shall only
be used in connection with the repair and maintenance of the building and shall
at no time be converted to or used as a balcony, roof garden or similar amenity or
sitting out area.

27) All Non-Road Mobile Machinery (NRMM) of net power of 37kW and up to and
including 560kW used during the course of the demolition, site preparation and
construction phases of the development hereby approved shall comply with the
emission standards set out in Chapter 7 of the Mayor of London’s supplementary
planning guidance "Control of Dust and Emissions During Construction and Demolition"
dated July 2014 (SPG), or subsequent guidance. Unless it complies with the standards
set out in the SPG, no NRMM shall be on site, at any time, whether in use or not,
without the prior written consent of the local planning authority. The developer shall
keep an up to date list of all NRMM used during the demolition, site preparation and
construction phases of the development on the online register at https://nrmm.london/.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    10
