 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 27 August 2026
 by D J Barnes MBA BSc(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date:17 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010764
 Prestedge Barn, Whitefield Lane, Ashover, Derbyshire S45 0HZ
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Dominic Collins against the decision of North East Derbyshire District
      Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00165/FL.
 •    The development proposed is a change of use of agricultural land to domestic garden (Class C3
      residential curtilage).


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a change of use of
   agricultural land to domestic garden (Class C3 residential curtilage) at Prestedge
   Barn, Whitefield Lane, Ashover, Derbyshire S45 0HZ in accordance with the terms
   of the application, Ref 26/00165/F, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plan: LA-SA-0004 C Location and Site Plans
     3)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the approved Boundary Treatment A specification except that a timber post
              and wire stock proof fence shall be erected instead of a timber post and rail
              fence.
     4)       The landscaping works contained in the Boundary Treatment A shall be
              carried out in accordance with approved details in either the first planting and
              seeding seasons from the date of this decision or before the domestic garden
              hereby approved is brought into use whichever is the sooner. The
              landscaping works implemented as approved shall be retained thereafter.
     5)       Any trees or plants which within a period of 5 years from when the domestic
              garden hereby approved is brought into use are removed or become
              seriously damaged or diseased shall be replaced in the next planting season
              with others of similar size and species.
     6)       Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 3(1) of the Town and Country
              Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015, (or any
              Order revoking and re-enacting that Order), no buildings, structures, areas of
              hardstanding or means of enclosure comprising fences or walls (excluding


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6010764


             the post and wire stock proof fence forming part of the approved Boundary
             Treatment A) shall be erected within the domestic garden hereby approved.
     7)      No external lighting shall be erected within the domestic garden hereby
             approved.
Procedural Matter
2. Since the submission of the appeal the National Planning Policy Framework
   (NPPF) was published in August 2026 and no longer refers to valued landscapes.
   The parties were provided with the opportunity to comment on this change to
   national policy.
3. The NPPF has not altered the objective of limiting development away from
   settlements to help safeguard the intrinsic character and beauty of the countryside.
   National Development Management (NDMP) Policy N2 has been referenced by the
   parties in their comments about the NPPF. This policy refers to consideration
   being given to the environmental qualities of land proposed for development,
   including the landscape character and the natural beauty of the countryside.
Main Issue
4. It is considered that the main issue is the effect of the proposed development on
   the character and appearance of the surrounding area.
Reasons
5. The proposed development seeks to extend the residential curtilage of a dwelling
   created through the re-use of a former agricultural building located in open
   countryside. It does not involve a change of use of the building to residential use
   and, as such, this appeal has been assessed based upon the description of
   development. Neither Policy SS9 of the North East Derbyshire Local Plan (LP) nor
   Policy AP2 of the Ashover Neighbourhood Plan refer to criteria for the extension of
   domestic gardens into the countryside.
6. There is already a residential curtilage associated with the dwelling which includes
   both hard and soft landscaped areas, parking spaces and outbuildings. The extent
   of the current curtilage was established by a planning consent granted by the
   council (Ref 25/00494/FL).
7. The character of the surrounding area comprises a mix of fields enclosed by
   hedgerows, areas of woodland and isolated buildings or groups of buildings,
   including dwellings with gardens. The topography of the surrounding area is
   undulating with the appeal property sited on higher ground albeit adjacent to a
   farmstead. Informed by the site visit, this assessment reflects the commentary
   contained in the Planning Officer’s report about the Peak Fringe and Lower
   Derwent Landscape Character Area. This Character Area is identified to be a
   landscape type of wooded slopes and valleys and this has contributed to the area
   surrounding the appeal site to be designated as an Area of Multiple Environmental
   Sensitivity (AMES). NP Policy AP13 refers to landscape, rather than countryside,
   being an important and highly valued resource which, elsewhere in the NP, is
   attributed to being valued by residents and visitors alike to enjoying the picturesque
   walking opportunities.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      2
 Appeal Decision 6010764


8. Also contributing to the designation of the surrounding area being an AMES, the
   council has referred to the Historic Landscape Assessment which indicates that the
   site is part of an ancient enclosure of a fossilised strip field system. The council
   claim that the appeal scheme would truncate the fossilised strip field system albeit
   it was noted during the site visit that the site’s ground level has been raised.
   However, irrespective of the ground level, the proposed use of the site as a
   domestic garden would not necessarily cause the harm identified by the council
   because the garden would predominantly be private amenity space rather than built
   development being erected. The erection of built forms of development on the site
   could be controlled by a suitable condition if this appeal succeeds.
9. The appeal site is situated to the west of the current residential curtilage and would
   be bounded to the north by a track which is a public right of way and to the west by
   woodland. There is another public right of way extending northwards from
   Whitefield Lane across a field. There is currently no southern boundary which
   separates the site from the wider field. The appeal scheme includes a specification
   for a means of enclosure comprising a fence and a hedge to create this boundary.
10. Longer distance views of the host dwelling and the site are generally screened by
    existing hedgerows and woodlands. As evidenced by the council, there are some
    limited long-distance views but it is the size of the dwelling which is the dominant
    visual feature rather than the existing curtilage and the site. With the lack of
    streetlighting and the separation distances between buildings noted during the site
    visit, it is reasonable to judge that at night-time the sky would be dark.
11. By reason of the adjacent woodland and a high hedge along Whitefield Lane, albeit
    with a field gate, the site is primarily visible from the public rights of way because of
    the existing gateway and the vegetation along the track not fully screening the site.
    From the public right of way along the track there would be a change in the
    character and appearance of the site resulting from the proposed change from
    agricultural to domestic use.
12. However, the degree of the change would not result in significant harm being
    caused to the character and appearance of the landscape associated with the open
    countryside within which the site is situated. The intrinsic beauty of the countryside
    would be preserved rather than there being an unacceptable visual intrusion
    associated with the proposed domestic garden use of the site. The attributes of the
    surrounding area’s landscape character and appearance, including the picturesque
    walking opportunities valued by residents and visitors, would be preserved. These
    judgements take into account what people walking along the public rights of way
    would see, the visual dominance of the host dwelling and the degree of visual
    enclosure of the site.
13. Further, the use of the site as part of the host dwelling’s domestic curtilage would
    not introduce an entirely new use into this location and, for this reason, the
    proposed garden would not be an incongruous or highly conspicuous form of
    development. The dominant landscape feature, whether from the distant
    viewpoints or the public rights of way, would remain the host dwelling. The
    character and appearance of the surrounding countryside would be preserved as a
    landscape comprising a mix of fields enclosed by hedgerows, areas of woodland
    and isolated buildings or groups of buildings, including residential properties with
    gardens.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      3
 Appeal Decision 6010764


14. This judgement is subject to the appearance of the site remaining open private
    amenity space rather than other domestic structures being erected, such as
    outbuildings, hardstanding, additional fences or walls. If such built forms of
    development were to be erected on the site, then there would be a material harm
    caused to the character and appearance of the surrounding area.
15. However, if this appeal succeeds, the condition suggested by the appellant to
    remove permitted development rights for the erection of structures and other
    means of enclosure would be exceptionally justified and necessary in this case to
    prevent such material harm being caused. Similar observations apply to the
    imposition of a suitable condition controlling the erection of external lighting on the
    site which would be sited away from the host dwelling. A suitable condition would
    preclude any adverse impact from artificial lighting on the night-time dark sky.
16. For the reasons given, it is concluded that the proposed development would not
    cause unacceptable harm to the character and appearance of the surrounding area
    and, as such, it would not conflict with LP Policies SDC3 and SDC12, NP Policies
    AP2, AP11 and AP13 and NDMP Policy N2. In addition to considering the
    landscape character and the natural beauty of the countryside, these policies refer
    to development not causing significant harm to the character, quality,
    distinctiveness of the landscape nor cause unacceptable visual intrusion but
    respond positively to, and respect, local character and context.
Conditions
17. The council has suggested conditions in the event that this appeal succeeds which
    have been assessed against the tests identified in the NPPF. For reasons of
    clarity, conditions are necessary to identify the approved drawing and the
    specification for the proposed means of enclosure. The suggestion from the
    council that the fence should be stock proof is necessary to ensure that any
    planting would be better protected but the wording of the condition has been
    drafted to improve its precision. It follows that conditions are necessary to
    implement the approved specification and secure the replacement of any lost or
    damaged plants or trees to ensure that the means of enclosure is effectively
    established.
18. It has already been identified that conditions to withdraw some permitted
    development rights and to preclude the erection of external lighting are necessary.
    Accordingly, it is concluded that this appeal should be allowed.



D J Barnes
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     4
