Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by P Barton BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 07 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010165
The Ferns, 6 Broc Hill Way, Brocton, Stafford, Staffordshire ST17 0UB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Dave Owen against the decision of Stafford Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/41298/FUL.
•    The development proposed is described as “proposing to remove existing stables with more
     appropriate agricultural building to be sited on existing concrete pad for housing tractors and various
     other equipment for land maintenance”.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A new version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published on 17 August 2026. The policy emphasis of the parts of the Framework
       most relevant to this appeal have not changed. As a result, I have not sought
       comments on the new version of the Framework, and I am satisfied that no party’s
       interests have been prejudiced by taking this approach.
Main Issues
3.     The main issues are:
           •    whether the proposed development would be inappropriate development in
                the Green Belt having regard to the Framework and any relevant
                development plan policies; and
           •    whether other considerations clearly outweigh the harm to the Green Belt
                and any other harm as to amount to very special circumstances.
Reasons
Whether inappropriate development in the Green Belt
4.     The Framework identifies that the objective of Green Belt policy is to prevent urban
       sprawl by keeping land permanently open. The essential features of Green Belts
       are their openness and their permanence. The Framework states that
       inappropriate development is, by definition, harmful to the Green Belt and should
       not be approved except in very special circumstances.
5.     Whilst not contained within the decision notice, the officer report refers to Policy
       SP7 of The Plan for Stafford Borough 2011-2031 (PSB), which includes a
       requirement for new development within the Green Belt to be consistent with

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010165


       national policies. I have had regard to it insofar as it is consistent with the latest
       version of the Framework.
6.     Development within the Green Belt is inappropriate unless it falls within one of the
       exceptions given in policy GB7 of the Framework. No exceptions under the
       previous version of the Framework in support of the appeal scheme have been
       presented.
7.     Located to a corner of a broadly rectangular-shaped parcel of land in the Green
       Belt, which consists primarily of grass, the proposed building would replace an
       existing stables building that I saw is predominantly being used for the storage of
       logs. Whilst the surrounding land contains many trees with some overhanging into
       the site, and other trees were within the grounds around the house, there were a
       limited number of trees within the rectangular-shaped parcel of land. I also
       observed pieces of equipment, including modest-sized ride-on mowers, within this
       parcel of land.
8.     Although the proposed building is intended to be used for the storage of land
       management and horticultural equipment, the appellant has stated that it is not
       intended to facilitate a commercial agricultural enterprise. On the basis of the
       evidence before me and from my observations, the proposal would be associated
       with the ongoing management and maintenance of privately owned land. There is
       no compelling case that the activities are of a scale and nature that it is for
       agriculture, horticulture and forestry, or solely for nature conservation, restoration
       and/or enhancement. Therefore, the proposed building would not meet the
       exception given in policy GB7 (1)(a) of the Framework.
9.     Policy GB7 (1)(b) of the Framework would also not be met as the replacement
       building would not be in the same use and would be materially larger than the one
       it replaces.
10. As the proposed building would be sited on an existing concrete slab, for the
    purposes of my assessment, I have considered this to be previously developed
    land (PDL). Policy GB7 (1)(e) is relevant and relates to the redevelopment of PDL,
    which would not cause substantial harm to the openness of the Green Belt. In
    considering the concept of openness, the courts have found that it broadly has
    visual and spatial dimensions.
11. There would be limited harm to the visual openness of the Green Belt due to the
    presence of dense vegetation surrounding the site and changes in ground levels
    resulting in the building sitting within a dip in the landscape. However, the increase
    in the quantum of development by virtue of the substantially greater footprint and
    height of the proposed building compared to the existing stables building would
    result in significant harm to the spatial openness of the Green Belt. Taking all
    these factors together the appeal building would have both spatial and visual
    impacts, which would cause substantial harm to the openness of the Green Belt.
    Consequently, it would not comply with Policy GB7 (1)(e) of the Framework.
12. Furthermore, based on the evidence before me, none of the other exceptions set
    out in policy GB7 of the Framework apply to the appeal building.
13. In terms of the proposed permeable paving system between the proposed building
    and an existing access, due to the nature and appearance of the surface it would
    not result in an area of urban-style hardstanding encroaching into the countryside.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010165


       Consequently, this aspect of the appeal scheme would meet Policy GB7 (1)(f)(i)
       which includes engineering operations, as the impact on the openness of the
       Green Belt is minimised, and there would not be a significant conflict with the
       Green Belt purposes.
14. In conclusion, the proposed building would not accord with any of the exceptions
    contained in policy GB7 of the Framework and is therefore inappropriate
    development in the Green Belt in terms of the Framework and PSB Policy SP7.
Other considerations
15. The need to consolidate and secure existing externally stored machinery, and
    replace an existing building, as well as the associated up-keep of the appeal site
    do represent benefits in favour of the appeal scheme. I afford them moderate
    weight.
16. The appeal site is within the Cannock Chase National Landscape (CCNL). Section
    85 of the Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000 (as amended) requires that
    regard be had to the purposes of conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of
    National Landscapes. There is also a duty under Section 245 of the Levelling-up
    and Regeneration Act 2023 to seek to further the purpose of conserving and
    enhancing the natural beauty of these areas. These purposes also include
    increasing the understanding and enjoyment by the public of the special qualities
    of the National Landscapes. The Council has not raised an objection to the
    proposal’s impact on the CCNL, and from my own observations, I see no reason to
    reach a different conclusion. A lack of harm in this regard has a neutral impact on
    the planning balance.
17. Although the appeal site also falls within 15km of the Cannock Chase Special Area
    of Conservation (SAC), the Council indicates that as the proposal would not create
    a new residential unit, holiday accommodation or visitor attraction, there would be
    no adverse impacts resulting from increased recreational pressure. As I have
    found the appeal scheme would be unacceptable for other reasons, it is not
    necessary for me to consider whether there would be any likely significant effect
    on the integrity of the SAC or undertake an Appropriate Assessment. If I were to
    find the proposal acceptable in this regard, a lack of harm would be a neutral
    factor.
18. A lack of harm or policy compliance with regard to, amongst other things, the living
    conditions of occupiers of neighbouring properties, highway safety, ecology and
    trees are neutral considerations that weigh neither for nor against the proposal.
19. The appellant refers to positive discussions with the original case officer, that the
    application was initially recommended for approval and that the Council do not
    provide formal pre-application advice for proposals of this nature. I am mindful that
    the authorising officer is not duty bound to follow the advice of the case officer.
    Therefore, these matters do not lead me away from my findings and I have had
    regard solely to the planning merits of the proposal.
Green Belt Balance
20. Policy GB6 of the Framework is clear that substantial weight should be given to
    the harm to the Green Belt, including harm to its openness. I have found that there



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010165


       would be harm to the Green Belt by reason of the proposal’s inappropriateness
       and its effect on openness.
21. The Framework states that the potential harm to the Green Belt by reason of
    inappropriateness and any other harm resulting from the development must be
    clearly outweighed by other considerations for permission to be granted. The other
    considerations in this case, as detailed above, do not have sufficient cumulative
    weight to clearly outweigh the harm to the Green Belt and any other harm. As
    such, the very special circumstances necessary to justify this development do not
    exist. This would be contrary to the Framework and PSB Policy SP7. Moreover, for
    this reason, policy S5 of the Framework is not engaged.
Conclusion
22. The proposal conflicts with the development plan as a whole and the material
    considerations, including the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal should be
    decided other than in accordance with it. Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.

P Barton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
