    Appeal Decision
    Site visit made on 17 August 2026
    by Chris Couper BA (Hons) Dip TP MRTPI
    an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
    Decision date: 7 September 2026


    Appeal Ref: 6010828
    18 The Dell, Kempston, Bedford MK42 7DL
    •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
        against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    •   The appeal is made by Newleaf Oasis Limited against the decision of Bedford Borough Council.
    •   The application Ref is 25/02172/COU.
    •   The development proposed is change of use from C3 to C2 (parents’ home).

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters and Background
2. I have been provided with drawing no. 5688 dated 30 April 2026 (‘the amended
   drawing’). It depicts two bedrooms at first floor, instead of three bedrooms as
   shown on drawing no. 5688 dated 2 November 2025 (‘the original drawing’) which
   formed part of the original application. The application was determined on 30 April
   2026 based on the original drawing.
3. The Planning Inspectorate Procedural Guide: Planning Appeals – England 20261
   states that the appeal process should not be used to evolve a scheme, and that it is
   important that what is considered by the Inspector is essentially the same scheme
   that was considered by the Council and by interested parties at application stage.
4. Having regard to that advice, whilst the amended drawing and additional statement
   were submitted on the day that the Council issued its decision, they were not
   considered by the Council, and the views of interested parties were not sought on
   them at that stage.
5. It is clear that at least some local residents are aware of the amended drawing as
   they refer to the revised scheme in their representations. However, I cannot be
   certain that all those who may wish to comment are aware of it, and I have not
   been provided with a revised response from the Service Director for Children’s
   Social Care (‘the SDCSC’).
6. The appellant agreed to two requested time extensions, and the amended drawing
   was submitted in response to the unexpected withdrawal of the application from the
   planning committee agenda one day before the meeting. That withdrawal followed
   the receipt of an objection to the proposal by the SDCSC, having been previously
   supported by officers.

1
    For appeals relating to applications dated on or before 31 March 2026

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision: 6010828


7. Be that as it may, the amended drawing constitutes a significant material
   amendment, and for me to accept it at this stage would potentially introduce
   procedural unfairness. Moreover, even if I were to accept it, other documents such
   as the Planning Statement have not been updated to reflect it and, although the
   appellant states that the occupancy would be reduced to two families, I cannot be
   certain what the proposed maximum number of residents and staff within the
   property would be, nor have I been provided with the wording of a planning
   condition by which that matter could be appropriately controlled. I have therefore
   based my decision on the original drawing.
8. In August 2026 a new version of the National Planning Policy Framework was
   published (‘the Framework’). Having regard to the main issue in this appeal, there
   are no material differences between it and the now superceded version which was
   in place at the time of the Council’s decision. I refer to the new version of the
   Framework in my reasoning below.
9. Finally, notwithstanding the appellant’s claim that the host property was previously
   used as a house in multiple occupation, I have limited evidence of that, and the
   Council states that it has no record of such a use. I have therefore dealt with the
   appeal on the basis of a change of use from Class C3 to Class C2 of the Town and
   Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended), and as set out on the
   application form.
Main Issue
10. The main issue is whether the proposal would provide appropriate living conditions
    for the future occupants of the host property, and its impact on the living conditions
    of nearby occupiers, particularly at 16 The Dell (‘No 16’).
Reasons
Living conditions
11. The host comprises a two storey semi-detached house, which is located on a
    corner plot where the short, quiet residential cul-de-sac of The Dell meets Hill Rise.
    As depicted on the existing layout plan, it has five bedrooms at first floor, and other
    living accommodation and an integral garage at ground floor.
12. The original drawing shows that the proposed use would include three bedrooms, a
    play room, a shared bathroom and a staff bedroom at first floor, along with a
    ground floor staff office, a shared sitting/dining room, kitchen/breakfast room, wc,
    utility and integral garage. Based on the proposed block plan there would be no
    change to the dimensions of the property’s long rear garden as a result of the
    scheme.
13. I understand that Newleaf Oasis Limited is an independent organisation, led by
    experienced social workers. The proposed use would provide short-term supported
    residential accommodation for up to three families, one of which could have two
    parents, with a maximum of three babies under 2 years old. It would provide
    vulnerable families with a safe place to live, and where the parents can be
    assessed, supervised and supported to parent safely. Staff would work shifts on a
    24 hour basis, with three present from 08:00 to 20:00, and two at night time. Visits
    would be limited to approved professionals, and by appointment only for a minimal
    number of selected family members.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision: 6010828


14. The use of the property as a parents’ home would be subject to other regulatory
    controls. However, I am mindful that Bedford Local Plan (2030) (‘BLP’) Policy 60
    only supports proposals for Class C2 care homes where, amongst other things, it
    would be appropriate to the needs of the intended occupiers and will lead to an
    improvement in the quality of care provided; and that Framework Policy HO9 also
    requires that specialist forms of accommodation should provide living conditions
    appropriate to the needs of their residents and users.
15. In his consultation response the SDCSC raises concerns that to have three new-
    born, pre-mobile and/or pre-verbal children with a parent or parents in such a small
    space is unreasonable; and that the layout suggests that the parents will be in their
    room with their child for most of the time, with no obvious therapy room or similar
    place to relax or have space to think.
16. On the basis of the above details, there could be ten or more people in the property
    at any one time. Given the cramped living conditions, the need for staff facilities
    and professional assessment areas, and the paucity of necessary private space for
    the families or parents, I share the SDCSC’s concerns.
17. Turning to the impact on nearby occupiers, BLP Policies 32 and 47S set out, in
    broad terms, that proposals should minimise, and take account of, the effect of
    noise and disturbance on quality of life, with appropriate measures to mitigate any
    adverse impacts.
18. The intensity of the proposed occupancy, with three unrelated family units and ten
    or more people in the property, along with visits and resident turnover, would be
    significantly greater compared to a typical five bedroom house, where the residents
    live together as a single household. I have no evidence regarding any noise
    insulation between it and the neighbouring semi-detached house at No 16, but
    those residents state that sounds can be heard through the party wall.
19. Given my findings above, I consider that the potential for noise and disturbance
    from the proposed use would be significantly greater compared to the property’s
    use as a dwellinghouse. In the absence of detailed measures to mitigate such
    impacts, I consider that the proposal would have a harmfully adverse impact on the
    living conditions of nearby occupiers, particularly at No 16.
20. Summing up, the scheme would fail to provide appropriate living conditions for the
    future occupants of the proposed parents’ home, and it would have a harmful
    impact on the living conditions of nearby occupiers. It would thereby conflict with
    BLP Policies 32, 47S and 60, and with Framework Policy HO9.
21. BLP Policies 28S, 29 and 30 require development to be of high quality design, to
    contribute to local character and distinctiveness, and to have a positive relationship
    with its surroundings. In this case, the building’s appearance would not change as
    a result of the scheme, and its impact on the character of the area would be limited.
    It would not therefore conflict with the general thrust of those policies.
Other considerations
22. In its favour, the scheme would make effective use of an existing building and it
    would play an important social role in helping to support vulnerable families. In
    these regards, although I have limited evidence of community needs, it finds
    support from the Framework, including its Policy HO7. However, given the harm


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
 Appeal Decision: 6010828


     that I have found it would cause, it would not accord with the Framework’s stance
     on supporting strong, vibrant and healthy communities.
Conclusion
23. The proposal would fail to provide appropriate living conditions for the future
    occupants of the parents’ home, and it would have a harmful impact on the living
    conditions of nearby occupiers. Whilst it would provide a specialist form of
    accommodation for which I am told there is a need, this scheme, at this intensity, is
    not the only way in which such accommodation could be provided. The scheme’s
    public benefits would not outweigh the significant harm that it would cause.
24. It would conflict with the development plan, and material considerations, including
    the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in
    accordance with it. For these reasons, and having regard to all other matters
    raised, including representations by interested parties, the appeal is dismissed.

Chris Couper
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       4
