Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 2 September 2026
by L Fern BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010496
62 Cartwright Road, Dagenham RM9 6JL
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Ahmed Abdulla against the decision of the Council of the London Borough
    of Barking and Dagenham.
•   The application Ref is 26/00292/HSE.
•   The development proposed is a part two-storey, part single-storey rear extension with a two-storey
    side extension, and alterations to the existing front fenestration.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2. A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework was published in
   August 2026 (Framework), which replaces previous iterations, and the contents of
   which have been considered in the determination of this appeal.
Main Issue
3. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
   appearance of the surrounding area, having regard to the Becontree Estate (BE) as
   a non-designated heritage asset (NDHA).
Reasons
4. Framework Policy DP3 makes it clear that development proposals should respond
   to their context (the history, character and features of their site and its setting) and
   integrate with and enhance their surroundings. Proposals that fail to do so, without
   clear justification, should be refused. Furthermore, Framework Policy HE7 seeks to
   protect NDHAs and confirms that any harm to the significance of a NDHA should
   be weighed against the benefits of the proposal and a balanced judgement made.
5. Policies SPP6 and DMD4 of the London Borough of Barking and Dagenham Local
   Plan (2024) (BDLP), amongst other things, require all development within the BE to
   integrate with the existing character of the area and enable the preservation and
   restoration of the historic fabric of the estate. Furthermore, where harm to a
   heritage asset is found it should be assessed against the requirements of national
   planning policy. Policy HC1 of the London Plan (2021) echoes this sentiment by,
   amongst other things, requiring development proposals affecting heritage assets to
   conserve their significance. LP Policies SP2, DMD1 and DMD5 are more general
   design policies, which, amongst other things, promote high-quality design that
   relates to its local context and character, including in respect of heritage assets.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010496


     The relevant parts of the above development plan policies are broadly consistent
     with the Framework.
6. The BE was originally developed under the “Homes for Heroes” interwar house
   building programme in the 1920s and 30s and was the largest municipal estate in
   the world at the time. It was almost entirely designed by the architect George
   Topham Forrest following the garden city principles of renowned urban planner
   Ebenezer Howard. Perimeter blocks of symmetrical short terraces and semi-
   detached dwellings of simple design, wide verges and small incidental open spaces
   are distinctive of the BE’s urban design and contribute positively to the character
   and appearance of the area.
7. No 62 Cartwright Road (No 62) is a residential property located on the end of a
   terraced row that sits forward of the one adjacent. Consequently, its side elevation
   is prominent when viewed from the highway. No 62 and its neighbour at 64
   Cartwright Road (No 64), which forms the end property on the adjacent row, have
   been extended at ground floor level and are now connected. However, the original
   gap at first floor level remains, which allows a reading of the properties as two
   separate rows of terraces, thereby helping to retain a key characteristic of the BE.
   In addition, the width of the roof of the main part of No 62 is broadly consistent with
   that at No 64, thereby preserving an element of design consistency between the
   properties, despite differing single storey and front elevational designs.
   Consequently, although No 62 has been somewhat altered from its original form, it
   maintains features that are characteristic of the BE and that contribute to the
   character and appearance of the NDHA.
8. Although a gap would be maintained between No 62 and No 64 at first floor level, it
   would be reduced by the proposed two storey side extension. This reduction would
   diminish the perception of the two terraced rows as being separate, which would be
   exacerbated by the fact that No 62 sits forward of No 64. Furthermore, despite a
   reduction in scale from previous iterations of the scheme, the current proposal
   would result in the elongation of the roof of the main part of the dwelling, which
   would be out-of-keeping with its neighbour at No 64. This would result in an
   inconsistency in proportions that would weaken the cohesion in simple architectural
   design that is prevalent within the BE.
9. The appellant has provided recent examples of what they consider to be similar
   two-storey side extensions that have been approved elsewhere within the BE.
   However, they are not wholly comparable to the appeal case. Some are located
   within different contexts, including with differing property separation distances and
   orientations, providing alternative relationships within the built form. Other cases
   would result in a greater amount of space being afforded between the extensions
   and the plot boundaries, and/or being set back from the main elevation of the
   property. This appeal has therefore been determined on an assessment of the
   specific characteristics of the site and its context.
10. For the above reasons, the proposal would cause a limited degree of harm to the
    significance of BE as a NDHA. In such circumstances, the Framework requires the
    harm to be weighed against the benefits of the proposal.
11. The proposal would provide additional accommodation that would negate the need
    for the family move elsewhere. However, this is a personal benefit, and planning is
    generally concerned with matters in the public interest. It would however constitute


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010496


     an efficient use of an existing residential property and curtilage, to which very
     limited weight is afforded given that the proposal is only for alterations to an
     existing single dwelling. Whilst there would be no harm to residential amenity for
     both the residents of No 62 and neighbours, this is not a benefit but a neutral
     consideration in the planning balance.
12. Having regard to the scale of the harm to, and the significance of, the NDHA, the
    very limited benefits would not outweigh the limited harm identified. The proposal
    would therefore be harmful to the character and appearance of the surrounding
    area and thus would be contrary to London Plan Policy HC1 and BDLP Policies
    SPP6, SP2, DMD1, DMD4 and DMD5.
Other Matters
13. The Council’s conduct during the application process is not a matter for this appeal.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
14. Framework Policy DP3 stipulates that proposals should be refused that fail to
    comply with it, which is the case in this instance. In addition, the proposal also
    conflicts with Framework policies relating to the BE as a NDHA. Collectively, this
    leads to the conclusion that the very limited benefits of the proposal would be
    substantially outweighed by the adverse effects when considering Framework
    Policy S4 relating to the principle of development within settlements. The proposal
    does not therefore benefit from the presumption in favour of sustainable
    development as articulated at Framework Policy S3.
15. The proposal is contrary to the development plan and there are no material
    considerations that indicate a decision should be made other than in accordance
    with it. Thus, the appeal is dismissed.

L Fern
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
