Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 September 2026
by F Harrison BA(Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010755
The Beck and Call, Stainbeck Road, Meanwood, Leeds LS7 2NP
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Mr Joe Pinder against the decision of Leeds City Council.
•      The application Ref is 25/07470/FU.
•      The development proposed is an outdoor TV screen.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. The description of development has been taken from the application form, omitting
   wording that is not an act of development. The screen has already been installed,
   however for clarity, I have determined the appeal on the development as shown on
   the plans. Since the appeal was submitted a new version of the National Planning
   Policy Framework (the Framework) came into effect, but there are no material
   changes in policy emphasis relevant to the substance of the appeal.
Main Issue
3. The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of neighbouring
   occupiers, with regard to noise and disturbance.
Reasons
4. The proposal relates to a public house on Stainbeck Road in a predominantly
   residential area. The appeal site is surrounded by dwellings which creates a
   sensitive relationship. The outdoor screen would be located within the existing
   outdoor seating area and the main sources of noise and disturbance from the
   proposal would be from customer behaviour and from the amplification equipment
   associated with the screen which have been considered in the Noise Statement
   (2026) (NS).
5. The Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)1 states that the subjective nature of noise
   means that there is not a simple relationship between noise levels and the impact
   on those affected, which will depend on how various factors combine in any
   particular situation. The NS identifies a background noise baseline based on a
   single noise monitoring position at the north west of the appeal site which is said to
   be in the vicinity of the nearest noise sensitive receptor. While the properties on
   Carr Manor Walk may be the nearest receptors to the appeal site boundary, given
1
    Paragraph: 006 Reference ID: 30-006-20190722

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010755


     the siting of the screen the properties and gardens on Stainbeck Road and
     Wensley Road would be the closest noise sensitive receptors to the proposal.
     Notwithstanding this, a worst-case scenario background noise level of 40 dB LA902
     adopted for the purposes of the NS is indicative of a relatively tranquil setting that
     would be sensitive to noise and disturbance.
6. It is not disputed that outdoor customer activity would increase during screenings of
   major sporting events, such as football tournaments, which have previously been
   screened under other temporary permissions at the site. The use of the external
   seating area is long established for the consumption of food and/or drink,
   nevertheless, customers watching sporting events are likely to engage in impulsive
   cheering and shouting in response to events on the screen. Such behaviour would
   generate louder noises of a different character than the sounds associated with the
   current use of the seating area.
7. Notwithstanding that measuring noise from customers of public houses is difficult to
   precisely quantify, the NS largely relies on the intermittent noise made by
   customers and the low frequency of high-profile football tournament matches
   involving England in drawing the conclusions that some residents may be affected
   for a brief time and would not equate to a significant adverse impact. However,
   while noise would be particularly prevalent during football tournaments such as the
   Euros and the World Cup, which would be likely to draw a large crowd, there is no
   mechanism before me to limit the screening of events to infrequent tournaments.
   Accordingly, there would be nothing to prevent league fixtures of the local football
   team or other sporting events to be screened, which would give rise to noise on a
   more frequent basis.
8. The hours of use of the screen could be controlled by a condition to avoid anti-
   social hours when neighbours could be sleeping, however the screen could be
   used at weekends and mid-week during the football season, in addition to
   international tournaments. This frequency of use would generate a significant level
   of disturbance to neighbouring occupiers when taking account of the inconsistent
   and unpredictable nature of noise made by customers when watching sporting
   events which would be particularly discordant against the existing calm qualities of
   the residential area.
9. Even if other types of sporting events would not attract as many customers as
   international tournaments would, given the highs and lows of sporting events the
   noise generated would still be jarring against the peaceful setting, particularly
   taking account of the fact it could occur on a frequent basis. The noise and
   disturbance would be most keenly felt during pleasant weather when neighbours
   could have windows open and be in their private gardens. While the noises
   generated by customers may be relatively short in duration, their intermittent and
   unpredictable nature has the capacity to attract attention, particularly given the
   proximity of sensitive receptors. Repeated exposure to such disturbance, would be
   detrimental to residents' quality of life.
10. I have no reason to doubt that the appellant recognises the importance of operating
    responsibly within the local community and is committed to minimising disturbance
    to neighbouring residents. The submitted Noise Management and Customer
    Dispersal Plan is said to mitigate and reduce to a minimum the noise arising from

2 The noise level that is exceeded for 90% of the measurement period.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6010755


     the customers through measures such as staff intervening where excessive noise
     occurs and active management of customer dispersal following sporting events.
     While these measures may help to prevent extremes of customer behaviour, even
     with regular monitoring and additional supervision, it would not be practical for staff
     to intervene every time shouting or cheering noise occurs which will typically be
     multiple times during a match. The management plan would not therefore fully
     address the sporadic nature of the type of noise associated with sporting events
     which are difficult to mitigate.
11. There has been one formal noise complaint in relation to the public house that
    related to amplified music rather than patron noise in the external seating area,
    nevertheless, this does not mean that the proposal would protect living conditions
    of neighbouring occupiers. There have been several objections from local residents
    that indicate that previous screenings of sporting events have been a nuisance for
    people living nearby, with shouting and yelling when football has been shown on
    the external screen that can be heard several streets away and has prevented
    children using their gardens and negatively affected young children’s sleep.
12. Overall, the increased noise exposure arising from the proposal would cross the
    significant observed adverse effect level boundary, whereby it would cause a
    material change in behaviour during operational hours, such as keeping windows
    closed and avoiding using private gardens. This leads me to find that the proposal
    would place an unacceptable noise burden on neighbouring occupiers and would
    not promote good quality of life.
13. While it is indicated that outdoor screening has taken place continuously for
    approximately six years at the appeal site under temporary permissions there is no
    clear evidence about the number and frequency of events screened and so a
    comparison with the appeal scheme is not possible. Based on the limited details
    provided about the example at the Original Oak public house in a different part of
    Leeds I am unable to ascertain whether the setting is directly comparable to the
    appeal site. As such, a decision to refuse permission at the appeal site would not
    be inconsistent with other decisions that have been taken in the area.
14. The amplification equipment would be mounted to the screen and orientated
    towards the seating area. Target noise levels from the equipment could be secured
    by a condition to ensure they met the Council’s relevant standard and so that
    speaker volumes could be controlled, monitored and maintained at appropriate
    levels. While noise associated with the screen itself could be satisfactorily
    controlled, this would not mitigate the noise and disturbance arising from customers
    identified above. The disturbance the proposal would create is indicative of noise in
    the wrong place at the wrong time. The proposal would therefore be contrary to
    Framework Policy P3 which requires development to be appropriate for its location,
    taking into account the likely effects on living conditions and to avoid unacceptable
    levels of noise.
15. To conclude, the proposal would have an unacceptable effect on the living
    conditions of neighbouring occupiers, with regard to noise and disturbance and
    would be in conflict with Policy GP5 of the Leeds Unitary Development Plan
    (Review 2006) and Policy P10 of the Core Strategy (as amended by the Core
    Strategy selective Review 2019). These policies include a requirement for
    proposals to avoid environmental intrusion, loss of amenity and provide good


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010755


     design that is appropriate to its location, contributing positively to quality of life
     and wellbeing.
Other Considerations
16. I have carefully considered the social role the public house plays in the local
    community and the supportive comments received from some residents about the
    proposal. The enhancement of the public house for all users within the community
    is a clear benefit of the proposal, which attracts modest weight in the absence of
    any clear evidence that the scale and nature of the proposal would make a
    demonstrable contribution to supporting social interaction in the local community.
    The precise extent of captured revenue relating to the external screen has not been
    quantified, as such this limits the weight to be given to this economic benefit.
Conclusion
17. My above findings bring the proposal into conflict with the development plan, read
    as a whole. There are no material considerations that indicate a decision should be
    made other than in accordance with it. Therefore, I conclude that the appeal should
    be dismissed.



F Harrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
