Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026 by E Street BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 3 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010956
99 Esmond Road, Chiswick, Ealing W4 1JE
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Michael Janov against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
    Ealing.
•   The application Ref is 260047HH.
•   The development proposed is a replacement of two single-glazed timber windows on ground floor
    and first floor front elevation with timber like-to-like double glazed casement windows.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure and Preliminary Matter
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
3. The most recent National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) includes
   changes with respect to heritage matters with specific regard to the degrees of
   harm. That said, the actions of finding harm to a designated heritage asset is not
   materially different from the previous iteration of the Framework. I am therefore
   satisfied that I can proceed without further consultation with the main parties since,
   with the above in mind, their respective cases would not be prejudiced.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is whether the proposal would preserve or enhance the character
   or appearance of the Bedford Park Conservation Area (CA).
Reasons for the Recommendation
5. The appeal site is a mid-terraced dwelling situated centrally within the CA. The
   building along with the adjoining one to the right are unique in their appearance in
   terms of the cat slide roof and use of varying materials on the front elevation. A key
   feature of the property is the ground and first-floor windows, which, together with
   their lintels, are timber-framed. The ground-floor top-hung windows incorporate
   individual glazing bars, this feature means they sit well with the dwelling and
   contribute positively to its traditional and thus historical significance. The CA is a
   good example of early residential housing estate in London. The wider dwellings
   within the street scene feature varying forward-facing appearances. Moreover, a
   level of consistency is viewed in terms of the materials and specifically window


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010956


     design and finishes. These features in combination contribute to a well-designed
     and preserved character and appearance for the CA.
6. No detailed plans have been provided showing how the proposed double-glazed
   windows would sit in their respective reveals and therefore appear as a whole on
   the building. Sections and photographs have been submitted to demonstrate the
   slimline nature of the windows and their scale. The existing openings are a
   fundamental and high-quality aspect of the building’s traditionality. Moreover, whilst
   the windows from afar would follow the same proportions and scaling, up close,
   they would clearly be a modern intervention with a loss of the important detailing
   reflective of the age of the building.
7. The proposed replacement window for the ground floor would include an attempt to
   replicate glazing bars on the upper hung windows which would be stuck on the
   glass rather than the more traditional separate glazing panels between each bar.
   This would be obvious and unacceptably detract from the quality of the other well-
   preserved examples within the street scene. I am unconvinced that the new
   windows would be a true like for like replacement given the lack of timber detailing
   and double-glazed nature. The appellant has detailed that the windows are in a
   poor state of repair and reached the end of their serviceable life. However, I have
   not been provided with any details as to why alternative courses of action such as
   secondary glazing have been discounted.
8. Section 72 (1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
   states special attention shall be paid to the desirability of preserving or enhancing
   the character and appearance of that area. Nationally speaking, Policy HE6 of the
   Framework places emphasis on substantial weight being given to the heritage
   asset’s conservation. By virtue of the above assessment, there would be harm to
   the CA in a failure to either preserve or enhance its character or appearance. This
   should be weighed against the public benefits of the proposal.
9. Whilst the replacement windows may provide some sustainability benefits, these
   would mainly be private for the occupiers on the property and only tenuously public.
   Some economic effects would arise during the construction phase but would attract
   limited weight given the modest scale of the development. They would also be time
   limited. Resultantly, I could give no more than limited weight to the public benefits
   overall. They would not therefore outweigh the substantial weight given to the
   conservation of the CA.
10. As such, there would be conflict with Policies D4 and HC1 of the London Plan
    2021, Policies 7B, 7C and 7.4 of the Ealing Development Management
    Development Plan Document (DPD) 2013. Amongst other things, these seek to
    ensure that development proposals are of a high-quality design and as a minimum
    conserve the historic environment.
11. As development within a settlement, Policy S4 of the new Framework would be
    relevant. It is clear from my earlier assessment that the adverse effects of the
    appeal scheme would carry substantial weight and the benefits (public for the sake
    of a heritage case) would not be sufficient to indicate a planning permission should
    be forthcoming. The position of Policy S4, and specifically a balance of adverse
    effect vs benefit would not therefore alter the outcome of the appeal.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010956


Conclusion and Recommendation
12. The appeal scheme would not comply with the development plan, I have been
    given no compelling reason, taking into account other material considerations
    advanced including the Framework, to deviate therefrom. I therefore recommend
    the appeal be dismissed.

E Street
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
13. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
