Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 September 2026
by Andrew Fulford BSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010642
Land Adjacent 10 Wren Avenue, Sproston, Crewe, Cheshire CW4 7LS
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•    The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs M Palmer against the decision of Cheshire West and Chester
     Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/02664/PIP.
•    The development proposed is the construction of one self-build dwelling.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. The proposal is for permission in principle (‘PiP’). Planning Practice Guidance
   (‘PPG’) advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
   housing-led development. The PiP consent route has two stages: the first stage (or
   permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site is suitable in-principle, and
   the second (‘technical details consent’) stage (‘TDC’) is when the detailed
   development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first of these two
   stages.
3. The scope of the considerations for PiP is limited to location, land use and the
   amount of development permitted. All other matters are considered as part of the
   subsequent TDC application if PiP is granted. I have determined the appeal
   accordingly.
4. I note that the submitted plans include detailed drawings for a bungalow. However,
   given that the proposal is for a PiP, these detailed drawings will not be considered
   further at this stage. This is a matter for any future TDC, if the PiP were to be
   granted.
5. An applicant can apply for PiP for a range of dwellings by expressing a minimum
   and maximum number of dwellings as part of the application. In this instance,
   permission is sought for a single dwelling.
6. On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) was published. Those parts of the Framework most relevant to this
   appeal have been amended. As a result, parties have been provided with an
   opportunity to make further submissions. I have referred to the latest version of the
   Framework where relevant in this appeal.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010642


Main Issue
7.    The main issue is whether the site is in a suitable location for residential development,
      having regard to development plan policy, and its accessibility to local facilities and
      sustainable modes of transport
Reasons
8.    Wren Avenue is a cul-de-sac consisting of 5 pairs semi-detached dwellings that
      front onto a grassed area of public open space. Despite the presence of a small
      number of other dwellings and rural businesses in the wider area the appeal site is
      located outside of any defined settlement in a rural location. The appeal site is
      equidistant between the settlements of Middlewich and Holmes Chapel.
9.    Policy STRAT 2 of the Cheshire West and Chester Local Plan Part One: Strategic
      Policies (2015) (LPP1) sets out the settlement hierarchy for the district. In the first
      instance the policy directs new development to the City of Chester and the towns
      of Ellesmere Port, Northwich and Winsford. The second and third tiers of the
      hierarchy set out the most sustainable rural locations and other smaller rural
      settlements that can accommodate appropriate levels of new development. Given
      the location outside of any defined settlement, the proposal is contrary to Policy
      STRAT 2 of the LPP1.
10. Policy STRAT 9 of the LPP1 and Policy DM 19 of Cheshire West and Chester
    Local Plan (Part Two) Land Allocations and Detailed Policies (2019) (LPP2) set
    out the types of development that are acceptable in countryside locations. The
    proposal falls outside of the listed criteria and consequently the erection of a
    dwelling on this site would be contrary to Policy STRAT 9 of the LPP1 and Policy
    DM 19 of the LPP2.
11. Policy STRAT 1 of the LPP1 seeks to locate new housing in areas with good
    accessibility to existing or proposed local shops, community facilities and primary
    schools and areas with good connections to public transport. This broadly aligns
    with the objectives of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework).
12. The appeal site is located on the corner of Wren Avenue and Brereton Lane on an
    undeveloped parcel of land that forms part of the curtilage of No. 10 Wren Avenue.
    Brereton Lane has no dedicated pedestrian footpath or grass verge with
    hedgerows located directly adjacent to the carriageway. There are no speed
    restrictions on Brereton Road indicating that vehicles could theoretically travel at
    speeds up to 60mph.
13. The appeal site is located approximately 400m from a bus stop on Holmes Chapel
    Road (A54) which is served by the D&G bus route 42 which runs hourly services
    between Holmes Chapel and Middlewich. Whilst the bus stop is within an
    acceptable walking distance, the first part of the route requires walking within the
    road along Brereton Lane given the lack of a pavement or grass verge. This would
    not be appealing due to the conflict with passing fast-moving traffic. Furthermore,
    to access buses on the northern side of Holmes Chapel Road this requires
    potential public transport users to cross a busy A road where there is no formal
    crossing point. Taking these factors into account this route would not be a realistic
    option for many future occupiers especially a parent with young children or those
    with mobility issues.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010642


14. Given the rural location outside of any defined settlement the only facility within
    walking distance is a public house. Consequently, the occupiers of the proposed
    development would be wholly reliant on surrounding settlements for access to
    essential facilities and services such as schools, GP surgeries, retail, leisure and
    employment.
15. The settlements of Middlewich and Holmes Chapel are approximately 2km from
    the appeal site and contain a range of services and facilities. Given the distance,
    cycling to these destinations would be possible. However, the routes include
    sections of unlit road where vehicles can travel at 40mph. This would be
    unattractive to all but the most confident cyclists.
16. There is a train station within Holmes Chapel, however given the unattractive
    walking route to the nearest bus stop it is unlikely that this would be accessed via
    sustainable modes. The proximity to the M6 has been highlighted however this
    does not encourage travel via sustainable modes.
17. Emphasis has been placed on the fact that the appeal site is not isolated.
    However, the main issue in this case is whether the appeal site is sustainably
    located to access public transport, services and facilities rather than whether there
    are other dwellings nearby. Consequently, the presence of other nearby dwellings
    does not overcome the concerns raised over the unsustainability of the location.
18. For the reasons given, the appeal site would not be a suitable location for
    residential development taking into account the conflict with development plan
    policy and the limited accessibility to local facilities and sustainable modes of
    transport. The development would be contrary to policies STRAT 1, STRAT 2 and
    STRAT 9 of the LPP1 and Policies DM 19 and R 1 of the LPP2. Amongst other
    matters, these policies seek to ensure that new housing is located where there is
    good accessibility to shops, services and public transport, housing is delivered in
    accordance with settlement hierarchy and new dwellings within the countryside are
    only be supported in a limited number of circumstances.
Other Matters
19. The scheme has been presented as self-build housing (SBH) which could be
    secured as such at the TDC stage. This is a benefit to the scheme which I attribute
    modest weight given the scale of development as one residential unit.
20. No objections have been raised from local residents, the Parish Council or
    statutory consultees. Nevertheless, I have determined this appeal on its individual
    planning merits, and the lack of any objections does not overcome my conclusion
    on the main issue.
21. Two appeal decisions1 have been referenced by the appellant. However, without
    full copies of these decisions it is not possible to make a full comparison with the
    appeal scheme. Although, it is my understanding that the decisions highlight that
    positive weight should be attached to the delivery of single dwelling schemes in
    the overall planning balance. However, it is for the decision maker to determine the
    level of weight to be attached, taking into account the specific circumstances of the
    case.


1
    Appeal Ref’s: APP/A0665/W/25/3376451 & APP/A0665/W/25/3370497


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            3
Appeal Decision 6010642


22. Whilst not mentioned in the Council’s reason for refusal, concerns have been
    raised that the construction of a dwelling in this location would harm the character
    and appearance of the area. However, given the proximity of the site to the
    uniform dwellings within Wren Avenue, I am satisfied that it is possible to design a
    dwelling at TDC stage that complements the surrounding properties and maintains
    the character of the wider area.
Planning Balance
23. Policy S3 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. For development outside settlements, this means that policy S5 of
    the Framework should be applied.
24. Policy S5 sets out that only certain forms of development should be approved
    outside settlements, these are listed under criteria (a)-(j). In this case criterion (j) is
    relevant as the Council does not currently have a 5-year housing land supply.
    However, criterion (j)(i) goes on to state that developments should be physically
    well-related to an existing settlement. As set out above, the appeal site is
    approximately 2km from the nearest settlements of Middlewich and Holmes
    Chapel. The development would thus not be physically well-related to any existing
    settlements. Accordingly, the proposal is not supported by criterion (j)(i), nor does
    it fall within any of the other listed criteria.
25. Where a development proposal does not fall within one of the categories set out in
    Policy S5, it should only be approved in exceptional circumstances, where the
    benefits of the proposal would substantially outweigh the adverse effects.
26. The proposal would provide additional housing where there is an identified shortfall
    in accordance with Policy HO7 of the Framework, specifically a self-build dwelling.
    There would also be economic benefits arising both during the construction and
    occupation of the dwelling. However, given that the scheme would provide just one
    additional dwelling only limited weight is attached to these benefits.
27. The site is not located where it can support sustainable patterns of movement and
    would not enable good accessibility for different users and would therefore be
    contrary to Policy TR3 of the Framework. Significant weight is attached to this
    conflict. The benefits would therefore not substantially outweigh the identified
    adverse effects and there are therefore no exceptional circumstances in this case.
28. Consequently, the proposal does not benefit from the presumption in favour of
    sustainable development set out within Policy S3 of the Framework.
Conclusion
29. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the proposal would conflict with the
    development plan and material considerations do not indicate that the appeal
    should be decided other than in accordance with the development plan. Therefore,
    the appeal is dismissed.



Andrew Fulford
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
