Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 July 2026 by A Chan Markovitz BA (Hons)
Decision by Tamsin Law BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 10 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010215
218 Sutton Road, Walsall WS5 3AH
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the
    Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•   The appeal is made by Mr Zahid Khan against the decision of Walsall Metropolitan Borough Council.
•   The application Ref is 26/0407.
•   The development proposed is “Single storey rear extension 6m depth”.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. Under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the Town and Country
   Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 as amended (the
   GPDO), planning permission is granted for the enlargement of a dwellinghouse
   subject to limitations and conditions.
4. Where an application is made for a determination as to whether prior approval is
   required for development which exceeds the limits in paragraph A.1(f) but is
   allowed by paragraph A.1(g) to Part 1, paragraph A.4(3) provides that the local
   planning authority may refuse the application where it considers that the proposed
   development does not comply – or that the developer has provided insufficient
   information to enable the authority to establish whether the proposed development
   complies with the conditions, limitations or restrictions that are applicable to such
   permitted development.
5. The Council refused the application as they considered that the proposed
   development would not comply with Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A,
   paragraphs A.1(j) and A.1(ja) of the GPDO, as it and any existing enlargements
   would extend beyond a wall forming a side elevation of the original dwellinghouse,
   and have a width greater than half the width of the original dwellinghouse.
6. There is no dispute between the parties that the proposed single storey rear
   extension would comply with all other limitations and conditions set out in



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010215


     paragraphs A.1, A.2, A.3 and A.4 of Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the GPDO.
     From the evidence before me, I see no reason to disagree.
Main Issue
7. The main issue is whether the proposed development would be granted planning
   permission by Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the GPDO.
Reasons for the Recommendation
8. The host dwelling is a two-storey semi-detached house. On my site visit, I observed
   that the host dwelling has a two-storey rear projection utilising similar cream
   painted brick elevations, metal roof gutters and dark grey roof tiles as the rest of the
   property. A two-storey rear projection of a similar width, depth and position in
   relation to its host property exists at the adjoining semi-detached pair, 216 Sutton
   Road.
9. From my observations, the plans submitted with the application, and the appellant
   statement, this two-storey rear projection appears to be an original part of the host
   dwelling. The proposed extension would be attached to this rear projection and
   extend beyond its left side wall. Therefore, based on the evidence before me, the
   proposed development would extend beyond an original side wall and would have
   a width greater than half the width of the original property, thereby not complying
   with paragraphs A.1(j) and A.1(ja) of the GPDO.
10. The appellant has submitted that the existing single-storey rear extension that
    extends beyond the two-storey rear projection is not an original part of the property
    and is intended to be demolished before the construction of the proposed single-
    storey rear extension. However, this does not overcome the fact that the proposal
    would extend beyond the left side wall of the two-storey rear projection which I
    have found to be original.
11. Proposals must comply with all the limitations and conditions set out in paragraphs
    A.1, A.2, A.3 and A.4 of Article 3(1), Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the GPDO to be
    permitted development. As the proposed development does not comply with
    paragraphs A.1(j) and A.1(ja) of the GPDO, it is not therefore permitted
    development and would not be granted planning permission by Article 3(1) and
    Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the GPDO.
Other Matter
12. As the proposed development is not permitted development there is no requirement
    to assess its impact on the amenity of adjoining premises.
Conclusion and Recommendation
13. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I
    recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.



A Chan Markovitz
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010215




Inspector’s Decision
14. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

Tamsin Law
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
