Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 20 August 2026
by S Leonard BA (Hons) BTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 27 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010314
2 Clarence Road, Poole BH14 8AX
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Poppy Wilson against the decision of Bournemouth Christchurch and Poole
     Council.
•    The application Ref is P/26/01417/HOU.
•    The development proposed is rear single-storey infill extension and a loft conversion with rear
     dormer and velux window to the front.


Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.     Following the submission of this appeal, a revised version of the National Planning
       Policy Framework (the Framework), was published on 17 August 2026. This
       replaces the 2024 Framework. I am satisfied that the revised Framework does not
       differ significantly from the 2024 version in respect of the substance of the matters
       before me. Like the 2024 Framework, the revised version seeks to achieve well-
       designed places and the conservation and enhancement of the historic
       environment. Accordingly, I have not deemed it necessary to seek comments from
       the main parties on the 2026 Framework, which I have considered in my decision.
Main Issue
3.     The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of
       the host property and the wider Ashley Cross Conservation Area (the ACCA).
Reasons
4.     Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
       (the Act) requires that, with respect to development affecting buildings or other
       land in a conservation area, ‘special attention shall be paid to the desirability of
       preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of that area.’
5.     The appeal property lies within the ACCA. The Council’s ACCA Character
       Appraisal and Management Plan (2012) (ACCACAMP) notes that the ACCA is
       urban and formal in character. Most of the buildings, including residential and
       commercial properties, date back to the comprehensive Victorian and Edwardian
       development of the area. Cohesiveness is identified as a feature of the urban
       structure. Buildings tend to be of a similar size and layout, and positioned within


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010314


       reasonably sized plots, resulting in a fairly fine, regular grain and a uniform feel
       within the area.
6.     Residential properties are generally visible from the public realm, two-storey in
       height, and are set back behind shallow front gardens and have a strong front
       building line. The original roofing material is predominantly slate, and roofs tend to
       be steeply pitched, incorporating brick chimneys as large and prominent features.
       Solid-to-glazed ratios and windows design are noted to give buildings a vertical
       emphasis.
7.     Specifically, the appeal site lies within Character Area 3: Residential Area to the
       South of Commercial Road of the ACCACAMP. This area dates to the Victorian
       era and is predominantly residential in character, comprising detached, semi-
       detached and short-terraced housing. Red brick walls feature under pitched slate
       roofs, where the main roof slopes away from the road, with gablets facing the road.
       Other notable architectural features include prominent chimneys, sash windows,
       terracotta, stucco or stone details over windows and doors, and contrasting brick
       string courses.
8.     The appeal property is an end-of-terrace two-storey dwelling. It comprises an
       integral part of a street scene comprising a group of short residential terraces
       which are laid out in a semi-circular arrangement along Clarence Road and
       Menton Road. These dwellings, including the appeal property, exhibit the aforesaid
       features which typify this part of the ACCA, according to the ACCACAMP. They
       collectively result in a cohesive townscape with properties being of a similar height
       and scale, having consistent front and rear building lines, and being set within long
       rectangular-shaped road-facing plots which taper towards the rear where they
       back onto rear service lanes.
9.     There is also a strong degree of uniformity due to a prevalence of similar
       materials, roof forms and architectural detailing. These include brick walls, front-
       facing projecting bays, vertically orientated timber sliding sash windows with
       decorative headers and cills and feature front porches.
10. The roofscape is characterised by slate and tile pitched roofs with prominent front-
    facing feature gablets with decorative bargeboards, as well as decorative tile
    edging and potted brick chimney stacks. As originally built, the dwellings have
    clear and uncluttered front and rear slopes to the main roof.
11. Some changes have been made to the original appeal property. These include the
    replacement of slate with concrete roof tiles, the painting of some of the rear
    elevation brickwork, the use of upvc for the windows, and the addition of a rear
    single storey extension.
12. Notwithstanding this, the property has retained its original roof form and
    architectural features, and it comprises an attractive period property which remains
    visually connected to the terrace of housing within which it lies. It makes a strong
    positive contribution to the townscape character of this part of the ACCA, and it is
    noteworthy that the site and the wider terrace are identified within the ACCACAMP
    as ‘positive features’ within the conservation area.
13. Whilst the design quality of the terraced housing is most appreciated in views from
    the street, it is also readily apparent in views from the service road which runs
    along the rear of the housing, as well as from neighbouring properties. Moreover,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010314


       in the case of the appeal site, due to its curved plot and juxtaposition in relation to
       the western end of the service road, the rear of the property is also visible from the
       public realm of Britannia Road.
14. The ACCACAMP recognises the scope for new development at the rear of
    properties where this reflects the style of the parent building and reinforces local
    distinctiveness, such as applying materials and details which are characteristic to
    the conservation area.
15. However, in the case of the appeal scheme, the proposed rear dormer would
    occupy virtually the whole of the main rear roof slope, extending almost across its
    entire width. As such, it would dominate this part of the roof due to its combined
    width and height and proximity to the ridge and eaves lines. The flat-roofed design
    would not respect the traditional pitched roof construction of the original property
    and it would result in the dormer having an incongruous ‘boxy’ appearance.

16. The proposed siting of the dormer close to the rear gable projection and two brick
    chimneys, which it would wrap around, combined with its proposed height, width
    and depth, would result in a cramped and over-dominant addition which would
    overwhelm these existing positive roof features.
17. The incongruous appearance of the dormer would be exacerbated by the non-
    alignment of its glazed elements with the ground and first floor windows below,
    together with notably more horizontally proportioned windows than those below
    which typify the original period property design. Moreover, the proposed small
    areas of dormer fenestration, set high into the rear wall of the dormer, leaving a
    large area of blank rear dormer wall, would serve to draw attention to the
    discordant and disproportionately large addition to the rear of the roof, which
    would not respect the character and appearance of the rear elevation of the
    property.
18. As a result, the proposed rear dormer would appear as a bulky, top-heavy and
    discordant addition to the rear roof slope, which would be visible from the public
    realm in the service road and from neighbouring properties. It would draw the eye
    and appear at odds with the consistent roofscape which is characteristic of the
    terrace as a whole.
19. Accordingly, I find that the appeal scheme would add an excessively large and
    visually over-dominant addition to the host property and the terrace within which it
    lies. It would be at odds with, and visually overwhelm the original building form, as
    well as resulting in a detrimental erosion of the visual appreciation of some of the
    defining architectural features of the appeal property and the wider terrace.
20. I acknowledge the presence of rear flat-roofed dormers nearby at Nos.18 and 20
     Clarence Road. The Council has confirmed that approval of the former in
     2010 pre-dated current local and national planning policy and the ACCACAMP,
     and that approval of the latter in 2026 took account of the existence of the former
     on the neighbouring property.
21. I saw during my site visit that these structures are not directly comparable with the
    appeal scheme. They occupy a smaller percentage of the original rear roof slopes
    of their respective host properties than that proposed by the appeal scheme, and
    they are sited on the rear of semi-detached houses which have a different rear
    dwelling design to that of the appeal property.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010314




22. Moreover, in terms of their location, these dormers are distinctly geographically
    separate from the differently designed terraces of properties to their north, within
    which the appeal site lies. As such, the architectural integrity and consistency of
    the rear roof slope character of these terraces has not been harmed by the
    existing dormers.

23. The appellant has also drawn my attention to the existence of rear dormers at
    Nos. 12, 18 and 32 Salterns Road. Whilst these properties also lie within
    Character Area 3 of the ACCA, they are in a different road to the appeal
    site. Moreover, there is no substantive evidence before me that these structures
    are directly comparable to the appeal scheme in respect of their design and
    relationship to their host properties. Also, I am not aware of the particular
    circumstances relating to their planning status, and it is not before me to
    comment on the appropriateness of these or otherwise.

24. In any event, the fact that apparently similar dormers may have been permitted in
    a different road, is not a reason, on its own, to allow unacceptable development. I
    have considered the appeal on its individual planning merits, and within the
    context and appearance of the existing building and the immediate locality. I have
    also taken account that the evidence before me, based on the ACCACAMP and
    my site visit, is that rear dormers are not a common feature of this part of the
    conservation area.

25. I acknowledge that the appeal property benefits from an extant permission1
     which enables the building of rear dormers, and I accept that there is no in-
     principle objection to converting the loft space into living accommodation.
     However, as the approved scheme relates to a significantly different proposal
     involving 2 small, pitched roof dormers which do not raise the same objections as
     the current appeal scheme, the extant permission does not justify allowing the
     current proposal and does not alter my above conclusions in respect of the main
     issue.

26. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude that the appeal proposal would
    materially harm the character and appearance of the host property and the wider
    ACCA. It would therefore be contrary to Policies PP27 and PP30 of the Poole
    Local Plan (2018), in so much as these policies, amongst other things, seek to
    ensure that new developments, including extensions, are well-designed, respect
    and relate to the existing building and maintain or enhance any details that
    contribute positively to local character, and that developments within conservation
    areas enhance or better reveal the significance and value of the site within the
    street scene and wider setting.

27. For similar reasons, the proposal would also be contrary to the social and
    environmental objectives of the Framework which, respectively, amongst other
    things, seek to foster well-designed and beautiful places, and protect and enhance
    our historic environment.




1
    LPA Ref 08/25717/000F


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010314


Heritage Balance

28. The statutory duty in Section 72 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
    Conservation Areas) Act 1990 is a matter of considerable importance and weight.
    In terms of the advice in Policy HE5 of the Framework, the harm to the ACCA
    would not be substantial, given the relatively modest scale of the scheme which
    relates to an extension to a single dwelling within the wider conservation area and
    the limited wider visibility of much of the scheme.

29. Consequently, Policy HE6 of the Framework sets out the need to address the
    harm in a balanced manner against any public benefits associated with the
    proposal. In doing so, however, Policy HE6 sets out that when considering the
    potential effect of a development proposal on the significance of a designated
    heritage asset, substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation
    irrespective of whether any potential effect amounts to a positive effect, harm,
    substantial harm, or total loss of its significance.

30. In this instance, whilst the proposal would improve the living conditions of the
    occupiers, this is not a public benefit, and no public benefits have been put
    forward in respect of the development to weigh against the harm.
Conclusion
31. The proposal would conflict with the development plan taken as a whole, and there
    are no material considerations, including the Framework, that indicate that a
    decision should be made other than in accordance with the development plan.
32. Therefore, for the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be
    dismissed.

S Leonard
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
