Appeal Decision
Hearing held on 25 August 2026
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by M Clowes BA (Hons) MCD PG CERT (Arch Con) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22nd September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6010035
Victoria Vaults, 47 - 49 Nunnery Lane, York YO23 1AB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for outline
     planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Nabeel Hanif [The Vaults (York)] against the City of York Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01690/FUL.
•    The development proposed is the conversion of Victoria Vaults public house into 3 townhouses.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2.     Prior to the Hearing, an application for costs was made by Mr Nabeel Hanif [The
       Vaults (York)] against the City of York Council. This application is the subject of a
       separate decision.
Preliminary Matters and Main Issues
3.     The address of the appeal site in the banner heading above follows agreement of
       the parties at the Hearing that it accurately identifies the site location.
4.     The Hearing dealt simultaneously with the companion appeal under reference
       6011055. Whilst there are common themes between the appeals, they concern
       different proposals and planning considerations. For clarity, I have issued separate
       decisions.
5.     The Council submitted late evidence during the Hearing confirming that the appeal
       site had been listed as an Asset of Community Value (ACV) on 11 August 2026.
       The appellant had already notified me of such in writing prior to the Hearing and
       the acceptance of this information did not therefore prejudice any party.
6.     A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
       17 August 2026 during the appeal process. Both parties were given the
       opportunity to comment on the implications of the revision in relation to the
       proposal, such that I am satisfied that no prejudice has occurred.
7.     The appeal is against the Council’s failure to determine the planning application
       within the relevant statutory timeframe. I have had regard to the Council’s
       statement which provides clarity in terms of the reasons the Council would have



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010035


       refused planning permission for the proposed development, had it been able to do
       so.
8.     Having regard to the written evidence and the discussions at the Hearing, the main
       issues are, i) whether the proposed residential development would result in the
       loss of a community facility, cultural venue and employment generating use; and if
       so, ii) whether that loss would be justified having regard to the evidence of viability
       and marketing and to the development plan and national planning policy.
Reasons
Community Facility
9.     The Victoria Vaults comprises a 2-storey building fronting Nunnery Lane within
       York City Centre, just outside of the historic walls. The parties disagree on the
       proper characterisation of the existing use. Nonetheless, it was last operated as a
       public house/live music venue with accommodation above. Following the
       appellant’s purchase of the appeal site, the commercial use ceased and the first
       floor is currently rented out as a short-term holiday let.
10. Policy HW1 of the City of York Local Plan (CYLP) 2025, seeks to protect existing
    community facilities, or facilities last used for community purposes [my emphasis].
    Policy D3 seeks to sustain, enhance and add value to York's cultural character
    and supports development that does not cause the loss of cultural facilities,
    activities, services, venues or spaces that deliver cultural opportunities. Together,
    these policies reflect the importance attached by the development plan to the
    retention of facilities which contribute to community life, social interaction and
    cultural wellbeing. In addition, Policy EC2 seeks to prevent the loss of existing
    employment land subject to compliance with specific criteria. I will return to this
    matter later in my decision.
11. As discussed above, Policy HW1 seeks to protect community facilities and permits
    their loss only where specific criteria are satisfied. The objectives of the policy are
    therefore consistent with Policy HC6 of the revised Framework, which seeks to
    guard against the unnecessary loss of valued community facilities and services.
    Consequently, I afford substantial weight to Policy HW1.
12. There is no dispute that the appeal building historically operated as a public house.
    Whilst the appellant is entitled to place weight on the Council's earlier decision to
    remove the appeal site from the ACV register in November 2025, that position has
    subsequently been reversed by the re-listing of the property as an ACV prior to the
    Hearing. The evidence before me does not include the detailed assessments
    which informed either ACV conclusion. I am aware that the appellant has
    requested a review of the most recent listing decision. Nonetheless, the appeal
    site remains listed as an ACV at the time of my determination of this appeal.
13. In any event, the issue before me is not whether the property satisfies the statutory
    tests for inclusion on the ACV register, but whether the proposal complies with
    Policy HW1 of the CYLP. The ACV regime and the planning system serve different
    purposes and apply different statutory and policy tests. Policy HW1 is not
    restricted to assets listed as ACVs, nor does it provide that a facility ceases to be a
    community facility once removed from the register. Rather, it applies more broadly
    to existing and recently used community facilities, with public houses expressly
    identified within the supporting text as an example of such facilities.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010035


14. Accordingly, whilst I have taken both the de-listing and subsequent re-listing into
    account as material considerations, neither is determinative of whether the appeal
    site should be regarded as a community facility for the purposes of Policy HW1.
    My conclusion derives from the nature of the use that was being undertaken at the
    appeal site immediately prior to its closure, irrespective of its status under the
    separate ACV regime. That is a public house that provided a venue for social
    interaction and community activity as clearly expressed in the representations of
    interested parties.
Cultural Venue
15. The appellant submits that no separate planning permission exists for the use of
    the appeal site as a music venue and that it should only be considered as a public
    house. In this regard, he contends that it should not be viewed as a cultural facility.
16. The Council contend that the appeal site functioned as both a public house and a
    dedicated live music venue before its closure. The premises hosted regular
    ticketed live music events 3 nights per week and contained a dedicated stage
    area, together with sound and lighting equipment associated with such events. I
    have heard and read persuasive evidence from interested parties that the venue
    provided opportunities for local and emerging musicians (particularly bands rather
    than soloists), promoters, sound technicians and other creative practitioners to
    develop and showcase their skills before live audiences, in a relatively small
    venue. It also hosted national and international touring bands and in doing so, it
    attracted visitors from a wider area than the local catchment alone.
17. Detailed representations from individuals and local groups including York Music
    Venue Network, The Campaign for Real Ale (CAMRA), the Campaign for Pubs
    and Clements Hall Local History Group, consistently describe the premises as an
    important and dedicated venue for live music, that was publicly recognised as part
    of York's grassroots music infrastructure. In this regard, I note that it received
    support through the Government's Cultural Recovery Fund. It was also the
    recipient of funding from the City of York Council’s grassroots venue support
    grants. Whilst not determinative, the award of specific cultural funding lends
    support to the view that the premises performed an established cultural function in
    addition to its role as a public house.
18. I acknowledge that the appellant has identified a large number of venues in York
    (circa 40) that are said to host live music. However, the Council and interested
    party evidence indicates that very few offer a comparative grassroots music
    function due to occupancy levels, lack of dedicated performance space, frequency
    of events and lack of ticketing. Whilst many of those venues provide some form of
    live music at different intervals, their primary function is as food and/or drink
    establishments, supplemented by occasional open-mic or live music events, rather
    than a regular programme of ticketed performances.
19. The evidence before me, including discussions at the Hearing, indicates that the
    Victoria Vaults was one of only 2 such premises for dedicated live music within the
    city centre, the other being The Crescent. However, the Crescent is understood to
    be a larger venue with a capacity of around 300 people. The Fulford Arms was
    also discussed at the Hearing, but it is located outside of the city centre. In
    addition, there was no conclusive evidence that the FortyFive Vinyl Café performs
    a similar role as a dedicated live music venue with specialist facilities and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010035


       performance space suitable for full bands, such that I am unable to consider it
       comparable.
20. Even if some of the venues identified by the appellant could be regarded as
    providing a broadly similar offer, they amount to no more than a very small number
    of alternatives. I am therefore satisfied that the Victoria Vaults fulfilled a specific
    and relatively uncommon role within York's grassroots music scene, and that there
    is insufficient alternative provision of this particular type of cultural venue within the
    local area to justify its loss. Whether or not the premises was operating beyond its
    licensed capacity and lawful planning use, I find that it made a meaningful
    contribution to York's cultural life and possessed a level of cultural value beyond
    that normally associated with a public house alone. In reaching this view, I note
    that at the Hearing Mr Waterhouse retracted the conclusion within the Stapleton
    Waterhouse Report that the loss of Victoria Vaults as a live music venue would not
    represent a major loss to York's cultural provision, explaining that he was not
    qualified to make such an assessment. I therefore attach little weight to that
    particular conclusion of the report.
21. It is not for me in considering this S78 appeal to determine the lawful use of the
    appeal site. Nor is it necessary to reach a definitive conclusion regarding the
    precise planning status of the music-related activities undertaken from the
    premises. Taking all of the information presented in the round, I am satisfied that
    whilst the Victoria Vaults operated as a public house, it also functioned as a venue
    that delivered cultural opportunities through the provision of live music events,
    thereby engaging the objectives of Policy D3.
22. Furthermore, Policy HC6 of the Framework expressly identifies both public houses
    and cultural venues as examples of key community facilities. The dual function of
    the appeal site as a public house and venue for live music therefore reinforces,
    rather than undermines the conclusion that the objectives of both Policies HW1
    and D3 are relevant to the determination of the appeal.
23. It follows that the proposed conversion and extension of the appeal building into 3
    townhouses would result in the loss of a community facility and cultural venue.
Whether the Loss is Justified
24. Criteria iv) of Policy HW1 would allow the loss of a commercial community facility
    where evidence is provided demonstrating that the facility is no longer financially
    viable with no market interest. Paragraph 6.10 of the supporting text explains that
    evidence of marketing for a minimum of 2 years without success will be required,
    together with a marketing report and an open book-based viability appraisal,
    demonstrating that the facility is not viable and could not reasonably be made so.
    Though not a requirement of the policy itself, the explanatory text nonetheless sets
    out the type of evidence considered necessary to demonstrate policy compliance.
25. In terms of viability, the appellant relies on a report produced by Nabarro McAllister
    and the trading experience of the most recent venue operator. The evidence
    indicates that the business experienced trading losses, required personal
    injections of capital and faced difficult trading conditions. Information has also
    been provided regarding operating costs associated with the venue and the
    experiences of the previous operator, albeit this is limited in scope. The Nabarro
    McAllister report concludes that the premises are not financially viable as a public


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010035


       house and estimates that substantial investment would be required to return the
       ground floor to an operational condition.
26. The evidence falls short of constituting the open book viability appraisal anticipated
    by the supporting text to Policy HW1. Whilst it demonstrates that the most recent
    operation of the venue was unsuccessful, I am not persuaded that it demonstrates
    that the use itself could not reasonably be made viable. Little evidence has been
    provided regarding whether the venue could be made viable under a different
    ownership structure, management approach or business model, nor has any
    benchmarking been undertaken against comparable venues. Consequently, it is
    unclear why the Nabarro McAllister report concludes that the premises are
    inherently unviable as a public house and live music venue, rather than
    demonstrating that the previous business was unsuccessful. Similarly, the
    suggested refurbishment cost of £250,000 is unsupported by any detailed
    calculations or cost evidence.
27. A number of interested parties contend the venue became increasingly underused
    and was only open intermittently before the appellant took possession. Whilst
    understanding the difficulties associated with operating such uses viably, I cannot
    confidently conclude that the poor financial performance was attributable to the
    use itself being incapable of operating viably in this location, rather than the
    manner in which the previous business was operated and managed.
28. Turning to the marketing evidence, I have had regard to both the Carter Towler
    and Barry Crux exercises. The Carter Towler particulars marketed the property not
    only as a public house and music venue, but also as an ‘excellent medium term
    redevelopment opportunity.’ A purchase resulted from that exercise, namely by the
    appellant, who explained at the Hearing that the property was acquired as an
    investment opportunity. Whilst the eventual sale price was below the original
    asking price, there is no persuasive evidence before me that the agreed figure
    represented an appropriate market value for the continuation of the existing use,
    rather than reflecting, at least in part, the site's redevelopment potential.
29. The subsequent Barry Crux exercise took a different approach. By that stage the
    first-floor accommodation had been refurbished as a short-term holiday let and
    excluded from the letting particulars, with only the ground floor being marketed.
    The appellant contends that the first floor has long been a separate flat. However,
    irrespective of its precise planning status, the evidence indicates that the venue
    previously operated with residential accommodation above. The Carter Towler
    particulars marketed the whole property, including the first-floor accommodation,
    and the Nabarro McAllister report similarly refers to the premises as a public house
    with a manager's flat above. The Barry Crux exercise therefore tested the market
    for occupation of the ground floor alone, rather than for the venue in the form in
    which it had most recently operated.
30. This distinction is important because the evidence suggests that at least some
    prospective operators considered the availability of the upper floors to be material
    to their interest in the property. Stapleton Waterhouse similarly identified the
    exclusion of the flat as a potential issue when assessing future operation of the
    premises as a public house and music venue.
31. Taken together, the two marketing exercises provide useful evidence regarding
    demand for the premises. However, they do not demonstrate that the property was


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010035


       marketed solely for continuation of its established use as a public house and live
       music venue with accommodation above, or that it was consistently valued by
       reference to that use. Stapleton Waterhouse identified concerns that the valuation
       was high and that further marketing of the property as a whole would be
       appropriate in order to fully test the market. The existence of some interest in the
       property, notwithstanding the asking price, does not demonstrate that the valuation
       was appropriate or that all potential demand had been captured.
32. Even if that was not the case, I am not persuaded that the evidence demonstrates
    an absence of market interest. The Barry Crux marketing exercise generated a
    number of enquiries and viewings, including interest from parties wishing to
    continue public house, hospitality and music-related uses. Whilst they did not lead
    to funded offers, they are nevertheless indicative of ongoing market interest in the
    facility. Furthermore, the absence of the first-floor accommodation from the
    marketing exercise appears to have reduced interest from at least some
    prospective operators. Consequently, I cannot be satisfied that the marketing
    undertaken would necessarily have identified all potential interest in retaining the
    facility in its established form.
33. I acknowledge that the Framework’s recent revision post-dates the adoption of the
    local plan. Policy HC6 resists the loss of key community facilities and public
    service infrastructure, unless amongst other things, it can be demonstrated that
    there is no reasonable prospect of the use being retained. In the case of public
    houses, the policy states that evidence should be provided demonstrating that
    reasonable steps have been taken to market the property for its existing use [my
    emphasis] without success for a period of at least 12 months. This differs from the
    supporting text to Policy HW1 of the CYLP which states a minimum of 2 years
    marketing.
34. I am not convinced by the Council’s position that the appeal site ceases to be a
    public house for the purpose of the Framework simply because the venue is also
    considered to be a cultural venue in this instance. Importantly, Policy HC6 of the
    Framework treats marketing as evidence relevant as to whether there is a
    reasonable prospect of retention, rather than establishing a determinative test
    based solely upon the passage of a specified period of time. Any tension between
    the Framework and Policy HW1 relates principally to the guidance contained within
    the supporting text, rather than the operative wording of the policy itself.
35. In any event, I do not consider it necessary in this case to reach a definitive
    conclusion regarding the weight to be attached to the 2-year marketing expectation
    in the supporting text, nor to determine whether the more recent 12-month period
    in the Framework alters that position. This is because in both policies, the
    marketing periods are evidential rather than determinative.
36. At the Hearing Mr Waterhouse was clear that the only way to fully expose the
    appeal site to market is to offer the whole property for sale and to let, based on a
    valuation of the existing use only. That has not occurred, irrespective of the
    duration of the marketing to date. My conclusions do not turn on the duration of the
    marketing alone. Rather, the central question is whether the evidence
    demonstrates that there is no reasonable prospect of the facility being retained. I
    have found that not to be the case.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6010035


Employment Use
37. There is no dispute that the former use generated employment, both directly
    through the operation of the premises and more broadly through the supply chain
    in connection with the music activities undertaken there. Redevelopment for
    housing would result in the loss of an employment-generating use.
38. The appellant contends that the operation of a music venue is incompatible with
    surrounding residential uses. Reliance is placed on the existence of nearby
    housing, the history of noise complaints and the observations of Stapleton
    Waterhouse regarding the difficulties of operating a music venue beneath
    residential accommodation.
39. I have carefully considered these submissions. However, the evidence does not
    persuade me that the former use was inherently incompatible with its
    surroundings. The site operated as a public house for 160 years and a music
    venue for a considerable period within an established mixed urban environment.
    The Council's Public Protection Team records only sporadic complaints regarding
    noise over an extended period and confirms that no noise abatement notice was
    served. The evidence also indicates that mitigation works were undertaken and
    that later issues largely related to operational matters such as doors being left
    open.
40. I acknowledge Stapleton Waterhouse's conclusion that the separate occupation of
    the first-floor accommodation would create difficulties for the operation of a future
    music venue. However, that observation principally concerns the circumstances
    arising from the subsequent separation and refurbishment of the first-floor
    accommodation, rather than demonstrating that the historic use of the building
    itself was incompatible with neighbouring land uses.
41. Nor am I persuaded that the evidence demonstrates that the existing use lacks
    market attractiveness or is incapable of supporting a viable commercial business.
    For the reasons set out above in relation to Policy HW1, the viability evidence
    before me is limited, and the marketing undertaken demonstrates some continuing
    interest in occupation of the premises for hospitality and music-related uses. Whilst
    that interest did not culminate in a completed transaction, it nevertheless weighs
    against a conclusion that the existing use is demonstrably unviable or unattractive
    to the market.
42. Accordingly, whilst I accept that the proposal would not result in the loss of an
    employment site that is necessary to meet wider employment land requirements
    during the plan period, I am not satisfied that the appellant has demonstrated that
    the existing use is no longer viable in terms of market attractiveness, business
    operations, condition or compatibility with adjacent uses. Consequently, the
    proposal conflicts with criterion i) of Policy EC2.
Conclusion
43. Drawing these matters together, I find that the Victoria Vaults functioned as both a
    community facility and cultural venue immediately prior to its closure. The
    proposed residential development would therefore result in the loss of a
    community facility for the purposes of Policy HW1 and a cultural venue in respect
    of Policy D3. It would also result in the loss of an employment-generating use for
    the purposes of Policy EC2.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6010035


44. I have carefully considered the viability and marketing evidence submitted in
    support of the proposal. Whilst the most recent operation of the venue was
    commercially unsuccessful, I am not satisfied that the evidence demonstrates that
    the facility could not reasonably be made viable, nor that there is no reasonable
    prospect of its retention having regard to the market interest identified.
    Consequently, I find that the requirements of Policy HW1(iv) have not been met.
45. Whilst Policies D3 and HW1 address different aspects of the appeal proposal,
    there is a clear overlap between them in this case. Having found that the evidence
    does not satisfactorily justify the loss of the community facility, I am likewise not
    persuaded that sufficient justification has been provided for the loss of the cultural
    venue. I therefore find conflict with Policy D3. For similar reasons, I further find that
    it has not been demonstrated that the existing use is unviable in terms of market
    attractiveness, business operations, condition or compatibility with adjacent uses
    so as to justify the loss of employment land under Policy EC2.
46. Consequently, I find that the appellant has failed to demonstrate that the loss of
    the community facility, cultural venue and employment-generating use would be
    justified. A substantial adverse effect would ensue. The proposal would therefore
    conflict with Policies HW1(iv), D3 and EC2 of the CYLP. In reaching that
    conclusion, I find that the proposal would conflict with Policy HW1(iv) irrespective
    of whether the relevant marketing benchmark is 12 months or 2 years. The
    proposal would also conflict with Policy HC6 of the Framework and Policy E2,
    which seeks to support economic growth by ensuring the availability of land and
    premises to meet the needs of businesses and employment-generating activities.
Other Matters
Heritage Assets
47. The appeal site lies immediately adjacent to, but outside, the Central Historic Core
    Conservation Area (CHCCA). The significance of the CHCCA derives from the
    exceptional survival of York's historic urban form, its medieval street pattern, the
    prevalence of historic buildings of varying periods and styles, the relationship
    between buildings, streets and spaces, and the contribution of landmark heritage
    assets including, but not limited to, the City Walls and York Minster. The
    contribution made by the appeal site to the significance of the CHCCA is therefore
    primarily derived from its role within the surrounding townscape and urban context.
48. The appeal site is also located within the setting of the Grade I listed and
    Scheduled Ancient Monument (SAM) City Walls including Victoria Bar1, and the
    Grade II listed The Moat House opposite2. The significance of the SAM and listed
    building comprising the City Walls and Victoria Bar derives principally from its
    exceptional evidential, historic and architectural value as one of the most complete
    surviving medieval town defences in England. The monument provides tangible
    evidence of York's historic development, illustrates the evolution of the city's
    fortifications over many centuries and remains an important landmark contributing
    to the city's identity and historic character. Its significance is also derived from its
    prominence within the townscape and the ability to appreciate the monument as
    part of the historic approach to the city.


1
    List Entry No 1259262.
2
    List Entry No 1257034.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6010035


49. The significance of The Moat House derives from its special architectural and
    historic interest as a mid-Victorian building and its contribution to the historic
    townscape of Nunnery Lane.
50. Whilst the appeal site does not form part of the SAM, it lies within the urban
    environment in which the City Walls, Victoria Bar and The Moat House are
    experienced. Its contribution to significance is therefore primarily contextual,
    arising from its role within the surrounding townscape rather than through any
    direct historical or functional relationship with the designated heritage assets.
51. The proposal would retain the existing building, and the extension would be of an
    appropriate design and materials located to the rear. The principal frontage would
    remain largely unchanged, and the alterations would be read in the context of the
    existing urban streetscape characterised by a variety of building forms and later
    alterations. In this regard, the relationship with the designated heritage assets
    would remain neutral post-development.
52. Having regard to the scale, siting and design of the proposed development, I find
    that it would preserve the significance of the SAM and the settings of the listed City
    Walls and Victoria Bar, and The Moat House. The proposal would preserve the
    contribution that the appeal site presently makes to the setting of the CHCCA.
    Consequently, the proposal would accord with Policies D4 and D5 of the CYLP. In
    reaching this conclusion, I have had special regard to the desirability of preserving
    the setting of the listed buildings, as required by section 66(1) of the Planning
    (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990.
Other Decisions
53. I have had regard to the previous appeal decisions referred to by the appellant
    including the 2 Jubilee decisions. In the 2022 appeal3 the ground floor public
    house was being retained with residential accommodation above. It did not
    therefore result in the loss of community facilities.
54. Whilst there are similarities with the appeal proposal in the 20254 Jubilee case, the
    property had been vacant and marketed for a substantial period. The Inspector
    was satisfied having regard to the particular viability and marketing evidence
    before him, including extensive marketing over a prolonged period and his finding
    that there was no compelling evidence of meaningful market interest in the
    continued operation of a public house from the site. Moreover, the Jubilee did not
    perform the same established cultural function as I have found existed at the
    Victoria Vaults. Consequently, whilst I have had regard to the Jubilee decisions,
    they do not alter my conclusions in the circumstances of this appeal.
55. The Bay Horse decision concerned a different proposal relating to the change of
    use of a pub with ancillary café to a full café use with flats above5. Policy HW1 of
    the CYLP was given limited weight as the plan had not been adopted and was
    subject to modifications following examination. The Inspector determined that the
    area was lacking a coffee shop and that it could be considered as a community
    facility such that there would be no loss overall. That is not the case here given
    that the proposal would remove the community facility and cultural venue.


3
  Appeal Decision APP/C2741/W/21/3285000.
4
  Appeal reference APP/C2741/W/25/3362935.
5
  Appeal reference APP/C2741/W/23/3333593.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     9
Appeal Decision 6010035


56. Likewise, the Magnet approval arose in a different policy context where the main
    issue related to whether the harm arising from the demolition of a Non-Designated
    Heritage Asset would be outweighed by the benefits of the scheme, rather than
    whether the loss of a community use was acceptable6.
57. I have had regard to the consistency principle arising from North Wiltshire DC v
    Secretary of State for the Environment. However, consistency does not require
    identical outcomes where the evidence and circumstances differ. Whilst I have
    carefully considered the appeal decisions relied upon by the appellant, my findings
    are based on the particular evidence before me. In this case that is regarding the
    role of the Victoria Vaults, the viability information submitted, the marketing
    undertaken and the application of policies within the development plan. The
    previous appeal decisions do not affect my findings.
Other Considerations
58. I have given due consideration to all of the representations submitted in support of
    and in opposition to the proposal. The existence of support does not, in itself,
    indicate an absence of harm and I have discussed the reasons for my findings in
    respect of the community, cultural and employment functions of the appeal site
    above. I will discuss the benefits of the scheme in the planning balance section
    below. I am also aware that there are numerous objections to the proposal
    indicating a substantial degree of public support for the retention of the existing
    use.
59. The appellant also raised concerns regarding the conduct and involvement of
    certain individuals in the consideration of the application. However, this is a matter
    for the parties involved. My conclusions are based upon my own independent
    assessment of the planning merits of the appeal.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
60. The Council's comments on the revised Framework focused principally on conflict
    with Policy HC67. However, Policy S4 requires a balancing exercise between the
    benefits of development within a settlement and any adverse effects. Accordingly, I
    have undertaken my own assessment of the benefits and harms of the proposal
    having regard to the Framework as a whole.
61. Policy S4 of the Framework establishes a presumption that development
    proposals within settlements should be approved, unless the benefits of doing so
    would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against
    the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
62. The appeal site occupies a sustainable location close to services, facilities and
    public transport opportunities within the city centre of York. The proposal would
    result in the efficient reuse and remodelling of a previously developed site within a
    settlement for housing. I acknowledge that the Government attaches significant
    importance to boosting the supply of homes. However, there is agreement that the
    Council is currently able to demonstrate a 5-year housing land supply. If the
    appellant’s assertion that the first-floor flat has always been a separate unit of
    accommodation were correct, the proposal would result in the net gain of 2, rather
    than 3 dwellings, as suggested by the appellant. Even taking the appellant’s case
6
    Appeal reference APP/C2741/W/22/3305435.
7
    With reference to the Council’s email to the Inspectorate dated 9 September 2026.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                   10
Appeal Decision 6010035


         at its highest, the contribution to housing supply would be modest. Consequently, I
         attach moderate positive weight to these benefits.
63. I have found that the proposal would preserve the significance of the SAM and the
    setting of the listed buildings and would not harm the CCHCA through
    development within its setting. Accordingly, no heritage harm would arise, and this
    matter weighs neither for, nor against, the proposal.
64. Against the benefits, I have found that the proposal would result in the unjustified
    loss of an important community facility, cultural venue and employment-generating
    use. Policy HC6 of the Framework affords protection to such uses and seeks to
    resist their loss unless specified criteria are satisfied. I have had regard to the
    appellant's submissions that there is no reasonable prospect of the existing use
    being retained and that adequate alternative provision exists elsewhere 8.
    However, for the reasons set out above, I am not satisfied that the appellant has
    demonstrated that the existing use could not reasonably be made viable, that there
    is no market interest in its continued operation, or that sufficient alternative
    provision exists for the particular community and cultural functions undertaken by
    the appeal site. Consequently, I find that the requirements of Policy HC6 have not
    been met and that the proposal would conflict with that policy.
65. The proposal would also result in the unjustified loss of employment-generating
    use, which would be at odds with the Framework's objective of supporting a strong
    and productive economy. Furthermore, there is no evidence before me that the
    safeguarding of this community, cultural and employment use is no longer
    appropriate, or that there is no reasonable prospect of the existing use being
    retained. In this regard, the proposal would give rise to the type of substantial
    adverse impact referred to in Policy S4(2)(a)(i) of the Framework. I therefore
    attach substantial weight to the adverse effects.
66. Taking all matters into account, I conclude that the substantial adverse impact of
    the proposal would substantially outweigh the moderate benefits arising from the
    delivery of housing and the reuse of a previously developed site. Accordingly,
    having applied Policy S4 of the Framework, I find that it does not indicate that
    planning permission should be granted.
67. The proposal would therefore conflict with the development plan and there are no
    material considerations, including the approach of the Framework, that indicate a
    decision should be made other than in accordance with it. Accordingly, the appeal
    is dismissed.

M Clowes
INSPECTOR




8
    Inclusive of the appellant’s email dated 10 September 2026 regarding the revised Framework.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  11
Appeal Decision 6010035



                                                APPEARANCES


FOR THE APPELLANT:

Nabeel Hanif                           Appellant and Owner

Tanveer Hussain                        Owner



FOR THE LOCAL PLANNING AUTHORITY:

Gareth Arnold                                  Development Manager

Sophie Prendergast                             Planning Officer

David Waterhouse                               Stapleton Waterhouse Ltd




INTERESTED PARTIES:

Cllr Peter Kilbane                             Ward Councillor for Micklegate and
                                               Executive Member for Economy and Culture

Mr Robinson                                    On behalf of York Music Venue Network




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           12
