Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 24 August 2026
by T Bennett BA(Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 15 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010520
Harefield Grove, Rickmansworth Road, Harefield UB9 6JY
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Stevens against the decision of the Council of the London
       Borough of Hillingdon.
•      The application Ref is 70328/APP/2023/1772.
•      The development proposed is described as “Retrospective change of use from - This application
       relates to three existing timber clad barns which were originally used as chicken sheds and for
       storage and the change of use of the sheds for use as a dog training centre”.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       The proposal is retrospective with the change of use having already commenced.
3.       The appellant originally submitted a Noise Assessment as part of the original
         application; however, concerns were raised regarding its robustness. In response,
         as part of this appeal, the appellant has submitted a revised Noise Assessment1
         (NA). The Council and interested parties have had the opportunity to comment on
         this as part of the appeal process and I am satisfied accepting it would not result in
         any prejudice to such parties. Consequently, and given it does not fundamentally
         alter the appeal proposal, I have accepted the revised NA and determined the
         appeal on this basis.
4.       The description of development refers only to the change of use of the chicken
         sheds. However, from the site block plan and submissions, it is apparent that the
         change of use also relates to the material change of use of the fields to the north
         and west of the chicken sheds for purposes associated with the dog training centre
         through the subdivision into four smaller recreational plots, the erection of post and
         mesh fencing and laying of hardstanding. I have determined the appeal on this
         basis.
5.       The appellants within their appeal statement refer to the neighbouring property as
         Orchard Cottage. However, it is Cottage House that is detailed on the decision
         notice and which is annotated on the site location plan and referred to within the
         NA. I am therefore satisfied that this is an error within the appeal statement and I
         have determined the appeal on the basis that the nearest neighbouring property is
         Cottage House and refer to it as such in the decision.

1
    24 Acoustics Technical Report: R11754-1 Rev 0

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010520


6. On 17 August 2026, the Government published a revised National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework). This latest version of the Framework has introduced
   plan-making and national decision-making policies. It is effective from the day of
   publication. The main parties have had an opportunity to consider the relevance of
   the Framework to their case. I have considered any comments made in the
   determination of this appeal.
Main Issue
7.       The main issue is the effect of the development on the living conditions of the
         future occupiers of Cottage House with regard to any noise and disturbance.
Reasons
8.       The proposal seeks to use the site as a dog training and daycare facility. The
         operating hours are stated to be between 7am – 6pm Monday to Friday with dog
         training taking place on Saturdays between 10am – 2pm. A maximum of 60 dogs
         are stated to be on site at any one time. Whilst the operating hours and numbers
         of dogs differ from the information submitted on the application form, the hours and
         dog numbers could be conditioned, in any approval.
9.       The information suggests that up to 30 dogs are able to play outside between the
         hours of 9am – 4pm in small groups, with a ratio of 10 dogs to 1 member of staff.
         No dogs or staff remain overnight at the facility.
10. The appeal site is discretely located, accessed via a gated track off
    Rickmansworth Road, with limited visibility from public vantage points. The training
    field is well contained, bound by mature trees on three sides with existing buildings
    screening it to the south.
11. The site is a former chicken farm and consists of a carpark, a large training field
    split into 4 smaller training fields and three former chicken sheds, two of which
    have been converted into dog care facilities.
12. There are existing commercial uses nearby. The appellant is of the view that
    noise emanating from these uses is not of a magnitude that causes disturbance.
    Indeed, on my visit, whilst only a snapshot in time, I observed that the area was
    relatively quiet.
13. To the north of the appeal site, sitting within a rural woodland setting, is Harefield
    Grove. This comprises a large Grade II manor house. It is not currently in
    residential use, but there is an extant permission2 for its conversion into around 15
    residential units and a live application awaiting determination for redevelopment
    works and new dwellings. This property is set approximately 100 metres away
    from the shared boundary with the appeal site. The Council consider that at this
    distance, any noise emanating from the appeal site would not be of a level that
    would cause disturbance to future occupiers.
14. Also within the grounds of Harefield Grove is Cottage House. This property is
    located approximately 8 metres from the boundary with the application site which
    borders the field where dog training and daycare takes place. Cottage House is
    currently derelict but has an existing lawful residential use and is to be retained as
    part of the extant permission at Harefield Grove. Therefore, Cottage House could

2
    Ref: 28301/APP/2013/3104


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010520


       be occupied in the future and given the hours of operation and maximum number
       of dogs that could be present, consideration must therefore be had to the impact of
       the proposal on the living conditions of any future occupants.
15. The primary concern is with regards to noise from the barking of dogs which could
    occur in the former chicken sheds and in the training field.
16. There is no recognised British Standard or other formal guidance for the
    assessment of noise from barking dogs. The revised NA has been prepared by a
    professional consultant and has adopted the widely used methodology advocated
    by South Holland District Council Supplementary Planning Document (SHSPD)
    which compares the average noise levels from dogs with existing background
    noise levels at the nearest residential property. It is noted that the SHSPD is
    intended for assessing noise from boarding and breeding kennels which are
    considered to be typically louder than daycare facilities which only operate during
    daytime hours. The guidance recommends that the noise level from dogs barking
    does not exceed the background noise levels.
17. The NA has calculated, using measured background and source noise levels, the
    noise levels experienced at Cottage House from dogs barking in three different
    scenarios, firstly noise from the barn building during a weekday daytime, secondly
    noise from the training fields during a weekday daytime and lastly noise from the
    training fields during a Saturday daytime. The table below shows the difference
    between background noise and noise at the receptor.

                                           Scenario                              Difference
          Weekday Daytime Noise Level (07.00 to 18.00 hours) – Barn building      -16 dBA
          Weekday Daytime Noise Level (07.00 to 18.00 hours) – Training field       0 dB
          Saturday Daytime Noise Level (10.00 to 14.00 hours) – Training field     -5 dBA

18. In determining the results, the NA explains that the calculations have factored in
    acoustic screening in the form of a 1.8 metre timber fence along the northern
    boundary between the training field and Cottage House, which is stated to provide
    a 10dB reduction in noise.
19. Based on the results, the NA concludes that with the mitigation, the noise arising
    from the change of use would not have a significant observed adverse effect on
    the living conditions of future occupiers at the nearest neighbouring property.
    However, my attention has been drawn to an acoustic review of the submitted NA
    by MZA Acoustics on behalf of Savills who are involved with the planning
    applications at Harefield Grove.
20. MZA Acoustics highlight that although the SHSPD is widely used, it uses the
    average noise level from dogs and does not account for the inherent attention
    catching nature of dog barking. They draw my attention to draft guidance produced
    by the Association of Noise Consultants which recommends corrections for the
    attention catching nature of dogs for impulsivity (between +3 and +9 dB) and for
    intermittency (+3dB) and therefore the subjective impact could increase by up to
    +12dB. Although this is a draft document and carries limited weight in itself, it
    nevertheless raises pertinent matters.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
Appeal Decision 6010520


21. I acknowledge that the dogs would be supervised in small groups and that the
    appellant seeks to ensure barking is restricted. However, barking is a natural
    display of emotion for dogs, and it would be expected to occur at times. Dogs can
    be unpredictable, vary in nature, size and breed. Whilst a management plan and
    staff could assist in keeping barking to a minimum there may be times when it is
    difficult to prevent.
22. The character of dog barking is unpredictable, typically comprising intermittent and
    impulsive short bursts of noise that can vary in tone, pitch and volume. This would
    have the potential to cause some noise disturbance. Given the close proximity of
    the outdoor training area to the boundary with Cottage House, I find that material
    noise disturbance is likely to occur when dogs are in the outside area rather than
    when inside the former chicken sheds which are set further away from Cottage
    House.
23. Indeed, during my site visit, which I acknowledge represents only a snapshot in
    time, I observed a couple of the dogs in the outdoor area barking briefly when I
    was outside the site. The barking was clearly discernible and in stark contrast to
    the general background noise levels in the locality. Therefore, given the nature of
    dog barking, I consider it reasonable for acoustic feature corrections to be applied.
24. Additionally, MZA Acoustics raise concerns regarding the effectiveness of the
    proposed acoustic fence. They suggest that following a barrier correction
    calculation undertaken in accordance with ISO 9613-2, given the overall size of the
    training fields, the fence would likely achieve a noise reduction of around 5 to 6 dB,
    rather than the 10dB cited. Whilst I note that the appellant states that an
    attenuation of 10dB is consistent with the guidance in the SHSPD, this appears to
    be based on there being no direct line of sight between the source and receiver.
    However, Cottage House is two stories in height. Given its close proximity to the
    boundary and the limited height of the proposed fence, there would likely be a
    direct line of sight over the fence, particularly during periods of leaf fall.
    Consequently, I cannot be satisfied that the level of attenuation suggested by the
    appellant would be achieved.
25. Whilst conditions could be imposed to ensure noise from the facility is
    appropriately managed and controlled, given my concerns with the NA and that
    there are areas which are close to the boundary with Cottage House I cannot be
    certain, based on the information before me at this time, that when barking does
    occur within the training fields, that the noise levels at Cottage House would be
    below a Significant Observed Adverse Effect Level, irrespective of any conditions
    being imposed.
26. For the reasons above, at this stage and taking a precautionary approach, I cannot
    be sufficiently satisfied that the development would not have a material adverse
    effect on the living conditions of future occupiers of Cottage House with regard to
    noise and disturbance. The proposal therefore conflicts with Polices EM8 of the
    Hillingdon Local Plan: Part One - Strategic Policies (2012) (HLP1), DME 7 and
    DMHB 11 of the Hillingdon Local Plan: Part Two Development Management
    Policies (2020) (HLP2), D14 of the London Plan (2021) (LP) and the Framework.
    Taken together, amongst other matters, these seek to ensure proposals do not
    adversely affect the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers by virtue of noise
    and that any impacts can be adequately controlled and mitigated.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010520


Other matters
Green Belt
27. I am conscious that the Council did not refuse the scheme on Green Belt grounds.
    However, given the location of the site in the Green Belt, I consider that it is
    important I examine this matter. The change of use comprises several elements:
    the change of use of the former chicken sheds which were in agricultural use to
    facilities for dog training and daycare, a change of use of the fields to the north and
    west of the sheds for use for dog training, the provision of a carpark and the
    erection of post and mesh fencing.
28. Policy GB6 of the Framework states that development in the Green Belt is
    inappropriate unless it falls within one of the categories in Policy GB7.
29. One such category outlined at paragraph 1.b.) of Policy GB7 is for the reuse,
    extension, alteration or replacement of an existing building, provided that the
    existing building is of permanent and substantial construction, is lawful in planning
    terms, and any extension or alteration will not result in a disproportionate increase
    in size compared to the original building. The Council consider that the change of
    use of the chicken sheds to facilities for the dog training centre meets this criteria.
    From the information before me and my observations on site, I have no reason to
    take a different view on that matter. This aspect would not represent inappropriate
    development in the Green Belt.
30. Policy GB7, paragraph 1.f.) of the Framework also sets out that certain other forms
    of development are not inappropriate in the Green Belt provided the impact on the
    openness of the Green Belt is minimised, and there would not be a significant
    conflict with the Green Belt purposes. Two such exceptions are set out at
    paragraph 1.f.iii.) this being for the material change in the use of land (such as
    changes of use for outdoor sport or recreation) and at paragraph 1.f.iv.) for the
    provision of appropriate facilities (in connection with the existing use of land or a
    change of use).
31. I consider the change of use of the field for dog training facilities would be a form
    of outdoor recreation and could be considered under criteria 1.f.iii.) with the car
    park eligible for consideration under criteria 1.f.iv.) as, given its rural location, this
    would be a necessary facility in order for the public to visit and bring their dogs. As
    the material change of use involves dividing the field into four smaller recreational
    plots I consider the low level post and mesh fencing to form part of the material
    change of use. Whether these aspects accord with the relevant criteria requires
    consideration of their effect on the openness and purposes of the Green Belt.
32. The Framework states that the fundamental aim of Green Belt policy is to prevent
    urban sprawl by keeping land permanently open and that the essential
    characteristics of Green Belts are their openness and their permanence. Planning
    Practice Guidance (PPG) provides advice on the factors that can be taken into
    account when considering the potential impact of development on the openness of
    the Green Belt, with openness being capable of having both spatial and visual
    aspects.
33. Given the site context that I have previously set out, the use of the field for dog
    training purposes has a negligible impact on spatial and visual openness.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010520


34. The post and mesh fencing is low level and visually permeable. Given its location
    around the edge of, and within, the enclosed training field it does not appear as a
    prominent feature and maintains views across the site.
35. The scale of the carpark is very modest, is bound in a porous gravel which limits
    any urbanising effect and is viewed against both existing buildings and areas of
    hardstanding as well as a belt of mature trees immediately to the west which
    screens it from views outside of the appeal site.
36. The enclosed nature of the appeal site which includes the training field and
    carpark means it does not appear to encroach into open countryside. The car park
    and post and mesh fencing has a very limited impact on the spatial and visual
    openness of the Green Belt. Considering these factors, I find the impact on the
    openness of the Green Belt has been minimised and neither the carpark, post and
    mesh fencing, nor the change of use of the field results in any significant conflict
    with the five Green Belt purposes set out in Policy GB2 of the Framework.
37. Consequently, the change of use of the field, post and mesh fencing and creation
    of the car park accords with criteria 1.f.iii.) and 1.f.iv.) respectively and is not
    inappropriate development in the Green Belt.
38. The only other outstanding matter, which has been introduced at the appeal stage,
    is the acoustic fence. The Council had indicated in the Officer Report that such
    mitigation would be inappropriate development within the Green Belt due to the
    scale and nature of such fencing. Having regard to the Framework, it is not clear
    whether or not this would be inappropriate development or be considered as part
    and parcel of the change of use. However, as the acoustic fencing did not form
    part of the original application and given my concerns with noise and that I cannot
    be certain, based on the information before me, that the acoustic fence would fully
    address noise concerns, it is not necessary for me to consider this matter further
    as it would not alter the outcome of the appeal.
Interested parties
39. I recognise and have taken into account the support from existing customers and
    others, but this is not sufficient in itself to make the development acceptable in
    planning terms and does not outweigh the policy conflict in this instance.
Other issues
40. I acknowledge the appellants’ frustration at the poor handling of the case by the
    Council and that they have responded to all of the requests that were made of
    them. However, this is not a matter which weighs in favour of the appeal which has
    been determined on its planning merits.
41. Although the appellants consider that no development has taken place within the
    Green Belt, a material change of use of the land has taken place which is
    development in planning terms.
42. I note that parts of the grounds of Harfield Grove to the north of the appeal site are
    used for filming purposes and that noise and disturbance may be generated whilst
    that takes place. Be that as it may, that use is different in nature to the proposal
    before me and is therefore not directly comparable. It therefore carries limited
    weight in my overall assessment of the main issue in this appeal.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6010520


43. The appeal site is adjacent to Harefield Grove a Grade II listed early 19th century
    building with Stucco features. Cottage House is a pre-1948 building and sits within
    the grounds of Harefield Grove. It is therefore deemed to be curtilage listed.
    Section 66 (1) of The Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
    1990 requires me to have special regard to the desirability of preserving the
    buildings or their setting.
44. The significance of Harefield Grove appears to be derived, in part, from its
    architectural detailing and its rural parkland setting. I am satisfied that the
    proposed development would preserve the setting of Harefield Grove and would
    not diminish the ability to appreciate the asset’s significance, with the Council also
    considering that the ability to appreciate the assets significance would not be
    unduly altered.
Planning Balance & Conclusion
45. Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 requires that
    applications for planning permission must be determined in accordance with the
    development plan unless material considerations indicate otherwise.
46. The Framework is a material consideration. Policy S3 of the Framework applies a
    presumption in favour of sustainable development, where outside of settlements,
    Policy S5 of the Framework is to be applied. Policy S5 permits certain forms of
    development outside of settlements stating that these should be approved, unless
    the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects,
    when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
47. Given the nature of the development, I find it would accord with the exception listed
    at paragraph 1b) of Policy S5 which allows development for rural businesses and
    services, where a location outside settlements is shown to be necessary. I also
    note the Council recognise that a rural site is necessary.
48. The proposal would not have an adverse effect on the character and appearance of
    the area, including the setting of the Grade II listed building or highway safety.
    However, a lack of harm carries neutral weight in the planning balance.
49. There are several benefits that arise from the development. The business makes a
    positive contribution to the area in economic terms by providing jobs. The
    Framework directs that substantial weight is given to the economic benefits of
    proposals for commercial development. It also provides a convenient and useful
    facility for dog owners and I note the supportive comments made by many
    interested parties. It would also reuse a rural building.
50. However, Policy P3 of the Framework also requires that development proposals
    do not give rise to, or contribute to, unacceptable levels of noise for neighbouring
    occupiers with adverse impacts avoided or else mitigated to an acceptable degree.
    As I have set out, on the basis from the information before me at the moment, I
    cannot be certain this would be the case. I cannot rule out that the development
    would not have material adverse effects on the living conditions of future
    residential occupiers of Cottage House in terms of noise and disturbance, in
    conflict with policies EM8 of HLP1, DM E7 and DMHB11 of HLP2 and D14 of the
    LP. I thus find that the development is contrary to the development plan as a
    whole. This is a matter to which I afford substantial weight against the
    development.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6010520


51. Planning decisions often involve competing interests that must be weighed in the
    balance by the decision maker. In the specific circumstances of this appeal, the
    benefits of the proposed development would be substantially outweighed by the
    identified adverse effects of the proposal, when assessed against the national-
    decision making policies of the Framework as a whole.
52. Accordingly, the identified conflicts with the development plan would not be
    outweighed by the material considerations. I therefore conclude that the appeal
    should be dismissed.

T Bennett
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
