Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 14 July 2026 by T Morris BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
Decision by A M Nilsson BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 October 2026.


Appeal Ref: 6010842
13 Crispin Road, Edgware HA8 9EN
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Emil Dashdamirov against the decision of the Council of the London
    Borough of Barnet.
•   The application Ref is 26/1224/HSE.
•   The development proposed is a single storey rear extension with 1no. rooflight. Roof extension
    involving rear dormer window and 2no. front facing rooflights.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matter
3. On the 17 August 2026 the Government published a revised National Planning
   Policy Framework (the Framework). It includes changes with respect to heritage
   matters with specific regard to the degrees of harm. That said, the actions of finding
   harm to a designated heritage asset is not materially different from the previous
   iteration of the Framework. I am therefore satisfied that I can proceed with the
   appeal without further consultation with the main parties given that with the above
   in mind, their respective cases would not be prejudiced.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are:
    i)        whether the proposed development would preserve or enhance the character
              or appearance of the Watling Estate Conservation Area; and
    ii)       the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of occupiers
              of 11 Crispin Road, with particular regard to outlook.
Reasons for the Recommendation
Character and Appearance / Conservation Area
5. The appeal site consists of a two-storey mid-terraced dwelling which is located in a
   residential area. The dwellings in this area tend to be of a simple design and are

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010842


     mostly set within small terraces. They predominantly feature plain and unaltered
     pitched roof slopes which contribute to a coherent roofscape, such as that at the
     appeal property and the terrace it forms part of. Moreover, despite those referred to
     by the appellant in their Heritage, Planning, Design & Access Statement, I
     observed no examples of dormer window extensions in the vicinity of the appeal
     property on my site visit.
6. The site is located in the Watling Estate Conservation Area (CA). The CA covers a
   large area and is predominantly formed of residential uses. The Watling Estate
   Conservation Area Character Appraisal Statement (2017) (CAS) identifies that the
   significance of the CA is mostly derived from its cohesive residential character as a
   whole, due to the estate having been built mostly at the same time as an integrated
   development. It also highlights that the roofs of dwellings in the CA are mainly plain
   and free of clutter, with limited use of dormer windows, and identifies that
   replacement roofs, dormers and roof extensions can be unsympathetic alterations
   to buildings in the CA.
7. In that regard, and despite the simple and utilitarian appearance of the host
   dwelling, I find that as its plain pitched roof form reflects the prevailing roof form of
   the wider terrace and the surrounding roofscape, it thus contributes positively to the
   character and appearance of the CA. It is therefore in keeping with the residential
   character of the estate as a whole and contributes positively to its visual coherence
   which is one of the positive features of the estate.
8. However, the proposed rear dormer window would only be set slightly in from the
   sides, the eaves and the ridge of the original roof. Accordingly, and owed to its
   considerable scale and mass, it would appear as a bulky and dominant addition to
   the rear roof slope of the host dwelling in the middle of the terrace. Consequently,
   the rear dormer window would be an incongruous feature which would detract from
   the otherwise plain roof form of the terrace and the consistency of the surrounding
   roofscape.
9. Even though the dormer window would be sited on the rear roof slope and would
   not be visible from the frontage, it would still be visible from multiple vantage points
   from the surrounding houses and from their rear gardens. In this context, it would
   be a conspicuous feature in the roofscape in an area where there are no other
   dormer windows in view, at least from my site visit observations. Moreover, any
   perceived lack of public visibility does not obviate the need for high-quality design
   as required by the development plan policies and the Framework.
10. Although the dormer window in the appeal decision at 164 Abbots Road is located
    in the same CA, I have not been provided with the plans for that development in
    order to make a full comparison. Therefore, even if neither dormer window would
    be apparent in the street scene, I cannot be certain that the dormer window in that
    appeal was of similar scale to the dormer window in the appeal before me. In any
    case, planning decisions are reliant on case-specific evidence and circumstances
    and I have drawn my own conclusions on this appeal having regard to the evidence
    before me and the particular circumstances of the case.
11. Notwithstanding the above, the proposed front facing rooflights would be of a
    modest scale and would be almost flush with the front roof slope of the host
    dwelling. Accordingly, they would not appear as an overly prominent feature within



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010842


     the front roof slope and would not significantly detract from the coherence of the
     roofscape of the terrace or the wider locality.
12. Taking aside any issues regarding the effect of the proposed single storey rear
    extension on living conditions, the depth and scale of the extension would be such
    that it would appear as a subservient addition to the host dwelling. It would be in
    keeping with the pattern of development in the area which includes numerous
    single storey rear extensions which are visible from the rear garden of the appeal
    property. Therefore, the proposed single storey rear extension would not be
    harmful to the residential character and coherence of the CA.
13. Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
    (the Act) requires that special attention must be paid to the desirability of preserving
    or enhancing the character or appearance of conservation areas. For the reasons
    set out above, I find that the proposed rear dormer window would not preserve or
    enhance the character or appearance of the CA.
14. Consequently, this would result in harm to the significance of the CA. The harm
    would be focussed on the appeal site and its surroundings and as such, it would be
    relatively localised and minor in scale. Nevertheless, policy HE6(3) of the
    Framework states that any harm to a designated heritage asset will be a matter of
    considerable importance and weight. In accordance with the requirements of policy
    HE6(4) of the Framework, where a development proposal would harm the
    significance of a designated heritage asset, the effect on the asset and its
    significance should be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the
    proposal.
15. In that regard, the proposal would provide additional space at the property which
    would help to meet the day-to-day needs of the householder and the needs of the
    growing family. However, the enlargement of the property would primarily be a
    personal benefit and not a benefit to the public at large. I therefore give this limited
    weight.
16. Consequently, given the limited extent of the public benefits which would arise from
    the proposed development, this would not outweigh the harm to the significance of
    the designated heritage asset which is a matter of considerable importance and
    weight in accordance with the Framework.
17. For the above reasons, the proposed development would fail to preserve or
    enhance the character or appearance of the CA. It would be contrary to policies D3
    and HC1 of The London Plan (2021) (LP) and policies CDH01, CDH05 and CDH08
    of the Barnet Local Plan 2021-2036 (2025) (BLP). Taken together, these policies
    require that developments respond to the existing character of a place, maintain or
    improve the appearance of the locality or street scene and conserve the
    significance of heritage assets.
18. Furthermore, the proposal would be contrary to the Council’s Residential Design
    Guidance Supplementary Planning Document (2016) (SPD). This advises that
    adequate roof slope above and below a dormer window is required on terraced
    properties and that dormer extensions should be set in at least 1 metre from the
    party wall, flank wall or chimney stack. It also advises that dormer windows should
    normally be subordinate features on the roof and should not occupy more than half
    the width or half the depth of the roof slope. The proposed dormer window would


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010842


     deviate from the advice in the SPD, which although is guidance, is a material
     consideration, and I see no good reasons to deviate from it in this instance.
19. The appellant also refers to the Draft Sustainable Design and Development
    Guidance Supplementary Planning Document Part 4, albeit pointing out that it is
    not intended for properties in conservation areas, but that it may be pertinent in
    certain instances. However, I have not been provided with a copy of this or further
    information regarding its current status. Therefore, even if it indicates that a 0.5
    metre set in for rear dormers is an appropriate design response, this doesn’t alter
    my conclusions on the proposed dormer window at least from the evidence
    provided.
Living Conditions
20. 11 Crispin Road (No 11) is the adjoining mid-terraced dwelling. The rear gardens of
    the appeal property and No 11 are of a modest size and are narrow in width. The
    side boundary treatment between the properties is formed of a fence which is only
    of a moderate height, at approximately 1.5 to 1.8 meters in height, and below the
    upper sections of the windows and doors on the rear elevations of the dwellings.
21. No 11 has a windowed door on its ground floor rear elevation which is close to the
    side boundary fence between the properties. Although I do not have the floorplans
    for No 11, given that the openings on the rear elevation of No 11 seem to mirror
    that of the appeal property, I find it probable that like the host dwelling, the
    windowed door at No 11 serves a kitchen. I have proceeded with the appeal on this
    basis and there is little information before me to suggest an alternative approach.
22. Due to the close proximity of the proposed single storey rear extension to the
    windowed door at No 11 together with its height above the side boundary fence and
    outward projection, it would be a prominent and obtrusive feature when viewed by
    the occupiers of the room at No 11 which the windowed door serves. The extension
    would enclose the windowed door where the outlook experienced by users of the
    room would be restricted, in a situation where there is already a limited aspect
    given the modest size of the dwelling and the narrow rear gardens at the
    properties. Consequently, the single storey rear extension would be overbearing
    feature which would be harm outlook from No 11, to the detriment of their living
    conditions.
23. The appellant refers to the fallback position of a 3-metre single storey rear
    extension which they indicate could be constructed via Class A of The Town and
    Country Planning (General Permitted Development) England Order 2015. However,
    this is not supported by a lawful development for such a development. In any case,
    given that a 3-metre single storey rear extension would be less deep than the 3.5
    metre extension in the appeal scheme, it would not be as harmful to the outlook of
    occupiers of No 11. Given that the fallback scheme would be less harmful than the
    appeal scheme, it does not justify the proposal.
24. With regards to the single storey rear extension in the appeal decision at 72
    Cloister Road, I have not been provided with the plans for that development in
    order to make a full comparison. I also note that the Inspector for that decision
    referred to some site-specific circumstances including ground levels, which again
    supports the view that planning decisions are heavily reliant on case-specific
    evidence and circumstances. Consequently, this appeal decision does not alter my
    findings.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010842


25. For the above reasons, the proposed single storey rear extension would be harmful
    to the living conditions of occupiers of No 11, with particular regard to outlook. It
    would be contrary to policy D3 of the LP and policies CDH01 and CDH05 of the
    BLP, which amongst other matters, require that proposals deliver a good standard
    of amenity and acceptable levels of outlook for adjoining occupants.
26. The single storey rear extension would also be contrary to the SPD, which states
    that extensions to properties should not result in a harmful loss of outlook from
    adjoining properties, advising that a 3-metre depth for a single storey rear
    extension should normally be considered acceptable for terraced properties. For
    the reasons I have set out above, I see little justification to deviate from the SPD
    guidance in this instance.
Conclusion and Recommendation
27. The proposed development would cause harm to the identified designated heritage
    asset, and this harm would not be outweighed by any public benefits arising from
    the proposal. It would also be harmful to the living conditions of the occupiers of No
    11, with particular regard to outlook. The proposal would therefore conflict with the
    development plan overall and there are no other identified considerations, including
    the provisions of the Framework, which would outweigh this conflict. Consequently,
    I recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

T Morris
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
28. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

A M Nilsson
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
