Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 22 September 2026
by C Shearing BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010459
Land west of 103 Tonbridge Road, Hildenborough, TN11 9HL
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•    The appeal is made by Corinthian Mountfield Ltd against the decision of Tonbridge and Malling
     Borough Council.
•    The application ref is 25/01693/PIP.
•    The development proposed is between 5 and 7 residential dwellings.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and permission in principle is granted for between 5 and 7
       residential dwellings at land west of 103 Tonbridge Road, Hildenborough TN11
       9HL in accordance with the terms of the application, ref 25/01693/PIP.
Application for Costs
2.     An application for costs has been made by Corinthian Mountfield Ltd against
       Tonbridge and Malling Borough Council. That application is the subject of a
       separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     The number of homes proposed was reduced during the course of the planning
       application and the range set out in the decision and the banner heading above is
       taken from the Council’s decision notice and the appeal documents.
4.     Permission in principle is part of a 2-stage planning consent process which
       provides an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for housing-led
       development. It separates the consideration of matters of principle for proposed
       development on a site (stage 1) from the technical detail of that development
       (stage 2). A full planning permission is only secured when both stages 1 and 2
       have been passed.
5.     This appeal relates to an application for permission in principle, being stage 1.
       Having regard to the Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) the scope of
       considerations at this stage is limited to location; land use and amount of
       development.
6.     A new National Planning Policy Framework 2026 (the Framework) was published
       during the course of the appeal. Both main parties have been given the opportunity
       to comment on its implications and I have taken the responses received into
       account.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010459


Main Issues
7.       The main issues are the suitability of the site’s location for the proposed
         development, having particular regard to:
         -    Effects on heritage assets, including the Hildenborough Conservation Area,
              and;
         -    Whether the proposal would be inappropriate development in the green belt.
Reasons
Hildenborough Conservation Area
8.       The northern part of the appeal site lies within the Hildenborough Conservation
         Area (the HCA) and there are a number of designated and non-designated
         heritage assets in the surrounding area. The duty of Section 66(1) of the Planning
         (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 applies here since it includes
         a reference to permission in principle. Similarly, the duty under Section 72(1) in
         conservation areas applies to the exercise of any functions under the Planning
         Acts. For these reasons I have exercised these duties in considering the appeal.
9.       The significance of the HCA is derived from its architectural and historic interest as
         a 19th century village centre set along a historic coaching route between London
         and the coast. This part of Tonbridge Road is enclosed on its northern side by a
         variety of buildings dating from between 1845 and 1900 but including more
         modern infills. The busy road together with the mix of uses gives this part of the
         HCA a vibrant character.
10. The southern side of Tonbridge Road is not free of development. Nonetheless, the
    dense hedgerows and mature trees which line its southern side provide a well
    defined edge to the HCA and contribute to the appreciation of its rural setting.
    They are also protected by a Tree Preservation Order1. There are two narrow
    accesses to the west of the appeal site, which cut through the hedgerow, and
    further west the boundary changes to a more domestic appearance with
    closeboard fencing and paraphernalia associated with Sackville School.
    Nonetheless, the hedgerow at the front of the appeal site is uninterrupted. The
    Hildenborough Conservation Area Appraisal 2011 acknowledges these hedges
    and trees are a prominent landscape feature enhancing the setting of the listed
    buildings and reinforcing the rural character of the village. I agree with those
    findings and the appeal site’s verdant northern boundary contributes positively to
    the significance of the HCA and how it is appreciated by users of Tonbridge Road.
11. Details of the site access, including its width and treatment, are not for
    consideration at this stage and I am mindful that the development could not
    proceed until technical details have been approved, and that there is no
    requirement for this to be given automatically. However, based on what I have
    seen, the principle of the development in this location would be reliant on the
    creation of an access onto Tonbridge Road. This would necessitate a break in the
    vegetated boundary, diluting its consistent nature and weakening its contribution to
    the significance of the HCA. This amounts to harm for the purposes of assessment
    against the Framework.


1
    Tree Preservation Order – Hildenborough No.4 1981 (12-26-20) TPO 5227


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               2
Appeal Decision 6010459


12. I find the rest of the appeal site behind the boundary makes a very limited
    contribution to the setting of the HCA given the lack of intervisibility between the
    two. Matters of the layout, design and landscaping of the scheme would be for
    consideration at a later date and I see no strong reason that these factors should
    prevent the principle of the proposed development.
13. For the reasons given, the principle of development in this location would cause
    harm to the character and appearance of the area and the significance of the HCA
    due to the effects of the required access. The development would conflict with
    policy SQ1 of the Managing Development and the Environment Development Plan
    Document 2010 which requires new development to reflect local distinctiveness
    including historical interest and have regard to Character Area Appraisals.
14. Policy SQ1, however, is not consistent with the Framework since it does not
    include the requirement for a balancing exercise which I return to below. Given this
    material inconsistency, and having regard to Annex A of the Framework, I give
    only limited weight to the conflict with policy SQ1. I do not find conflict with policy
    CP24 of the Core Strategy 2007 (the CS) which relates to design quality and since
    those matters would be subject to consideration at the technical details stage.
Other Assets
15. The site falls within the wider non-designated Foxbush Historic Park and Garden
    which extends to the south and west of the site. Given the presence of other
    development and paraphernalia in this part of the Park and Garden, I see no
    strong reason that harm would occur to this asset or its setting through the
    principle of the development.
16. Pembroke Lodge is a grade II listed building on the opposite side of the road. Its
    setting comprises the busy carriageway of Tonbridge Road and surrounding
    residential development. Its immediate setting includes two existing narrow
    accesses directly opposite it. Given the existing breaks in this part of the
    hedgerow, and the separation of that asset by the road, I do not consider the
    principle of the development and associated access would cause harm to its
    setting and the way it is experienced. Given the distance from the appeal site and
    intervening structures and access, the proposal at this stage would also preserve
    the setting of Woodside Cottage, which is also grade II listed.
17. The Council’s case refers to other non-designated assets including Sackville
    School, Hilden Park School and several unspecified dwellings. In the absence of
    further details of those effects, given their distance from the appeal site and
    intervening structures and uses, the development would not cause harm to their
    setting. Potential archaeology would be dealt with at the next stage.
Heritage Balance
18. For the reasons given the proposal would result in harm to the significance of the
    HCA. This would be at the lower end of the scale of harm for several reasons, in
    particular given the extent of the intrusion into the Tonbridge Road boundary, the
    remaining extent of hedgerow and since there are other accesses nearby to the
    west. Nonetheless, the Framework requires that substantial weight be given to the
    asset’s conservation irrespective of the level of harm and any harm is a matter of
    considerable importance and weight.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010459


19. The Framework at policy HE6(4) requires that this harm be weighed against any
    public benefits resulting from the proposal. The proposal would provide between 5
    and 7 new homes which would contribute to the local housing stock as well as to
    the national objective to boost the supply of homes. The Council accept it cannot
    demonstrate a five year land supply for homes and the officer report cites a supply
    of just 2.89 year supply, which is a significant shortfall, and the appellant cites a
    score well below 75% in the most recent Housing Delivery Test. The new homes
    would be well related to an existing settlement and the services and facilities it
    provides, as well as bus links. Policy HO7 of the Framework states substantial
    weight should be given to the benefits of providing homes which contribute
    towards meeting evidenced accommodation needs for the community, which I
    consider is the case here given the acknowledged unmet need for homes. In
    giving substantial weight to the proposed new housing, whether that be 5 or 7
    homes, together with the economic benefits of the development to which I give
    moderate weight, I find these outweigh the harm which would arise to the HCA.
Whether Inappropriate Development in the Green Belt
20. The site meets the new definition of grey belt given by the Framework since it does
    not strongly contribute to any purposes (a), (b) or (d) in policy GB2. Among other
    reasons, and having regard to the advice of the PPG, this is because the site does
    not adjoin a large built up area, form a substantial part of a gap between towns, or
    relate to a historic town. The findings of the Arup Green Belt Assessment do not
    alter this judgement. The exception to inappropriate development at policy
    GB7(1)g. of the Framework is therefore relevant. The proposal would not
    fundamentally undermine the purposes of the remaining green belt across the area
    of the plan; it is a type of development for which there is an evidenced unmet
    need, and; it is in a sustainable location being very close to services and facilities
    in Hildenborough as well as bus links providing onward public transport links.
    Criteria i. to iii. are therefore met.
21. The final criteria of GB7(1)g. relates to major development and the need to comply
    with the Golden Rules of policy GB8. Notwithstanding the definition of major
    development set out in the relevant regulations2, the application form states the
    site has an area exceeding 0.5 hectares and the development would therefore fall
    under the definition of major development set out in Annex B of the Framework.
    Despite the absence of evidence on this matter, I see no strong reason that the
    required contributions could not reasonably be delivered by the scheme. The PPG
    makes clear that planning obligations cannot be secured at the permission in
    principle stage, and it is not possible for conditions to be attached. Accordingly the
    contributions set out in policy GB8 would be secured at the next stage. For the
    purposes of the green belt assessment at this stage I have therefore assumed
    they are capable of being met before full planning permission were granted.
22. For these reasons the development at this stage would meet the exception to
    inappropriate development at policy GB7(1)g. The development would comply with
    policy CP3 of the CS which states that national green belt policy will be applied to
    this area. Since the proposal is not inappropriate development it is not necessary
    to consider the effects of the proposal on openness, or whether very special
    circumstances exist.


2
    The Town and Country Planning (Permission in Principle) (Amendment) Order 2017


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                4
Appeal Decision 6010459


Other Matters
23. The Council’s officer report finds that development in this location causes conflict
    with policies CP12 and CP14 of the CS, which seek to focus development within
    the confines of rural settlements and restrict development in the countryside. The
    Council acknowledge, however, that those policies pre date the Framework and
    are inconsistent with its language. I agree with that finding and the spatial strategy
    set out in those development plan policies is inconsistent with the Framework’s
    aims to direct development to the most appropriate and sustainable locations.
    Neither is that strategy delivering a sufficient supply of homes in accordance with
    the other aims of the Framework. For these reasons I give the conflict with those
    policies limited weight.
24. I have had regard to the concerns of interested parties, which include impacts on
    wildlife and highway safety. These would fall to be considered at the technical
    details consent stage which the PPG states includes other statutory requirements
    such as those relating to protected species. There is not substantive evidence to
    demonstrate that the number of homes proposed would be likely to generate
    significant amounts of movements or would have a severe adverse impact on the
    transport network. With regard to land ownership, I am satisfied that the
    information provided is adequate for the assessment and determination of the
    appeal.
25. I have not been provided with details of the referenced 2005 appeal scheme 3 or
    the land it relates to. As such I cannot be certain that the circumstances are the
    same. That is similarly the case for the more recent appeal referenced in the
    Cotswolds4.
26. I have had regard to the Council’s consultee responses, which include a request
    for financial contributions to infrastructure. As above, the PPG is clear that
    obligations cannot be secured at this stage and these matters would fall under the
    next stage when the final quantum of homes, and their impacts on infrastructure,
    can be assessed.
27. Since the PPG makes clear that it is not possible for conditions to be attached to a
    grant of permission in principle, none are attached to this decision.
Presumption in Favour of Sustainable Development
28. Policy S5 of the Framework sets out the presumption in favour of sustainable
    development for development outside settlements. Since this assessment has
    found the proposal would not be inappropriate through the application of policies
    HC8 and GB7, S5(5) states that the proposals should be approved unless the
    benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects,
    when assessed against the national decision making policies in the Framework,
    and in applying S5(2).
29. Given the above findings relating to heritage and green belt effects, the proposal
    would not fail to comply with any of the national decision-making policies which
    state that development proposals should be refused in specific circumstances. The
    benefits of approving the development are set out above and arise from the
    provision of new homes, which attracts substantial weight, together with some
3
    APP/H2265/A/04/1170042
4
    6004274


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010459


       short term and longer term economic benefits from construction and expenditure
       into the local economy by future occupants. The adverse impacts have been found
       to be low level heritage harm as well as conflict with the development plan policies
       relating to heritage and the spatial strategy for the location of new development,
       for which the appropriate weights are discussed above. Overall the benefits would
       not be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects, when assessed against the
       national decision-making policies in the Framework. Accordingly, the development
       benefits from the presumption in favour of sustainable development set out in the
       Framework. This is of critical importance in decision making and amounts to a
       consideration of sufficient weight to determine the appeal other than in accordance
       with the development plan.
Conclusion
30. For the reasons given, the appeal is allowed.

C Shearing
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
