Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by K Townend BSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 03 September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6010865
Land to front of 25 Market Place, Cannock, Staffordshire WS11 1BS
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made on behalf of BT Group PLC against the decision of Cannock Chase District
     Council.
•    The application Ref is CH/26/070.
•    The development is installation of a proposed new global street hub, including the associated display
     of advertisements on both sides of the unit.

Appeal B Ref: 6010866
Land to front of 25 Market Place, Cannock, Staffordshire WS11 1BS
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (the Regulations) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made on behalf of BT Group PLC against the decision of Cannock Chase District
     Council.
•    The application Ref is CH/26/071
•    The development is installation of a proposed new global street hub, including the associated display
     of advertisements on both sides of the unit.

Appeal A: Decision
1.     Appeal A is dismissed.
Appeal B: Decision
2.     Appeal B is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
3.     The two appeals relate to the same proposal on the same site. Appeal ‘A’
       concerns the refusal of planning permission for installation of a new BT Street Hub
       Unit and associated display of advertisement panels on either side of the unit.
       Appeal ‘B’ concerns the refusal of express consent regarding the same
       development. I have considered each on its merits. However, as they raise similar
       issues, I have combined both decisions into a single decision letter.
4.     The Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisement) (England) Regulations
       2007 require that decisions on express consent applications for advertisements be
       made only in the interests of amenity and public safety, taking account of any
       material factors. The National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) and
       the Planning Practice Guidance (the PPG) confirm this approach.
5.     A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the revised Framework) came into
       force on the 17 August 2026. It is a material consideration which should be taken


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010865 & 6010866


       into account from the day of publication. Although the revised Framework is
       significantly different from the previous versions the details most pertinent to this
       appeal are not substantially changed. Having considered the revisions, and in light
       of the principles of natural justice, in this instance it is not necessary to invite any
       submissions from the parties on the revised Framework.
6.     The appeal site is within the Cannock Conservation Area and near to listed
       buildings. I have, therefore, had regard to sections 66(1) and 72(1) of the Planning
       (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (‘the Act’), which respectively
       require me to have special regard to the desirability of preserving a listed building
       or its setting or any features of special architectural or historic interest which it
       possesses; and to pay special attention to the desirability of preserving or
       enhancing the character or appearance of a conservation area.
7.    The address in the banner heading above is taken from the description of the site
      location section of the application form as this best describes the address of the
      development. This also reflects the address in the Council’s decision notice.
Main Issues
8.     The main issue relevant to Appeal A is the effect of the proposal on the character
       and appearance of the area, specifically whether the proposal would preserve or
       enhance the character or appearance of the Cannock Conservation Area.
9.     With respect to Appeal B, as there is no dispute between the parties in relation to
       the proposed advertisement on public safety, the main issue is therefore the effect
       of the proposed advertisement on amenity, including the Cannock Conservation
       Area.
Reasons
Character and appearance, including visual amenity
10. The appeal site comprises a wide area of pavement outside 25 Market Place in the
    pedestrianised area of the town centre of Cannock. It currently contains two BT
    telephone boxes situated on a section of block paving. There are also bins,
    bollards, and signs in the immediate area along with a bandstand, amenity
    planting, and seating in the wider area. Street trees are also prominent in the area
    and soften the appearance of the hard surfaces and buildings. The buildings along
    Market Place have commercial ground floor uses with first and second floor
    commercial uses, storage and accommodation.
11. The conservation area is supported by the Cannock Town Centre Conservation
    Area Appraisal, April 2014 (the CAA). This sets out that the town origins date back
    to the medieval period with a market established in the 13th Century, the broad
    marketplace remains intact and contributes positively to the historic medieval
    street layout, forming the historic core of the town. The spacious layout and the
    open marketplace are key points noted of special interest in the CAA. There is a
    diversity of building types and heights with general harmony from their continuity,
    mass, and materials.
12. In so far as it is relevant to the appeals, I consider that the significance of the
    conservation area is mainly derived from the townscape which is defined by its
    spacious street pattern, open spaces and range of buildings. It is in reasonably
    good condition with the buildings and public realm well maintained. The CAA notes

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010865 & 6010866


       that street furniture in the area comprises a co-ordinated series of elements
       painted in a dark blue and gold colour scheme, which I observed on my visit. The
       CAA also recognises the assortment of modern utility cabinets and telephone
       kiosks, among other things, which create an amount of clutter. This incremental
       clutter is noted, in the CAA, as having a detrimental visual effect on the
       conservation area and the CAA recommends that public realm improvements
       should include a consistent approach to street furniture and a reduction of clutter.
13. The appeal site lies outside a group of buildings identified as significant and having
    a positive effect on the conservation area and a couple of buildings that are
    neutral. It is not a modern part of the street and the two existing BT telephone
    boxes form part of the clutter within the marketplace and are negative to the
    character of the conservation area. Nevertheless, the wider area contributes
    positively as it forms part of the open marketplace and is part of the historic core
    and interest of the conservation area.
14. The proposed hub would be dark coloured and would, therefore, relate to the
    surrounding street furniture in its colour finish. Nevertheless, although smaller than
    the nearby buildings, the structure would be significantly taller than any of the
    other street furniture and with a very modern design which would not fit in with the
    consistent design approach of the other street furniture in the area. Although the
    removal of the two existing BT telephone boxes would reduce visual clutter, the
    replacement with a tall, solid structure, with illuminated and changing
    advertisements would cause new visual clutter to the area.
15. Furthermore, the design of the two principal elevations are intended for
    advertisement panels. Conditions could be imposed to control the length of the
    display, intensity of illumination, especially during hours of darkness, and ensure
    the change in display is smooth. However, the advertisement panels are intended
    to draw attention and, due to their position, illumination, and changing content, the
    panels would appear visually prominent, incongruous and a visually intrusive alien
    feature in the conservation area. The appeal proposal is not for nighttime
    economic use and I have no compelling evidence that the area has a high level of
    illumination and activity at nighttime.
16. Within the immediate area around the site there is existing business advertising on
    premises. Albeit there may be some illuminated business advertising these are
    mostly above shop windows, static, and relevant to the context of the town centre
    location. My attention has been drawn to an illuminated poster advertisement with
    scrolling images within the shopfront window of the betting shop near to the appeal
    site. Although this is similar to the proposed advertisement panels, it is within the
    shopfront rather than in a freestanding structure and is, therefore, less prominent
    in the street scene.
17. The proposal, as a whole, would be a modern and unsympathetic addition to the
    area. Even though it would not interrupt the existing built and plan form of the
    buildings or substantially obscure views across the marketplace, it would not
    preserve, nor enhance, the character, or appearance, of the conservation area and
    would therefore be harmful to the amenity of the area. The proposal would result in
    harm to the conservation area, this harm is of considerable importance and weight
    in my decision. There is a presumption in favour of the desirability of preserving or
    enhancing the character or appearance of the conservation area. The Framework
    advises that such harm should be weighed against the public benefits.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010865 & 6010866


18. The proposal would remove two existing kiosks which are in a poor condition and
    do not complement the other street furniture. It would also result in a small
    increase in usable pavement and the new hub would be a more accessible
    structure than the existing enclosed kiosks. However, even with the removal of two
    telephone boxes, these benefits are modest and do not outweigh the harm to the
    character and appearance of the area. The appellant contends that the structure is
    temporary, however, the application is for full planning permission not temporary
    consent and, even if it was only in position for a few years, it would still be harmful.
19. The proposal would also provide benefits to the community with the provision of
    free Wi-Fi, emergency calls, device charging, and community messaging.
    Together, these factors amount to community and public benefits. Nevertheless,
    even considering the support for modern communication developments set out in
    the Framework, the benefits would not outweigh the harm I have identified.
    Moreover, these matters would not constitute measures to mitigate or minimise the
    harm.
20. There are also Listed Buildings within the conservation area and near to the
    appeal site. The nearest is St Lukes Church. The setting in which the church is
    appreciated includes the historic core of the town centre and the marketplace.
    However, due to the position of the proposal and that it would not reduce the open
    nature of the marketplace the appeal proposal would not harm the significance of
    the setting of this listed building. The other listed buildings within the town centre
    are further away and there are intervening buildings that would restrict the appeal
    proposal being within the setting of, or harming the setting of, those buildings.
21. In relation to Appeal A, the proposal for a new BT hub structure, by reason of the
    siting, design and scale of the structure, including the integral advertisement
    panels, would be harmful to the character and appearance of the area and would
    not protect nor enhance the character or appearance of the Cannock Conservation
    Area. The kiosk, therefore, would not comply with the requirements of Policies
    SO1.1 and SO1.2 of the Cannock Chase District Local Plan 2018-2040 (the LP)
    which, taken together, seek to protect and enhance the significance of designated
    heritage assets, give heritage assets the highest level of protection, weigh the
    harm to heritage assets against the public benefits of the development and the
    action that will be taken to mitigate and minimise the harm, and require
    development proposals to be designed to enhance the quality of the townscape.
22. In relation to Appeal B, I have taken into account Policies SO1.1 and SO1.2 of the
    LP in so far as they are material in this case. Given I have concluded that the
    proposal would harm amenity it therefore conflicts with these policies.
Conclusion
23. For the above reasons, I conclude that Appeal A should be dismissed.
24. I conclude that the display of the advertisement would be detrimental to the
    interests of amenity. Appeal B should, therefore, be dismissed.

K Townend
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
