    Appeal Decision
    Site visit made on 10 September 2026
    by L Gardner MRTPI
    an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
    Decision date: 14 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010455
Weavers, Exted Hill, Elham, Kent CT4 6YG
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by James Johnson against the decision of Folkestone and Hythe District
       Council.
•      The application Ref is 26/0296/FH.
•      The development proposed is the erection of a single storey detached outbuilding.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       The appeal site lies within the Kent Downs National Landscape (KDNL). I am
         required, under Section 85 of The Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000 as
         amended, to seek to further the purpose of conserving and enhancing the natural
         beauty of National Landscapes when performing my function in determining this
         appeal.
3.       I understand that a revised plan1 was received during the application, amending
         the position of the proposed outbuilding in relation to the site boundary. The
         evidence before me confirms that the Council was in receipt of this plan prior to
         making its decision. I have therefore considered the appeal on the same basis.
Main Issue
4.       The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of
         the area, including the landscape character and scenic beauty of the KDNL.
Reasons
5.       The appeal site comprises a detached dwelling, accessed from Exted Hill. The
         dwelling has a long rear garden, bounded in part by fencing but also areas of
         dense and mature landscaping. There is an existing public right of way which
         crosses the southern corner of the appeal site.
6.       Development in the surrounding area is sporadic, in the immediate surroundings
         comprised of a small cluster of dwellings which includes the appeal site, otherwise
         surrounded by open countryside. Consequently, the surrounding area has a
         distinctly rural character.


1
    Site and Location Plans reference 260217-L-001

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010455


7.       The proposed outbuilding would be positioned towards the end of the rear garden,
         a considerable distance from the host dwelling. Notwithstanding this distance, due
         to the scale and design of the outbuilding, which would be more akin to an
         agricultural building than an ancillary residential building, the proposal would fail to
         achieve a degree of subservience to the host dwelling. Instead, it would compete
         with the primacy of built form within the site.
8.       I am not persuaded that a building of a more domesticated design would be more
         visually obtrusive in this location, but in any case, the harm which would arise from
         the proposal would be from a combination of the design, height and footprint.
         Collectively these factors would lead to a prominent and incongruous form of
         development relative to its domestic setting, which would lead to the disruption of
         countryside views.
9.       The appeal site is more sensitive to visual receptors given the proximity of the
         adjacent public footpath, allowing users of the footpath to experience the visual
         harm of the development in close range. Whilst I accept that existing vegetation
         would offer some screening of the outbuilding, it would not fully mitigate the visual
         and landscape effects of the proposal.
10. The precise material finish of the proposed outbuilding could be subject to
    agreement through condition. However, the material finish alone would not
    successfully mitigate against the harm arising from the overall design, height and
    scale of the proposal.
11. Policy NE3 of the Folkestone & Hythe District Places and Policies Local Plan
    (2020) (the Local Plan) sets out that the impact of individual proposals and their
    cumulative effect on the KDNL, and its setting, will be carefully assessed. It goes
    on to state that planning permission will be granted subject to several criteria,
    including that the natural beauty and locally distinctive features of the KDNL, and
    its setting, are conserved and enhanced.
12. Based on the above, I find that the proposal would harm the character and
    appearance of the area, including the landscape character and scenic beauty of
    the KDNL. It would therefore conflict with Policy NE3 of the Local Plan. It would
    also fail to accord with the relevant provisions of Policies HB1 and HB8 of the
    Local Plan, particularly as they relate to development making a positive
    contribution to its location and surroundings and reflecting the scale and
    proportions of original buildings.
13. Although I find the harm to the KDNL to be localised, the statutory duty is to seek
    to conserve and enhance such areas, which is a high threshold. For these
    reasons, I have attributed considerable importance to this harm.
Other Matters
14. Whilst I observed the presence of an outbuilding towards the end of the rear
    garden of the neighbouring property, the scale and form of this outbuilding is not
    comparable to the appeal proposal in its footprint, design or height. The presence
    of neighbouring outbuildings therefore does not alter my above conclusions.
15. Equally, the examples given of other forms of residential outbuildings which have
    been approved in the District2 are not directly comparable to the appeal proposal
2
    Appendices 6 and 7 of the appellant’s statement


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              2
Appeal Decision 6010455


       in either their design or positioning relative to the host dwelling. I have therefore
       afforded these examples very limited weight in my determination of the appeal.
16. I accept that no concerns were raised in relation to several matters, including the
    effect on neighbouring living conditions and trees. However, these factors do not
    specifically weigh in favour of the appeal.
17. There is a suggestion that an outbuilding could be erected through permitted
    development rights within the rear garden of the dwelling. However, it is clear that
    the proposal itself would be beyond the extent of development permissible through
    permitted development rights both in relation to its size and position relative to the
    dwelling. Based on the evidence, I cannot be satisfied that a building erected
    under permitted development rights would be more harmful than the appeal
    proposal. I have therefore not been presented with a reasonable or comparable
    fall-back position which would lead me to alter my overall conclusions.
18. I understand that the purpose of the proposed outbuilding is to allow for the
    storage of a ride on lawn mower and other associated residential paraphernalia.
    Although the outbuilding would offer benefits to the appellant in respect to
    additional storage, these would be private benefits which would not outweigh the
    harm which I have identified above.
Conclusion
19. I conclude that the proposal would be contrary to the development plan when read
    as a whole, and material considerations do not dictate that a decision should be
    made other than in accordance with the development plan.

L Gardner
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
