Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 10 August 2026
by S Harrington MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 08 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010729
Rosemellyn Fisheries, Roche Road, St Austell PL26 8LB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Alun Kitts, Falmouth Garages Ltd against the decision of Cornwall
     Council.
•    The application Ref is PA25/05532.
•    The development proposed is addition of shower block and 2 disused railway wagons, a shepherds
     hut and two caravans for holiday accommodation.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     At my site visit I observed 2 railway wagons, a shepherd’s hut and a small caravan
       the subject of the proposal at the appeal site. Whilst there is planning permission
       for 2 disused railway wagons, this is in relation to the use for shelter, as opposed
       to overnight accommodation. The appellant within their submission, including that
       of the 26th August 2026 indicates that the use of accommodation the subject of this
       proposal had taken place, and had been advertised for holiday use. The
       application is therefore partially retrospective, and I have considered the
       submission accordingly.
3.     During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
       (Framework) was published. The main parties have had the opportunity to
       comment on the implications of this change, and no parties will have been
       prejudiced by my having regard to the latest version in reaching my decision.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are:
           •    whether the appeal site would provide a suitable location for the proposal,
                having regard to the local development strategy and its accessibility by a
                range of transport modes; and
           •    whether the proposal would be appropriate in terms of flood risk, with
                particular regard to access to the site and safety of future occupants and
                emergency responders.
Reasons
Location

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010729


5.     Policy 2 of the Cornwall Local Plan Strategic Policies 2010-2030 (LP) outlines the
       Council’s development strategy. It sets out a sustainable approach to
       accommodating growth and maintaining the dispersed development pattern of
       Cornwall and providing jobs in a proportional manner based on the role and
       function of each place.
6.     The proposal would result in additional units of holiday accommodation.
       Nonetheless, the proposed units would, individually and separately, provide future
       occupiers, the facilities required for day-to-day private domestic existence. They
       would not lose that characteristic if they were occupied for only part of the year, or
       at infrequent intervals, or by a series of different persons. Consequently, the
       proposed accommodation units exhibit the characteristics of dwellinghouses.
7.     LP Policy 3 defines how housing will be accommodated, based on a settlement
       hierarchy of role and function. Given the appeal site location outside of any defined
       settlement and for planning purposes, within the countryside, the proposal would
       not gain support from LP Policy 3. LP Policy 7 concerns housing in the countryside
       and provides that such development will only be permitted where there are special
       circumstances. However, the proposal would not accord with any of those special
       circumstances or exceptions as provided for under LP Policy 7.
8.     Notwithstanding the above, planning proposals must be assessed against the
       policies of the development plan when taken as a whole. In this instance, business
       and tourism development is addressed by LP Policy 5. Whilst the proposal is an
       extension of an existing fisheries business and smallholding, the proposal relates
       to tourism development. In this respect, although LP Policy 5(1)(d) does provide
       support for an extension to an existing business where re-location would be
       impractical or not viable, LP Policy 5 (3) directly relates to development of new, or
       upgrading of existing tourism facilities and accommodation and is therefore directly
       relevant to the consideration of the proposal.
9.     This supports the enhancement of existing or provision of new, high quality
       sustainable tourism facilities, attractions and accommodation where they would be
       of an appropriate scale to its location and to its accessibility by a range of transport
       modes. Proposals should provide a well-balanced mix of economic, social and
       environmental benefits.
10. Even if the proposal would be of a scale appropriate to its location and is not
    isolated in that there are some nearby dwellings, it is divorced from any settlement
    or services and facilities. The nearest facilities are located within Bugle. However,
    to access these facilities, visitors to the appeal site would need to travel along a
    relatively fast flowing road.
11. This route would not be conducive to safe pedestrian use due to the distance
    involved, lack of pavements and safe refuge, as well as lack of street lighting along
    sections of the route. This could result in conflict between pedestrians and
    vehicles. Therefore, occupiers of the proposal are unlikely to access the services
    and facilities which are closest to the appeal site directly by foot, particularly into
    the evening or during inclement weather.
12. Moreover, the substantive evidence before me indicates that the appeal site is not
    well served by easily accessible public transport. Therefore, the appeal site is not
    accessible by a range of transport modes and future occupants would be heavily


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010729


         reliant on private vehicles. Such reliance on the private vehicle indicates that the
         proposal would also have an adverse environmental impact.
13. I therefore conclude that the appeal site would not provide a suitable location for
    the proposal, having regard to the local development strategy and its accessibility
    by a range of transport modes. The proposal would conflict with LP policies 1, 2, 3,
    5 and 7. As well as that outlined previously, these policies seek, amongst other
    things, to promote sustainable development. The proposal would also be contrary
    with policies C1 and T1 of the Climate Emergency Development Plan Document
    (February 2023) (CEDPD) which seeks, amongst other things, to locate new
    development in order to reduce emissions and minimise the need to travel and
    maximise the sustainable and active modes of transport in all developments.
14. LP Policy 12 is also cited within the Council’s reason for refusal. However, this
    policy seeks, amongst other things, to achieve high quality safe, sustainable and
    inclusive design in all developments. Although the proposal may result in a
    differing character of occupiers’ movements, the Council do not argue that the
    proposal would harm the character or appearance of the area or result in harm to
    future occupiers or neighbouring occupiers living conditions. On the evidence
    before me, I see no reason to disagree, and I therefore find no conflict with this
    Policy and this Policy is not determinative to my assessment of this main issue.
Flood risk
15. Although the footprint of the proposed units of holiday accommodation and shower
    block are within Flood Zone 1, the appellant’s Flood Risk Assessment1 (FRA)
    states that part of the access route is within Flood Zone 2 and 3, indicating a
    medium/high probability of flood from fluvial sources.
16. Policy F7 of the Framework requires that where development is proposed in a
    location known to be at risk from any form of flooding, now or in the future, it
    should be refused unless, amongst other things, any residual risk can be safely
    managed, and safe access and escape routes are included where appropriate, as
    part of an agreed emergency plan.
17. The appellant has not experienced or is aware of any previous flood events.
    However, the FRA indicates that at the point of the access track at highest risk of
    flooding, during a present day 1 in 100 year fluvial flood event the access route
    could flood to a maximum of 0.68m rising to a maximum of 0.69m during a 1 in
    1,000 year flood event, with moderate flow rates. The FRA further outlines the
    hazard classification associated with moving through the flood water would be
    “Danger for Most”.
18. Mitigation measures are proposed within the FRA in terms of the accommodation
    units and shower block, and it also suggests that the owners/operators of the site
    should sign up to the Environment Agency flood warning system. In terms of
    access and egress during a flood event, the FRA suggests that when exiting
    occupants should turn to the north at the end of the access road and travel north
    on the U6114, rather than travelling onto Roche Road through the deepest section
    of flooding.



1
    Engineering & Development Solutions Report No. J-3647


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                3
Appeal Decision 6010729


19. Nevertheless, whilst reducing the time occupants would be within Flood zone 2/3,
    occupants and/or emergency services would still be required to cross an area
    within Flood zones 2/3. As such, and although I have no doubt of the appellant’s
    intention to mitigate any risk through good business management, weather
    forecasting and communication with customers, in the absence of a robust formal
    emergency plan, I cannot be sure that future occupants would be safe during a
    flood event.
20. Although the existing fisheries can be operated without any restrictions on number
    of anglers, visitors on site or hours of operation, the proposal before me would
    result in overnight occupation of holiday accommodation. The proposal could
    therefore result in additional visitors at the site and would result in a differing
    character of use and movements. Consequently, whilst I accept the appellant
    carries out a duty of care for existing users of the fisheries, this in itself does not
    lessen the potential risk of occupiers of the proposal.
21. To conclude, the proposal would not be appropriate in terms of flood risk, with
    particular regard to access to the site and safety of future occupants and
    emergency responders. The proposal would conflict with LP Policy 27 and CEDPD
    policies C1 and CC3. These policies seek, amongst other things, to ensure
    developments provide safe and suitable access, improve resilience to the effects
    of climate change, avoid areas at risk of flooding and reduce flood risk.
Other Matters
22. The Framework seeks to build a strong, effective economy, with policy S5
    supporting development for rural businesses and services, including tourism,
    where a location outside settlements is shown to be necessary, and policy E4
    which supports sustainable growth in rural areas. The proposal would result in
    some economic benefit both for the appellant, and also the wider local economy
    from the use of nearby services and facilities by future holiday occupiers. Due to
    the relatively small scale of the proposal, I afford this benefit modest weight.
23. Nevertheless, whilst the Framework recognises development proposals to meet
    business needs in rural areas may need to be located outside settlements, and in
    locations that are not well served by public transport, the Framework at policy TR3
    also seeks to locate development in sustainable locations. Moreover, the
    Framework also seeks to ensure that development does not present a risk from
    flooding to potential occupiers, to which given the matter involves public safety, I
    afford substantial weight.
24. I note the appellant's comments about the Council's communication during the
    planning application and in particular the imposition of the second reason for
    refusal. This has little to do with the planning merits of the case, which I have
    considered on the basis of the evidence before me and a recent site visit.
Conclusion
25. For the reasons given above, I find that the proposal would conflict with the
    development plan, read as a whole. No material considerations have been shown
    to have sufficient weight to indicate that a decision should be taken otherwise than
    in accordance with it. Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.

S Harrington INSPECTOR
https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
