 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 28 August 2026
 by G Ellis BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 22 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010772
 33 Western Avenue, Thorpe, Egham, TW20 8QB
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mariana Florescu against the decision of Runnymede Borough Council
 •   The application Ref is RU.25/1146.
 •   The development proposed is the subdivision of existing bungalow to form 2 x semi detached
     dwellings following alterations and extension to the roof, front and side extensions and formation of a
     dropped kerb.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural and Preliminary Matters
2. A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
   published on 17 August 2026. The changes to the Framework do not affect the
   merits of this case in a material way and I, therefore, have not consulted the parties
   with regard to these changes.
3. The Council’s reason for refusal only relates to BNG, no other concerns are raised
   in relation to the proposed development and from the information and my
   observations of the site I have no reason to disagree.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is whether the development would be capable of delivering the
   required biodiversity net gain (BNG).
Reasons
5. Schedule 7A to the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 in effect requires all
   planning permissions to be granted subject to the mandatory biodiversity gain
   condition. The biodiversity gain objective is for development to deliver at least a
   10% increase in biodiversity value relative to the pre-development biodiversity
   value of the onsite habitat. This increase can be achieved through onsite
   biodiversity gains, registered offsite biodiversity gains or statutory biodiversity
   credits. Paragraph 9 of the Schedule requires any onsite habitat enhancement
   relied upon to be maintained for at least 30 years after the development is
   completed.
6. The Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) indicates it would generally be
   inappropriate to refuse an application on grounds the biodiversity gain objective will

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6010772


     not be met, but indicates decision makers may need to consider more broadly
     whether the biodiversity gain condition is capable of being successfully discharged.
7. The appellant does not dispute the need for BNG and submitted supporting
   information with the planning application. On the advice of its ecological adviser,
   Surrey Wildlife Trust, the Council raised concerns about the baseline information
   and whether long-term management and monitoring could be secured.
8. The subdivided property forms part of a residential estate with relatively typical
   domestic gardens comprising a mixture of grass, hardstanding, planting and trees.
   It is proposed to provide all of the biodiversity gain on-site. The Proposed
   Landscape Plan indicates that eight new trees would be planted, the existing
   boundary hedge would be extended, and small changes would be made to the
   extent of hard surfacing and grass. Based on the Small Sites Metric (SSM)
   completed by the appellant, these measures would result in a net change of 0.0110
   units and an uplift of 14.14%.
9. The Statutory Biodiversity Metric User Guide produced by DEFRA, updated in
   August 2026, provides guidance on the use of the statutory biodiversity metric
   calculation tool. The submitted information contains discrepancies between the
   plan and the SSM (e.g. the number of trees) and lacks evidence to support some of
   the categorisations used. More significantly, however, the guide clearly indicates
   that BNG gains cannot be legally secured in private gardens because they do not
   have public access.
10. As set out in the guide, tree planting and new habitats in such locations should be
    recorded only as vegetated garden or unvegetated garden, as appropriate. This
    reflects the difficulties in managing and monitoring biodiversity net gains within a
    private garden.
11. The appellant has prepared a Biodiversity Management Statement indicating that
    the proposed habitats and planting would be maintained through routine garden
    management by the property owner(s). It also suggests further conditions relating
    to the details of the existing features and planting. Notwithstanding these
    measures, the biodiversity gain condition requires the post-development
    biodiversity value of the site to be maintained for at least 30 years after the
    development is completed. In private gardens, this could not be effectively
    monitored and enforced, and the maintenance period would be likely to extend
    beyond the tenure of the current owners. Therefore, even if I were to regard these
    on-site measures as BNG, there is no mechanism to secure the long-term
    requirements.
12. The landscaping would provide biodiversity enhancement to the site. However, for
    the reasons set out above, particularly the private garden location and the
    requirement to maintain the biodiversity value over the long term, I cannot be
    satisfied that the BNG condition is capable of being successfully discharged.
    Accordingly, I cannot be satisfied that the proposal makes adequate provision for
    biodiversity net gain.
13. The proposal would therefore fail to satisfy the requirements of Schedule 7 of the
    TCPA and would conflict with policies SD7, EE9 and EE11 of the Runnymede 2030
    Local Plan. Taken together, these promote opportunities to achieve and secure net
    gains in biodiversity.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
 Appeal Decision 6010772


14. Based on the date of the planning application BNG is a statutory requirement of the
    development. This is a matter of importance and failure to comply is a fundamental
    flaw of the proposal.
15. Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.

G Ellis
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      3
