Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 27 August 2026
by D Harris-Watkins BA(Hons) PgD MRICS
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010911
Beechwood House, Willoughby Road, West Willoughby, Lincolnshire NG32 3SN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs A Pearsey against the decision of South Kesteven District Council.
•    The application Ref is S26/0178.
•    The development proposed is erection of dwellinghouse.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published. The main parties have been invited to comment on the
       relevance of the Framework to the appeal, I am therefore satisfied they have not
       been prejudiced. Consideration has been given to those comments received in
       reaching the appeal decision.
3.     Following the publication of the Framework, the Council now contest that though it
       considers the proposed development conflicts with the development plan, material
       considerations indicate a decision should be made other than in accordance with
       it. Notwithstanding this, as the appeal has been submitted I will proceed to
       determine the appeal on the basis of the evidence before me.
4.     Though not listed within the reasons for refusal on the decision notice, the main
       parties have contested the necessity of how the proposed dwelling would be
       secured as a self-build dwelling as proposed by the appellant. Both main parties
       have had opportunity to comment throughout the course of the appeal. I am
       therefore satisfied they are not prejudiced and I have considered the matter in my
       appraisal of the main issues of the appeal.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues are:
         •    whether the biodiversity gain condition as set out at Schedule 7A of the Town
              and Country Planning Act 1990 (as inserted by Schedule 14 of the
              Environment Act 2021) is capable of being successfully discharged; and,
         •    whether the appeal site is a suitable location for the proposed development,
              with regard to the Council’s spatial strategy, and the accessibility of services
              and facilities; and,


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010911


         •    the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the street
              scene and rural landscape.
Reasons
Biodiversity Gain Objective
6.     Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG) is a mandatory requirement of Schedule 7A of the
       Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (TCPA) (as inserted by Schedule 14 of the
       Environment Act 2021). Every grant of planning permission, subject to certain
       exemptions1, is deemed to have been granted subject to the condition that the
       biodiversity gain objective is met (the BNG condition). This objective is for
       development to deliver at least a 10% increase in biodiversity value relative to the
       pre-development biodiversity value of the onsite habitat.
7.     Though the self-build exemption from the BNG condition is selected on the
       application form, no unilateral undertaking has been submitted to secure it as
       such. The appellant has highlighted that there is a BNG condition exemption for
       sites less than 0.2 Ha, however this applies only to applications made before 6th
       August 2026.
8.     The appellant has highlighted several developments2 where a condition has been
       utilised to try and secure the occupation of the development. However, I find a
       condition requiring occupation of the dwelling by the person who built it would be
       unlikely to pass the tests set out in the National Planning Policy Framework and
       Planning Practice Guidance. My decision is consistent with that at Irnham Grane,
       Corby Glen3, which is more recent than the appeal raised by the appellant and I
       give greater weight to.
9.     In the absence of an appropriate means of securing the dwelling as a self-build
       property I am not satisfied there is a valid exemption, therefore the BNG condition
       applies. Where the BNG condition applies, the application must contain the
       minimum information required by Article 7 of The Town and Country Planning
       (Development Management Procedure) (England) Order 2015. This requires
       information including the pre-development biodiversity values of the site and a
       completed metric calculation tool.
10. The determination of the Biodiversity Gain Plan (BGP) under the BNG condition is
    the mechanism to confirm whether the development meets the biodiversity gain
    objective, and development cannot commence until the BGP is approved. As the
    application/appeal is not accompanied by the minimum information requirements it
    does not quantify the sites existing biodiversity value, it is also therefore not
    possible to quantify the minimum 10% increase in biodiversity value required.
11. For these reasons, I conclude the appeal fails to demonstrate the biodiversity gain
    condition is capable of being successfully discharged and would therefore conflict
    with the requirements of Schedule 7A of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990.
Location of Development
12. The Council’s spatial strategy is based upon the settlement hierarchy in policy SP2
    of the South Kesteven District Council Local Plan 2020 (the LP), which focuses
1
  The Biodiversity Gain Requirements (Exemptions) Regulations 2024
2
  S25/2423, S26/0343, S26/0153, APP/F2415/W/22/3303898
3
  APP/E2530/W/25/3376529


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              2
Appeal Decision 6010911


         new development on those settlements with the most accessible services and
         facilities. West Willoughby is not listed within the settlement hierarchy and is
         therefore not where development is directed towards.
13. Policies SP3 and SP4 of the LP provide support for infill and edge of settlement
    housing development provided they meet a number of location criteria. Though the
    appellant has stated that there is community support for the proposal, in
    accordance with a criterion of SP4 of the LP, as the site does not relate to a
    named settlement within SP2 of the LP, these policies do not apply.
14. Development located within the open countryside is strictly controlled in
    accordance with policy SP5 of the LP. None of the types of development within
    this policy which could be acceptable within the open countryside apply to the
    current proposal. Consequently, the proposal would not be in a suitable location
    for residential development. Permitting it would be harmful in that the strategy for
    the distribution of housing would be undermined.
15. The appeal site is located between two dwellings within the small settlement of
    West Willoughby, such that it is not isolated as has been established4 in the
    context of the Framework. There are no services within West Willoughby other
    than a bus service that goes between Grantham and Sleaford, stopping at the
    nearest settlements of Ancaster and Barkston, where a range of services and
    facilities are available.
16. West Willoughby is served by a surfaced footway to a bar and restaurant at a
    leisure facility, and a service station that is open 7 days a week and sells
    groceries. The path also runs to the village of Ancaster beyond. The footway is
    however unlit, such that it would not provide suitable access at all times of day and
    year. The distance to the services and bar/restaurant is also considerable, with
    Ancaster a significant distance away. There is no footway connecting the site to
    Barkston. The above services and facilities would however be accessible by cycle
    from the appeal site, and the relatively short bus journey.
17. Though the level of connection to services and facilities by walking, cycling and
    public transport may not be to the level expected in an urban area, the
    combination of those available to the site would meet some of the day-to-day
    needs of the future occupiers. Furthermore, the Council now accepts that in
    context of the overall sustainability of the district the site is sufficiently connected to
    services and facilities.
18. The proposal would be in accordance with policies SD1 and ID2 of the LP, which
    seek that development should be located where it minimises the need to travel and
    services and facilities are accessible by sustainable methods of transport.
    However, the proposal is in conflict with policies SP2 and SP5 of the LP, which
    outline the Council’s spatial strategy. Consequently, I conclude the appeal site
    would not be a suitable location for the proposed development. While the proposal
    would be harmful in that the strategy for the distribution of housing would be
    undermined, this harm would be limited because the site has an acceptable
    relationship to services and facilities, a key consideration of the Council’s spatial
    strategy.



4
    Braintree District Council v SoSCLG & ORS [2018]. City & Bramshill V SoSHCL [2021]


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 3
Appeal Decision 6010911


Character and Appearance
19. The dwellings surrounding the site have a fairly spread-out pattern of development
    at a low density, though there is a variety of plot sizes and spaces between
    dwellings. The majority of properties are detached, two-storey and face onto the
    public highway. The dwellings are predominantly constructed of stone and have
    gable roofs with gable end projections, which provide architectural interest to
    several of the buildings. The gardens and roadside verges are well wooded,
    breaking up views of built form within the area. This in combination with the open
    countryside that surrounds West Willoughby, provides the area with a spacious
    and verdant character.
20. The appeal site comprises a grass paddock located between two residential
    properties, and a block of stables, towards the edge of the built form of West
    Willoughby. As an undeveloped space between dwellings, it contributes positively
    towards the spacious and verdant character of the area. The site is open to the
    countryside to the north, however significant mature trees to the south means it is
    largely obscured from the public domain from Willoughby Road.
21. The proposal is for a dwelling to be located between the two neighbouring
    residential properties, facing towards the highway. The dwelling would be two
    storeys, constructed of stone, and have a combination of roof styles, with a gable
    end project providing architectural interest to the front. The dwelling would have a
    relatively large footprint; however, this would be comparable to both Beechwood
    House and a number of other properties locally. Consequently, the design would
    be sympathetic to other properties within the surrounding area.
22. Though the property would be setback from Beechwood House it would not extend
    beyond the built form located to the rear of Greystones. Due to the siting and
    layout of the proposal it would not lead to unnecessary encroachment into the
    countryside. Though the development would close a gap between properties, the
    spacing between buildings and plot density would be comparable to those in the
    surrounding area. The development is also largely not visible from the public
    domain to the south, and from the north the dwelling would be seen in the context
    of the surrounding dwellings and stables. Accordingly, I do not find it would be
    materially harmful to the character of the area and surrounding rural landscape.
23. For the reasons above, I find the proposal would have an acceptable effect on the
    character and appearance of the street scene and rural landscape. The proposal
    would be in accordance with policy DE1 of the LP, which seeks that development
    should be of a high design quality, and should reinforce local identity and not have
    an adverse impact on the street scene, settlement pattern or character of the
    surrounding area.
24. The Council have referenced policies SP2 and SP5 of the LP. These policies
    cover the location of development. They do not concern the effect of development
    on character and appearance, other than in relation to the named settlements
    within the hierarchy and forms of development given within those policies, which
    do not apply to the appeal development. As such, I have not found them
    determinative in relation to matters of character and appearance of the proposed
    development.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010911


Other Matters
25. I have taken into account the need for consistency in decision making5, however
    Beechwood House was granted planning permission6 during a different plan
    period, at a time where the draft version of policy SP4 of the LP was not restricted
    to named settlements in policy SP2 of the LP. Furthermore, the BNG condition
    was not a requirement at this time. Consequently, the circumstances at the time of
    its determination were materially different and I have determined the appeal on its
    own merits.
26. I have not been provided with any means of securing the dwelling as an affordable
    dwelling, accordingly I find this carries little weight in favour of the appeal.
Planning Balance
27. Though I have found the proposal does not harm the character and appearance of
    the street scene and rural landscape, and would have acceptable access to
    services and facilities, it would undermine the Council’s spatial strategy. The
    conflict I have identified with policies SP2 and SP5 of the LP results in a conflict
    with the development plan read as a whole.
28. Policy S3 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. For development inside and outside settlements, this means that
    policy S4 and S5 of the Framework should be applied respectively.
29. The Framework provides a definition of a settlement, and it states settlements do
    not include hamlets or groups of houses outside predominantly built-up areas.
    West Willoughby comprises 15 houses and no other facilities, accordingly I do not
    find it can be considered a predominantly built-up area, or that the site is within a
    settlement and as a result policy S4 of the Framework does not apply.
30. Policy S5 of the Framework provides forms of development that should be
    approved outside of settlements, unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects. One of the forms listed is where
    the development would meet an unmet need which includes where the local
    planning authority cannot demonstrate a five-year housing land supply. Though
    the Council cannot currently demonstrate a five-year housing land supply, this
    requires development would be physically well related to an existing settlement. As
    set out above, West Willoughby is not a settlement in the context of the
    Framework’s definition. The forms of development listed within policy S5 of the
    Framework also include limited infilling within groups of housing, which the
    proposal does comprise of.
31. The development is contrary to policy SP2 and SP5 of the LP, and policy SP3 of
    the LP restricts infilling to named settlements within SP2. These policies are
    materially inconsistent with Policy SP5 of the Framework with regards to its
    broader support for limited infilling outside of settlements. As a result, the conflict
    with these policies is given very limited weight in accordance with the Annexe A of
    the Framework.
32. The proposal would make effective use of land and contribute towards the mix and
    supply of housing, with a design sympathetic to the local area. Policy HO7 of the

5
    North Wiltshire District Council v Secretary of State for the Environment and Clover [1993] 65 P&CR 137
6
    S18/2271


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                   5
Appeal Decision 6010911


       Framework states substantial weight should be given to the benefits of providing
       homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced accommodation needs
       of the community. The development would also result in social and economic
       benefits through future occupiers’ use of services and facilities within the area, and
       during the construction phase of the development.
33. Taken together the benefits would not be substantially outweighed by the adverse
    effects, and therefore the presumption in favour of sustainable development
    applies.
Conclusion
34. The proposed development would conflict with the development plan, but material
    considerations indicate that a decision should be made other than in accordance
    with it. However, it has not been demonstrated that the proposed development
    would comply with Schedule 7A of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990.
    Therefore, the appeal should be dismissed.

D Harris-Watkins
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
