Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 2 September 2026
by C Evans MTCP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010411
Land to the South of Telegraph Road, Caldy CH48 1NZ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Jerry Roberts against the decision of Wirral Council.
•    The application Ref is PIP/25/01491.
•    The development proposed is described as: “permission in principle for the construction of up to
     three dwellinghouses, with associated works”.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The proposal is for permission in principle. The Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
       advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
       housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has two
       stages: the first (‘permission in principle’) stage establishes whether a site is
       suitable in-principle and the second (‘technical details consent’) stage is when the
       detailed development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first of
       these two stages.
3.     The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
       land use and the amount of development permitted. All other matters are
       considered as part of a subsequent technical details consent application if
       permission in principle is granted. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
4.     The evidence submitted included a layout plan. As this is for permission in
       principle, I have considered this as indicative only.
5.     Subsequent to the decision made by the Council on the application to which this
       appeal relates, a revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. Both parties have had an
       opportunity to comment. My decision has been made on the basis of the revised
       Framework.
Main Issues
6.     The main issues are:
     •     whether the proposed development would be inappropriate development in the
           Green Belt having regard to the Framework and relevant development plan
           policies;


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010411


     •     the effect of the proposal on the openness and purposes of the Green Belt; and
     •     whether any harm by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm, would
           be clearly outweighed by other considerations, so as to amount to the very
           special circumstances required to justify the proposal.
Reasons
Inappropriate development
7.     The appeal site adjoins Telegraph Road on one side and is in use as grazing
       paddocks for horses. Surrounding uses are mixed. A ribbon of residential
       dwellings along Telegraph Road borders the site to one side. The access road
       leading to a sports facility and car park borders the opposite side, with further
       paddocks and stables. Beyond the site, away from Telegraph Road is a hockey
       pitch, athletic track and green fields. Sports fields are on the opposite side of
       Telegraph Road.
8.     The site is located in the Green Belt. Policy GB7 of the Framework details the type
       of development which is not inappropriate in the Green Belt. This includes limited
       infilling in villages lying within the Green Belt. Both parties are in agreement that
       Caldy is a village and that the development would be limited in scale. They
       disagree, however, over whether the site is part of the village and whether it
       represents infilling.
9.     Whilst there is a footpath and streetlights along Telegraph Road, the ribbon of
       development that the appeal site adjoins appears distinctly separate to the main
       part of Caldy due to the open green space between them. In addition, when
       travelling along Telegraph Road from Caldy towards the appeal site, the dwellings
       closest to Caldy on the appeal site side of the road are well screened behind
       mature trees. As a result, the ribbon of development appears distinctly separate to
       the village.
10. The proposed development would fill part of the gap between the residential
    development in Caldy and the ribbon of development along Telegraph Road. An
    area of green space would remain along Telegraph Road. Whilst this does not
    necessarily preclude the site being considered as infill, the mature trees along
    Telegraph Road provides further visual separation. As a result, development of the
    site would not appear as an infill development.
11. It has been put to me that the prevailing urban grain for the area features large
    gaps between properties. Be that as it may, as described above, the greenspace
    around the appeal site, in combination with the mature trees and vegetation along
    Telegraph Road, result in a visual separation. Consequently, development of the
    site would be incongruent with the established urban grain.
12. For the reasons highlighted above, I conclude that the proposal would be
    inappropriate development in the Green Belt. It would conflict with Wirral Local
    Plan 2022-2040 (adopted 2025) (Local Plan) Policy WS1, which requires national
    policy for the Green Belt to apply.
Openness of the Green Belt
13. The openness of the Green Belt is both visual and spatial in nature. Although no
    plans and elevations are provided through the permission in principle process, the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010411


       proposal would result in built form where there is none. It would be clearly seen
       from Telegraph Road. Whilst it would adjoin the existing ribbon of residential
       development on one side, the site contributes positively to the openness of a wider
       area of undeveloped Green Belt land.
14. The appellant has indicated that the foliage and planting along Telegraph Road
    could be retained and that this could be secured at technical details consent stage
    of the permission in principle process. This, however, would not overcome the
    harm to the openness of the Green Belt that I have identified above.
15. On the whole, the proposal would result in harm to the visual and spatial openness
    of the Green Belt, although this would be modest given the small scale of the
    proposal. Nevertheless, the proposal conflicts with the purposes of the Green Belt
    and substantial weight should be given to the harm, as per Policy GB 6 of the
    Framework and Policy WS1 of the Local Plan.
Other considerations
16. The proposal would contribute positively towards the housing choice and supply in
    the area, where the Local Plan notes a need for larger sized homes to support
    families. I give this limited weight, given that no details of a shortfall in housing
    land supply are before me. Neither are there details of the type or size of dwelling
    proposed, which are undetermined at this stage.
17. I acknowledge that the site is in an accessible location, at low risk of flooding from
    fluvial sources and no known areas of surface water flooding, is not within a
    designated ecological area, has no Tree Preservation Orders within or adjacent to
    the site, is not within a conservation area, and there are no listed buildings within
    or in proximity to the site. However, I find that these matters are neutral in the
    planning balance.
Other Matters
18. The appeal site is located within the consultation Impact Risk Zone associated with
    Thurstaston Common SSSI. The Council has confirmed that it was not necessary
    to consult Natural England regarding the proposal.
19. My attention has been drawn to appeal decisions, which were allowed on the basis
    of representing limited infilling in villages. Few details have been provided to me
    and so I cannot be certain that these are comparable. Nevertheless, I have
    carefully reviewed these. The first, (Ref: APP/V1505/W/21/3283535) makes
    reference to residential development either side of the site and dwellings under
    construction to the rear. The second (Ref: APP/F2360/W/20/3244797) refers to the
    site as being enclosed by existing built development. The appeal site before me
    has residential development to just one side of the site only, and so is materially
    different in this regard. These decisions have not altered my findings above.
20. Reference has also been made to other developments in the area, which are in the
    Green Belt. Few details have been provided to me and so I do not know the
    circumstances under which they were approved. I am also not bound by previous
    decisions made by the Council and am required to assess this appeal on the basis
    of its own merits.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010411


Green Belt Balance and Conclusion
21. The proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt and would
    harm openness. This attracts significant weight, in line with Policy GB 6 of the
    Framework. Other considerations do not clearly outweigh the harm to the Green
    Belt. Therefore, there are no very special circumstances that apply.
22. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.



C Evans
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
