Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by Richard Snow BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010430
Regency House, 65 New Bridge Street, Leicester LE2 7JR
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr A Qinami on behalf of The Car Crew Ltd against the decision of Leicester
    City Council.
•   The application ref is 20251872.
•   The development proposed is change of use from factory (Class B2 General Industrial) to car repair
    workshop and MOT test centre (Sui Generis).

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. I observed during my site visit that the change of use to a car repair workshop and
   MOT test centre has already taken place.
3. The appellant has submitted a revised plan (Drawing No: 65NBS-A0-001 Rev B
   dated 25 May 2026) with the appeal which shows an alternative internal layout to
   that which formed the basis of the council’s decision. The appellant advises that the
   plan depicts the manner in which the proposed use would operate. The plan does
   not constitute a fundamental change to the proposal and as all parties have had the
   opportunity to consider this plan through the appeal process, accepting this plan
   would not cause procedural unfairness. Accordingly, I have determined the appeal
   on the basis of this revised plan.
4. The council adopted the Leicester Local Plan (2020-2036) (the LP) on 9 June 2026.
   The LP replaced the Leicester City Core Strategy (2014) and the saved policies of
   the Leicester Local Plan (2006) referred to in evidence. Main parties have had the
   opportunity to address the LP in their submissions.
5. A new National Planning Policy Framework (‘the new Framework’) was published
   on 17 August 2026 after the statements in relation to this appeal had been
   exchanged and final comments made. However, as the changes to the new
   Framework are not material to this decision, the cases of the parties have not been
   prejudiced by not being able to comment on the new Framework. I have therefore
   determined the appeal on the basis of the statements and comments that have
   been received.
Main Issue
6. The main issue for the appeal is the effect of the proposed development on
   highway safety in relation to users of the public highway in the vicinity of the site.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010430


Reasons
7. The appeal site is located on the corner of New Bridge Street and Brazil Street
   within an area of mixed commercial and residential properties. At its southern end,
   New Bridge Street provides access to the “Electricity Sports Ground”. Roads within
   the vicinity of the site are subject to parking restrictions including double yellow
   lines and residents’ parking zones.
8. The appeal premises is a flat-roofed building of 2 and 3 stories, containing various
   vehicular access and pedestrian doors onto New Bridge Street. The proposed use
   relates to the ground floor of the building only.
9. Policy T07 of the LP requires new development which generates a demand for car
   parking to make provision to meet that demand having regard to road safety
   considerations. Amongst other requirements, car parking should be usable, safe
   and secure and should avoid dominating the street scene. For commercial
   development, adequate provision should be made for parking, servicing and
   loading without having an impact on the operational effectiveness of the
   development and the safe movement of people, vehicles and goods.
10. At the time of my site visit, the interior of the building included two car hoists affixed
    to the floor with both accommodating cars being serviced/repaired. Two
    unroadworthy cars in states of disassembly were stored adjacent to these hoists.
    Elsewhere in the building, 4 other cars were accommodated, seemingly awaiting
    work/repair. The adjacent sports ground car park accommodated several further
    vehicles connected to the appeal premises. During my observations, a car
    undergoing an engine inspection was parked on the road frontage, and a flat-bed
    lorry delivered another. Both were temporarily parked on-street and then relocated
    to the sports ground car park after a short period. Whilst I appreciate these
    observations represent a snapshot in time, I have no reason to believe that the
    activities occurring were dissimilar in nature to those that typically occur at the
    premises. Indeed, representations made by interested parties suggest that the use
    of the premises for vehicle MOT/repairs has led to the indiscriminate parking of
    cars, including damaged cars awaiting repair, on footways and carriageways in the
    surrounding area.
11. The appellant advances that the MOT/repair use proposed would operate
    materially differently to that described above and would be restricted to a
    designated area of 112 sqm in the northern part of the building. The proposed
    internal layout plan indicates that this area would accommodate 4 cars; 2 on
    MOT/repair ramps/hoists, 1 awaiting diagnosis and 1 awaiting collection. My
    observations on site indicate that this would be difficult to achieve given the limited
    space available. It is suggested that customers would attend only by prior
    appointment and that daily appointments would typically number 6 - 7.
12. The remainder of the building would be used primarily as a storage area with an
    ancillary reception, office and staff facilities. With the exception of the MOT area
    described above, no part of the building would be used for the storage or parking of
    customer vehicles. Notwithstanding this, the submitted plan depicts space within
    the building as “available vehicle space for storage” showing space for 6 cars
    internally and 1 externally in front of the access door. The appellant suggests that a
    planning condition could be used to restrict operations to the areas described.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010430


13. Given the linear alignment of spaces for customer cars within the proposed
    MOT/repair area, and the arrangement of cars within the proposed storage area, it
    is apparent that cars would require removal from the building to allow others to
    manoeuvre, resulting in vehicles being displaced onto the public highway.
    Furthermore, even if the arrival of customers’ cars could be regulated through the
    operation of an appointment-only scheme as suggested, the subsequent collection
    of cars would fall outside of the appellant’s control and the uncertainty of timings for
    collections is likely to result in additional demand for parking.
14. The proposed use depends on the ability to accommodate cars being delivered,
    serviced and repaired, plus those awaiting diagnostics or works and those awaiting
    collection by customers. The application form indicates that the business would
    employ 5 full-time employees. I have been provided with no information regarding
    available public transport or any proposed Travel Plan to encourage employees to
    travel to work by means other than their private vehicles, and the proposed plan
    shows no parking provision for staff. Consequently, in proposing just 4 off-street
    parking spaces to meet the numerous operational demands described above, I
    conclude that the operation of the business is very unlikely to be accommodated
    wholly within the building and the displacement of vehicles onto the public highway
    would be highly likely.
15. There is no turning head on New Bridge Street and, given the width of the road,
    vehicles may require multi-point manoeuvres within the highway or need to reverse
    into the crossroads to turn. In an area where double yellow lines and residents’
    parking zones are prevalent, manoeuvring and parked vehicles are highly likely to
    result in the obstruction of highway users and pedestrians, particularly those with
    pushchairs and wheelchair users, and cause potential conflict with other vehicles,
    detrimentally affecting highway safety.
16. The appellant proposes a Vehicle Management Plan (VMP) which it is suggested
    could be secured by planning condition. The VMP would seek to control the arrival
    of customers, prevent parking on New Bridge Street and prohibit repairs to cars
    occurring outside the building. It would additionally seek to limit the acceptance of
    broken-down cars, require the retention of customer’s car keys, prevent the use of
    3rd party land for parking without a prior legal agreement, and impose restrictions
    on deliveries and on-street parking. I consider it unlikely, however, that a condition
    requiring the operation of the business in this manner would be enforceable, and
    elements of the proposed operational restrictions are not within the control of the
    appellant. Accordingly, such a condition would not meet the tests of the new
    Framework or overcome my concerns above.
17. The appellant advances evidence of a written agreement made with the Leicester
    Electricity Sports Cricket Club (LESCC) in February 2026 which permits the parking
    of up to 10 cars and vans on LESCC land subject to various conditions. This does
    not constitute a formal lease agreement and is a rolling one-month arrangement
    subject to termination at short notice. Representations made during this appeal cast
    doubt on the continuation of this informal arrangement. Accordingly, I can attribute
    it little weight. Without use of the sports ground car park, it is not immediately
    apparent where arriving vehicles, such as those I observed on my site visit could be
    parked, other than on the public highway.
18. In addition to the matters already covered, the appellant proposes that planning
    conditions could be imposed to restrict opening hours (including on match days),

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010430


     the use of machinery, and the storage of waste oils/filters/fluids; the prevention of
     body-spraying or paint shop operations, external car washing or testing; plus the
     closure of all doors during noisy operations, and a limit on the maximum number of
     cars permitted on site. However, these suggested conditions would not directly
     address the highway safety concerns above.
19. The evidence suggests that whilst the ground floor of the premises had been
    vacant for some time, its lawful use remains for general industrial purposes (within
    Use Class B2). Both parties recognise that reverting to this lawful use would itself
    create a parking demand. However, the appeal proposals relate to a use entirely
    dependent on the delivery, repair/servicing and collection of cars and I consider
    that the number of vehicles likely to be on site at any time, and their turnover, would
    accordingly be greater than that of a typical industrial use.
20. The appellant advances that the proposal would deliver a valuable local service,
    provide employment and bring formerly vacant industrial floorspace back into
    economic use. Collectively, these amount to economic benefits in favour of the
    appeal, but do not overcome my concerns set out above.
21. Taking all of the above into account, I find that the proposal would give rise to
    significant harm to highway safety through the parking and manoeuvring of cars on
    the public highway and the likely obstruction to pedestrians and road users this
    would cause. Accordingly, the proposal conflicts with Policy T07 of the LP in failing
    to provide adequate provision for parking, servicing and loading and avoid harm to
    highway safety.
Conclusion
22. The proposal does not accord with the development plan as a whole and there are
    no other considerations that indicate I should take a decision other than in
    accordance with it. Accordingly, the appeal should be dismissed.



Richard Snow
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
