Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 13 August 2026
by C Butcher BSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010616
Vale View, West Bagborough, Taunton, TA4 3EW
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
     planning permission
•    The appeal is made by Mr J Raucki (AJ Raucki & Son Ltd) against Somerset Council.
•    The application Ref is 45/26/0003.
•    The development proposed is the erection of four dwellings, garages and associated works.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     I have determined this appeal on the basis of the Council’s failure to determine the
       planning application within the statutory timescale. However, I have had regard to
       the Council’s appeal statement, in so far that it provides clarity on the reasons why
       the Council would have refused planning permission had it been able to do so.
3.     An updated version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework)
       was published on 17th August 2026. In the interests of fairness, I provided the main
       parties with an opportunity to submit comments on the new Framework as part of
       the appeal process. I have taken account of those comments when making my
       decision.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are: (i) the effect of the proposed development on protected
       species; and (ii) whether the proposed development would be capable of
       delivering the minimum required net gain in biodiversity.
Reasons
Protected Species
5.     As part of the material submitted at the application stage, the appellant has
       provided a Preliminary Ecological Assessment, produced by Greena Ecological
       Consultancy, March 2026 (the PEA). The PEA seeks to provide a baseline for
       different species that could be present on site in order to demonstrate how they
       would be protected as a result of the proposal.
6.     I note that the Council’s ecology officer has raised various concerns with the
       submitted PEA with particular regard to bats, reptiles, dormice and nesting birds. I
       will not repeat those concerns in detail as part of my decision. However, it is clear

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010616


         that the ecologist considers that additional surveys are required in relation to each
         of those species. In particular, they note that at least fifteen species of bats, two
         species of reptiles and hazel dormice have all been recorded within reasonably
         close proximity to the site. Moreover, the ecologist contends that the site contains
         features that could provide a suitable habitat for those species. In relation to
         nesting birds, a survey was undertaken in mid-August which is outside of the
         optimal period. The ecologist also stated that the site could be suitable for ground
         nesting species such as skylarks.
7.       I can see no reason to disagree with the content of the ecologist’s comments
         which appear to be robust and measured. I therefore agree that further survey
         work is required in order to determine with sufficient certainty that the proposed
         development would not result in undue harm to protected species.
8.       The appellant has set out that the Council did not object to a very similar PEA
         which supported a previous application for six dwellings in 20251. It is not clear to
         me why the Council considered the previous PEA to be acceptable, subject to the
         imposition of conditions, and I acknowledge that this position will be frustrating for
         the appellant. However, as the decision maker in this appeal, I need sufficient
         certainty that the development will not harm protected species. At present, that is
         simply not the case.
9.       There are mitigation measures which could be conditioned, including those
         contained within the PEA. These include preventing vegetation clearance in the
         bird nesting season, and the installation of bat boxes. However, in light of the
         insufficient survey information, such measures would not fully allay my concerns.
         Moreover, seeking additional surveys via a suitably worded condition would not be
         appropriate as the required level of certainty is needed prior to granting planning
         permission.
10. As a result of these considerations, I find that the proposal has the potential to
    harm protected species. As such it would conflict with Policies DM1 and CP8 of
    the Taunton Deane Core Strategy, September 2012 (the CS), as well as Policy
    ENV1 of the Site Allocations and Development Management Plan, December
    2016. Taken together, the relevant aspects of these policies seek to preserve the
    natural environment, including protected species.
Biodiversity Net Gain
11. Under the statutory framework for biodiversity net gain (BNG), subject to some
    exceptions, every grant of planning permission is deemed to have been granted
    subject to the condition that the biodiversity gain objective is met (the ‘biodiversity
    gain condition’). The objective requires development to deliver at least a 10%
    increase in biodiversity value relative to the pre-development biodiversity value of
    the on-site habitat. The increase can be achieved through on-site biodiversity
    gains, registered offsite biodiversity gains or statutory biodiversity credits.
12. The Council has not alleged that the minimum information requirements have not
    been met. Based on the available evidence, including the details in the application
    form and the appellant’s Biodiversity Net Gain Report (March 2026), I have no
    reason to disagree. However, the Council has set out that the off-site gains need
    to be secured via a planning obligation. I agree that a planning obligation will be

1
    Council ref: 45/25/0013


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6010616


       required, despite the fact that the off-site land is also within the ownership of the
       appellant. However, such an agreement is only necessary at the point at which the
       statutory biodiversity gain plan condition is discharged.
13. On that basis, for the purposes of this decision, I conclude that the proposed
    development would be capable of delivering the minimum required net gain in
    biodiversity. As such, there would be no conflict with CS Policy CP8, which in part
    seeks to protect and enhance biodiversity.
Other Matters
14. The appeal site is within the Quantock Hills National Landscape (the NL). The site
    is well related to existing development and visually forms part of the settlement of
    West Bagborough. I am satisfied that the proposed development would be seen
    within that context and would not be perceived as encroaching on the countryside.
    As such, the scenic beauty of the NL would be maintained. As a result of the
    design of the scheme, I am also satisfied that the requirements of the Levelling Up
    and Regeneration Act 2023 would be adhered to. This legislation requires decision
    makers to actively seek to further the statutory purposes of NL’s.
15. The development lies within the hydrological catchment of the River Tone, which
    forms part of the Somerset Levels and Moors Ramsar catchment. I note that
    mitigation has been proposed. However, as the appeal is being dismissed for other
    reasons, there is no need for me to undertake an appropriate assessment.
Conclusion
16. I have found that the appeal proposal has the potential to cause harm in relation to
    protected species. Consequently, it would conflict with the development plan when
    read as a whole, notwithstanding that I have found no harm with regards to
    biodiversity net gain. The provision of four dwellings would contribute to local
    housing need, including helping to address a current under supply. The proposal
    could also provide some economic benefits for the local area and deliver
    biodiversity enhancements. However, the modest nature of the scheme means
    that any such benefits are likely to be relatively limited.
17. The Council is currently unable to demonstrate a five-year supply of sites, with the
    current figure being just 3.95 years. Moreover, the site is situated just outside of
    the settlement of West Bagborough. With that in mind, Policy S5(j) of the
    Framework applies. In such circumstances this part of the policy provides support
    for proposals where they would be well related to an existing settlement and would
    be of an appropriate scale in relation to the availability of infrastructure. Given the
    location of the site, these aspects of the policy would be met. Part 1 of the policy
    notes that such proposals should be approved unless the benefits of doing so
    would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against
    national decision-making policies.
18. Policy HO7 of the Framework states that substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community. In light of the shortfall in housing land
    supply, this policy could be considered to be of relevance. However, in this
    instance the lack of information in relation to protected species means that
    significant harm cannot be ruled out. As a result of the conflict with the aims of


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010616


       Policy N2 of the Framework, I conclude that the harm would substantially outweigh
       the benefits, even when affording substantial weight in relation to Policy HO7.
19. Accordingly, there are no material considerations, either individually or in
    combination, that outweigh the identified harm and associated development plan
    conflict. The appeal is therefore dismissed.



C Butcher
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
