Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by G Dring BA (Hons) MA MRTPI MAUDE
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010422
40 Millers Lane, Harpley, Norfolk PE31 6TU
    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Neale against the decision of King's Lynn and West Norfolk
     Borough Council.
    The application Ref is 26/00172/F.
    The development proposed is a self-build dwelling.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    I have taken the site address above from the appeal form rather than the
      application form as it more clearly identifies the location of the site.
3.    I have been provided with plans relating to an amended scheme which was
      submitted to but not considered by the Council when it reached its decision. These
      plans included amendments to the red line boundary and the layout of the
      proposed dwelling. Although the general form of the proposal remains similar to
      that originally proposed, there are material differences.
4.    As the Council did not consider the revised plans, it follows that they were not
      subject to any consultation exercise. Having regard to the principles of
      transparency and fairness, I am mindful that interested parties would not
      necessarily be aware of or made comments in response to the appeal on the
      amended scheme, and for this reason I consider that they would be potentially
      prejudiced if I accepted the amended drawings. Accordingly, I have determined the
      appeal on the basis of the plans originally submitted with the planning application
      and on which the Council made its decision.
5.    The appellant submitted a Traffic Survey with their final comments in response to
      the Highway Authority submission. However, at that late stage there was no
      opportunity for the Council or any interested parties to comment on that evidence.
      Again, in the interests of transparency and fairness, I have not accepted this late
      evidence, nor have I considered it in coming to my decision.
6.    A revised Unilateral Undertaking (UU) was submitted with the appeal which seeks
      to secure the dwelling as a self-build custom build (SBCB) dwelling and confirm
      mitigation in relation to European sites protected under the Habitat and Species
      Regulations 2017 (as amended). I will return to these matters later in my decision.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010422


7.    Whilst I note that ‘Short Lane’ is referred to in the Council’s second reason for
      refusal, it is clear from the evidence submitted that this road name was used in
      error and that in fact Millers Lane is the correct road name. The Highway Authority
      has confirmed that the assessment was made on the basis of the drawings and
      that the correct site, along with the proposed access was considered. I am content,
      following my site visit and having reviewed the evidence that this is the case.
8.    A new National Planning Policy Framework (Framework) was published on 17
      August 2026 which replaces the previous version. Both parties have had the
      opportunity to comment on the new Framework. Accordingly, I have had regard to
      the current Framework in reaching my decision.
Main Issues
9.    The main issues are:
               whether the site is in a suitable location for residential development having
                regard to the spatial strategy and the character and appearance of the area;
               highway safety and the accessibility of services and facilities; and
               the provision of SBCB development.
Reasons
Suitable location
10. Harpley is defined as a tier 5 rural village under Policy LP01 of the King’s Lynn and
    West Norfolk Local Plan 2021-2040 (LP) where limited growth is identified to
    support local service provision and the housing needs of smaller rural
    communities. There is no dispute that the site is situated outside of the
    development boundary identified in the LP but is directly adjacent to it.
11. LP Policy LP02 states that in tier 5 settlements, residential development will not
    normally be supported outside development boundaries, unless allocated through
    the LP or a Neighbourhood Plan. One exception to this is where a tier 5 settlement
    has a housing requirement, referred to by LP Policy LP03, for which there are no
    opportunities within the development boundary and which a Neighbourhood Plan
    does not address through allocations.
12. Under LP Policy LP01 a requirement for one dwelling is identified for Harpley
    throughout the plan period. The Council state that due to a recent approval, there
    is currently permission for 16 dwellings within the development boundary of
    Harpley which goes beyond the requirement set out in the LP. There is no
    evidence before me which suggests a contrary position. There is also no evidence
    that the site is allocated, and I am not directed to any further requirement for
    dwellings in or adjacent to Harpley identified under LP Policy LP03, nor in a
    Neighbourhood Plan. The proposal is therefore contrary to LP Policy LP02 and the
    overarching spatial strategy set out in the LP.
13. The site comprises a grass field with hedgerows and trees along the majority of
    the boundaries. Millers Lane runs alongside the southern boundary and there is an
    existing vehicular access into the site. Adjacent to the northeast and east of the
    site is existing residential development, including two storey dwellings of different
    types and designs with a variety of garden space sizes. The prevailing layout in


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010422


       this part of the village sees linear development that is in alignment with and has
       frontage onto the road, albeit Mill View, the property adjacent the site, is orientated
       side on to the roads, addressing the junction of Mill Road and Millers Lane instead.
       The site abuts open countryside along the remaining boundaries.
14. Whilst the site is enclosed and screened by significant boundary vegetation, its
    open, undeveloped and verdant features mean that it is distinctly rural in its
    character and appearance. Whilst there is no conservation area nor any listed
    buildings in proximity, the characteristics of the site still contribute positively to the
    rural setting of the village.
15. The provision of a dwelling on the site, along with the associated domestic
    paraphernalia and activity related to residential development would significantly
    diminish the rural character and appearance of the site, permanently eroding the
    positive contribution that it makes to the rural setting of the village. For these
    reasons, I do not find that it would appear as the logical rounding off of the
    settlement in character and appearance terms.
16. In isolation, the proposal would result in a property that would add to the varying
    character and appearance of the area. However, the proposed siting of the
    dwelling set back within the site and not aligned with or fronting onto the road
    would be at odds with the prevailing characteristics of the settlement. The
    proposed garden space would be significantly larger than those that surround it,
    which would also result in incongruity with the settlement pattern. The proposed
    close boarded fence along the northwestern boundary would also create a harsh
    boundary treatment alongside the Public Right of Way, which would result in a
    harmful visual impact for those using that route.
17. Whilst the site would be partially screened by the retained vegetation, the removal
    of trees to form a new access into the site would mean that the dwelling would be
    visible from Millers Lane across the access point and through breaks in the
    vegetation, particularly during the winter when the vegetation would be less dense.
    New planting could bolster the existing boundary vegetation and whilst the verdant
    boundaries of the site would soften the appearance of the development, it could
    not necessarily be relied upon. The provision of a dwelling on the site would
    therefore be apparent from Millers Lane and from neighbouring dwellings.
18. The effects would be localised due to the existing enclosure of the site, the
    proximity of the existing development within the settlement, and because the site
    does not form part of the wider larger scale agricultural landscape. Nevertheless,
    the erosion of the rural character and appearance of the site at the settlement
    edge, alongside the incongruity with the settlement pattern to which it would sit
    adjacent would result in significant harm to the character and appearance of the
    area.
19. I therefore find that the proposal would not be in a suitable location for residential
    development having regard to the spatial strategy and it would result in harm to the
    character and appearance of the area. It would be contrary to Policies LP02, LP18
    and LP21 of the LP. These policies seek, amongst other things, that development
    is more limited in the smaller rural settlements, is of high quality design which
    respects or enhances the character of the area and that the amenity of the wider
    environment is conserved and enhanced.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010422




Highway safety and accessibility
20. I witnessed on site that the visibility from the proposed access point appeared
    reasonable in both directions meaning that there would be time for motorists
    entering or exiting the site to see oncoming traffic along Millers Lane. Millers Lane
    is also subject to a 30mph speed restriction and due to the narrow nature of the
    road, I consider it a reasonable assumption that speeds along the road could be
    more restrained.
21. However, Millers Lane is so narrow that cars are unable to pass each other, whilst
    remaining fully on the carriageway. I did not witness any formal passing places,
    meaning that it is likely that the verge would be used to enable these types of
    manoeuvres and vehicles may need to be reversed to enable another to proceed.
    The verge is not designed to support moving traffic and therefore movement on it
    could cause damage to it. Also, the ground could be uneven or have hidden
    obstacles present which would also be unsafe for road users. The use of the verge
    would therefore be hazardous to motorists and even more so should a larger
    vehicle need to pass another vehicle along this route.
22. As you head east along Millers Lane, a relatively short distance from the proposed
    access point is a bend in the road which leads to a T junction with Mill Road to the
    southeast and Back Street to the northwest. I found visibility to be good from this
    junction towards Mill Road but restricted along Back Street due to boundary
    hedging. This restriction means that you have to edge out into the carriageway
    before being able to clearly see oncoming traffic until it is relatively close to the
    junction. Given the restricted width of the roads, this is hazardous. However, I
    acknowledge that this is an existing constraint.
23. There is no dispute between the parties that the level of vehicular movements
    likely to result from the proposal is six habitual traffic trips per day. There is no
    data before me which suggests there have been any collisions along this stretch of
    road in recent years. However, there is also no evidence before me which sets out
    the current level of vehicular movements along Millers Lane to understand the
    baseline position in terms of its use.
24. Whilst the increase in vehicular movements resulting from the proposal would be
    limited, it would nevertheless result in an increase, exacerbating an existing
    situation whereby the road is insufficient for motorists to safely pass one another.
    As a result, the risk of conflict between the different users of Millers Lane including
    pedestrians and cyclists would be increased and therefore the proposal would be
    likely to result in harm to highway safety.
25. Whilst there are some services and facilities within Harpley, including a school,
    church, public house, village hall and bus stops for onward journeys, the most
    direct route to them would be along Millers Lane and Short Lane. Short Lane is
    also restricted in width. There is no separate footway along Millers Lane or Short
    Lane, nor is there any lighting along the majority of the route. The overall length of
    the journey from the site to the junction with Nethergate Street which leads to the
    main facilities would be approximately 600m. Given this length, in combination with
    the condition of the route, it would not be an attractive option for many to walk or
    cycle along. Whilst some could stand and wait clear of the highway on the verge



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010422


       where it is available, some may struggle to do that, including those with limited
       mobility or those with young children.
26. I recognise that the driving distance to the services and facilities in the village
    would be short, and the journey to other larger villages nearby which offer a wider
    range of services and facilities would not be overly far. Nevertheless, the location
    of the site would not maximise the use of sustainable modes of transport.
27. More limited accessibility to services and facilities by sustainable transport modes
    maybe the case for some of the more rural settlements of the borough, however,
    LP Policy LP02 recognises this and sets out support for more limited development
    in response to this consideration.
28. Without substantive evidence to the contrary, the proposal would be likely to result
    in harm to highway safety and access to services and facilities by sustainable
    modes of transport would be constrained. It is therefore contrary to Policies LP06,
    LP13 and LP21 of the LP. These policies seek, amongst other things, that
    developments provide safe and convenient access for all modes and that they are
    located to minimise the need to travel and maximise the ability to make journeys
    via sustainable modes of transport.
29. Policy LP02 is also referred to by the Council, but in section 5, which appears most
    relevant to the proposal, there is no discussion regarding highway safety or
    accessibility. This is therefore not directly relevant to this main issue.
SBCB provision
30. LP Policy LP31 refers specifically to SBCB development and states that proposals
    for such development will be supported where they respect local character and
    comply with other relevant policies in the LP.
31. The Council has confirmed that it cannot demonstrate a sufficient supply of SBCB
    plots to meet the identified demand as required by the Self Build and Custom
    Housebuilding Act 2015, as amended by the Housing and Planning Act 2016. The
    appellant suggests a shortfall of 243 plots. The Council has not provided any
    substantive information.
32. As stated above the proposal is described as being an SBCB development. A legal
    agreement was submitted to the Council previously, however due to issues raised
    with the drafting of that agreement by the Council, a revised UU dated 30 July
    2026 was submitted with the appeal. The revised UU includes the amended
    drawing that identifies a different red line boundary and a different layout to that
    identified in the drawings that were assessed by the Council when it determined
    the application. Whilst the reference to the planning application number would
    provide a link to the development that is being proposed, the discrepancy in the
    plans could provide uncertainty. However, the Council suggests that the
    development would be secured as a SBCB development and based on the
    evidence before me I find it could be appropriately secured as such.
33. Nevertheless, given my findings above in relation to the spatial strategy, character
    and appearance, highway safety and accessibility, the proposal would be contrary
    to LP Policy LP31, due to the conflict I have found with other relevant policies in
    the LP.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010422


Other Matters
34. Pre-application advice was sought by the appellant prior to submitting the
    application, which was potentially more positive in its conclusions. However, the
    Council has confirmed that between that advice being issued and the application
    being determined, new planning policies were adopted. It also confirms that
    permission had been granted for residential development at another site within
    Harpley, exceeding the requirement set out in the LP. Whilst I understand the
    appellants frustrations, pre-application comments are indicative at the time they
    are made and are not legally binding. Therefore, there is no duty for the
    pre-application advice to be upheld in the determination of a subsequent
    application.
35. I am referred to appeal decisions in other Council areas. In the cases of 65A
    Renhold Road and land north of Thistle Barn, it was found that the location would
    be unsuitable but no unacceptable harm was found in relation to the character and
    appearance of the area. In the decision at land at the Loke, the Inspector found
    that the location of the site would offer a genuine choice of non-car transport
    modes for all users. In the case at land west of Suffolk House, the scheme was for
    nine self-build/custom build dwellings and is therefore of a different scale to the
    scheme before me now. The considerations set out in the planning balances of
    those other cases are not comparable to the circumstances of this appeal and they
    do not alter my findings set out above.
36. I note that letters of support were received in response to the planning application.
    Whilst I have considered the comments made, they do not outweigh my concerns
    set out above.
Planning Balance
37. Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 requires
    planning applications to be determined in accordance with the development plan
    unless material considerations indicate otherwise. The proposal would be contrary
    to the LP policies identified above relating to the location of the development, the
    character and appearance of the area, highway safety and accessibility.
    Consequently, the proposal would be contrary to the development plan when read
    as a whole.
38. Framework Policy S3:1 b. states that Policy S5 should be applied where
    development proposals are located outside settlements. Framework Policy S5:1
    identifies that outside settlements, only certain forms of development should be
    approved as set out under criteria a. – j., unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies set out in the Framework.
39. Whilst the appellant does not assert that the proposal would fall under any of the
    criteria set out under Framework Policy S5:1, the Council has suggested that there
    is evidenced unmet need in respect of SBCB plots and therefore criterion j. maybe
    relevant.
40. Criterion j. identifies support for development which would meet an evidenced
    unmet need where a development would be physically well related to an existing
    settlement (unless the nature of the development would make this inappropriate)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6010422


       and be of a scale which can be accommodated taking into account the existing or
       proposed availability of infrastructure.
41. The Council suggest that due to the proposal only making a limited contribution to
    this unmet need, this would not be the relevant test. Nonetheless, there does not
    appear to be a requirement set out in the Framework on the level of contribution
    that a proposal might make to an evidenced unmet need.
42. However, whilst the site would be physically adjacent to the settlement and of
    limited scale, given the harm I have found in respect of character and appearance
    and the highway safety implications, the nature of the development would be
    inappropriate in this location and therefore criterion j. would not be satisfied.
    Therefore, the proposal would not fall under any of the criteria set out under
    Framework Policy S5:1.
43. Framework Policy S5:4 states that where a proposal does not fall under one of the
    categories identified under Policy S5, it should only be approved in exceptional
    circumstances, where the benefits of the proposal would substantially outweigh the
    adverse effects, including to the character of the countryside and in relation to
    promoting sustainable patterns of movement.
44. The proposal would result in an additional SBCB dwelling, adjacent to an existing
    rural settlement which could be delivered quickly, and which would provide some
    social benefit. Given the evidenced unmet need in relation to SBCB provision, I
    attribute substantial weight to the proposal, in line with Framework Policy HO7:1.
45. There would be economic benefits during the construction phase and after with
    future occupants supporting local services and facilities. Sustainable construction
    and energy efficiency measures are asserted as forming part of the proposed
    design along with the provision for electric vehicle charging. Additional landscaping
    and biodiversity enhancements are also proposed. Given the scale of the scheme
    these benefits would be limited.
46. The lack of harm or policy compliance in respect of matters such as ecology,
    arboriculture, drainage and flood risk, archaeology, living conditions and public
    rights of way are neutral considerations that weigh neither for nor against the
    proposal.
47. The proposal would be at odds with Framework Policy N2:1 which states that the
    environmental qualities of the site, including the natural beauty of the countryside
    should be considered in order to contribute positively to the natural environment.
    Given the more localised effect that would result I attribute medium weight to this
    conflict.
48. I find that the harm to the character and appearance of the area would be
    significant and contrary to Framework Policy DP3:1 which states that proposals
    should respond to their context so that they integrate with and enhance their
    surroundings. Policy DP3:3 identifies that proposals should be refused, if without
    clear justification, they conflict with DP3:1. I do not find that the conflict with this
    Framework policy has been justified in the evidence before me. I therefore
    attribute substantial weight to the conflict with Policy DP3:1.
49. With regard to accessibility, Framework Policy TR3 guides development towards
    sustainable locations, to limit the need to travel by private car. In this case, the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6010422


       development would not generate a significant amount of movement, given its small
       scale. Travel distances to the services and facilities within Harpley and to those in
       the nearby larger villages would be relatively short. Nonetheless, this has to be
       considered against the more limited options for the use of sustainable modes of
       transport and the condition of the local road network which would not necessarily
       support good access to facilities. However, I note that Framework Policy TR3:1 e.
       identifies that in rural areas, opportunities to improve sustainable modes of
       transport should be taken where they exist and can be supported by the
       development proposed. Given the location of the site adjacent to a settlement, I
       find moderate negative weight should be attributed to this matter in this case.
50. Given the limited increase in vehicle movements that would result, I do not find
    that the proposal would result in a severe adverse impact on the transport network.
    However, without substantive evidence to the contrary, the restricted width and
    condition of Millers Lane means that the increase in vehicle movements would
    increase the risk of conflict between users of the road, including pedestrians and
    cyclists. It would therefore result in an unacceptable impact on highway safety
    contrary to Policy TR6:4 of the Framework, to which I attribute considerable
    weight.
51. In conclusion, whilst I attribute cumulative positive weight to the benefits, including
    substantial weight to the benefit of SBCB provision, I find that the benefits would
    not substantially outweigh the adverse effects, when considering them in
    combination. The exceptional circumstances referred to in Framework Policy S5:4
    have therefore not been demonstrated.
Conclusion
52. The proposal would conflict with the development plan as a whole and there are
    no other considerations, including the Framework, which indicate a decision other
    than in accordance with the development plan. The appeal is therefore dismissed.
53. The site is within the Zone of Influence of a number of European Sites that are
    protected under the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as
    amended). However, Regulation 63(1) requires an Appropriate Assessment (AA)
    to be carried out where the competent authority is minded to give consent for the
    proposed development. As I find that the development is unacceptable for the
    reasons set out above, there is no need for me to carry out an AA.


G Dring
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
