Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 14 July 2026 by T Morris BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
Decision by H Jones BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 September 2026.


Appeal Ref: 6010582
1 Greenway Close, Colindale, Barnet, London NW9 5AZ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Zhehan Yu against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
    Barnet.
•   The application Ref is 26/1139/HSE.
•   The development proposed is double storey side extension to the dwelling house, 3.m2 front porch
    and single storey rear extension.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matter
3. On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) was published by the Government. This is a material consideration in
   the decision-making process from the day of publication. I am satisfied that the
   Framework’s content does not affect the substance of the main issue in the appeal.
   Since they would not therefore be prejudiced, I have proceeded without further
   consultation with the appeal parties.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
   appearance of the area.
Reasons for the Recommendation
5. The appeal site contains a two-storey semi-detached dwelling. The site is located in
   a predominantly residential area and is prominently positioned on the corner of
   Greenway Close and Greenway Gardens. The side elevation of the dwelling is set
   back from the footway, broadly in line with, and following the setback pattern of, the
   frontages of the dwellings situated on Greenway Gardens. Whilst there are
   dwellings in the surrounding area which have been altered and extended, this
   consistent approach to the manner in which dwellings are set back from and
   address the street is evident elsewhere in the area too, and it contributes positively
   to the character and appearance of the area.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010582


6. The first-floor side extension would project well beyond the frontages of adjacent
   dwellings on Greenway Gardens. The added bulk, mass and height of the first-floor
   extension would also erode the presently more open character of this corner plot.
   As a result, it would appear as a prominent and imposing feature in the street
   scene, at odds with the generally consistent building lines which prevail here.
7. I note the efforts which have been made to amend the development since some
   pre-application advice was obtained. I further note that the first-floor side extension
   includes, amongst other design facets, a recessed front elevation, a hipped roof, a
   set down of its roof ridge whilst matching materials are also proposed as part of the
   development. Despite these more meritorious facets of the design, for the particular
   reasons I have explained above, the first-floor extension would result in the
   development harming the character and appearance of the area.
8. The appellant refers to an extension at 47 The Greenway (No. 47), which I
   observed on my site visit. However, in contrast with the appeal site, No. 47 is
   positioned beside a bend on Greenway Gardens. As a result, in approaches to it, I
   find that the first-floor element of the extension at No. 47 does not have the same
   degree of prominence or intrusion into the street scene as would be the case with
   the appeal proposal. Moreover, planning decisions are heavily dependent on the
   case-specific evidence and circumstances. I have come to my own views on this
   appeal having regard to the evidence before me now and the particular
   circumstances of the case. Consequently, the development at No. 47 does not
   provide a justification for the proposal.
9. For the above reasons, I conclude that the proposed development would be
   harmful to the character and appearance of the area. It would be contrary to policy
   D3 of The London Plan (2021) and policies CDH01 and CDH05 of the Barnet Local
   Plan 2021-2036 (2025). Together, and amongst other matters, these policies
   require that developments respond to the existing character of a place, including
   the pattern of development, as well as maintain or improve the appearance of the
   locality or street scene.
10. The proposal would also conflict with guidance set out within the Council’s
    Residential Design Guidance Supplementary Planning Document (2016) (SPD).
    This specifically highlights that extensions on corner sites will be particularly open
    to public view and that first-floor extensions on corner sites should not project
    beyond the building line of the adjoining road. The proposal’s first-floor extension
    contravenes this, would result in a harmfully prominent and imposing feature and,
    consequently, the development conflicts with the SPD’s overall objective of
    ensuring high-quality design. Although the SPD is guidance, it is a material
    consideration, and there is no justification to deviate from it in this instance.
11. Furthermore, the proposal would also be contrary to policy DP3(1) of the
    Framework, which advises that developments should respond to their context and
    integrate with and enhance their surroundings.
Other Matters
12. The proposed development would facilitate the extension and remodelling of an
    existing dwelling. This would result in a modernised home which would better meet
    the needs of its occupants. The evidence before me indicates that, associated with
    this, improvements to the property’s energy efficiency and environmental
    performance would arise. These are benefits of the proposal.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010582


13. The appellant refers to a lawful development certificate for a roof extension
    involving a hip-to gable extension, rear dormer window with Juliet balcony and two
    front rooflights. The lawful development certificate as well as the plans for the
    development have not been provided, however, the description of the development
    to which the lawful development certificate relates omits the proposed first-floor
    side extension. This is the element of the proposal which the Council specifically
    object to, and which I have identified would result in harm. Consequently, since the
    development the subject of the lawful development certificate is not comparable to
    the appeal scheme, the fallback position it provides does not weigh in the
    proposal’s favour.
14. The absence of harm in terms of neighbouring amenity, parking, highway safety,
    trees, flooding and heritage are neutral factors which do not weigh in favour of the
    appeal and do not alter my conclusions on the appeal overall.
Conclusion and Recommendation
15. In my main issue, I have found that the proposed development would be harmful to
    the character and appearance of the area and would conflict with policies within the
    development plan. Overall, I find that the proposed development conflicts with the
    development plan taken as a whole.
16. The Framework establishes a presumption in favour of sustainable development.
    Since the site lies within a settlement, the Framework indicates that development
    should be approved unless its benefits are substantially outweighed by adverse
    effects when assessed against the Framework's national decision-making policies.
17. The benefits in this case are derived from the extension and remodelling of an
    existing dwelling, and the creation of a modernised and more energy efficient
    home.
18. Against this, the harm to the character and appearance of the area means that the
    proposal would conflict with policy DP3(1) of the Framework, and this policy sets
    out that proposals should be refused when such conflict would arise. Therefore, I
    attach substantial weight to this harm. Taking these points together, the benefits of
    granting planning permission would be substantially outweighed by adverse effects.
19. Overall, there are no material considerations, including the Framework, that
    indicate the decision should be made other than in accordance with the
    development plan. Therefore, I recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

T Morris
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
20. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

H Jones
INSPECTOR



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
