 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 8 September 2026
 by Lynne Evans BA MA MRTPI MRICS
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 23 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010944
 25 Elms Avenue, Eastbourne BN21 3DN
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Ms Thu Van Luu against the decision of Eastbourne Borough Council.
 •    The application Ref is 250283.
 •    The development proposed is change of use from C1 Guest House to C4 House in Multiple
      Occupation.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. A new National Planning Policy Framework (Framework) was issued on 17 August
   2026, which replaces the previous Framework published in December 2024 and all
   other iterations. I have therefore written to seek the views of the Appellant and the
   Council on the revised Framework as pertinent to this appeal. I have taken the
   representations received into account in my determination of the appeal.
3. The Appellant has referred in detail, with supporting information, to an application
   under the Council’s Ref 250416 for a lawful development certificate for existing use
   of the same property, as a residential dwelling. However, that application is not
   before me, and my decision must necessarily be based on the application as
   submitted, namely seeking planning permission for the change of use from a guest
   house under Class C1 to a house in multiple occupation (HMO) with 5 bedrooms
   (Class C4). The application forms confirm that the change of use had not
   commenced at the time of the submission of the application.
4. My understanding is that the application for a lawful development certificate for
   existing use as a residential dwelling has not been determined at the time of the
   appeal submissions and is, in any event, subject to separate proceedings based on
   factual and evidential grounds. However, and as explained, my consideration is
   necessarily directed to the proposal as submitted and as described on the planning
   application forms, namely the proposed change of use from a guest house to an
   HMO.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6010944


Main Issues:
5. The main issues in this appeal are:
     a) The effect of the proposed development on the provision of tourist
        accommodation within the designated Tourist Accommodation Area and on the
        tourism economy as well as on the residential amenity of the area; and
     b) Whether adequate provision would be made for refuse/recycling and cycle
        storage facilities to serve the proposed development to respect the character
        and appearance of the local area and to meet sustainable travel demands.
Reasons
Effect on tourist accommodation and tourism economy and residential amenity

6. The appeal property is a three storey property on the north side of Elms Avenue. It
   lies within the Tourist Accommodation Area as defined by the Eastbourne Borough
   Plan (2003) (Borough Plan) and is situated in the Secondary Sector of that area as
   identified in the Tourist Accommodation Retention SPD (2025) (TAR SPD). The
   property is also located within the Town Centre and Seafront Conservation Area.
7. The proposal seeks to change the use of the property from a guest house under
   Class C1 to a 5 bedroom HMO under Class C4.
8. Policies TO1 and TO2 of the Borough Plan seek to retain a stock of serviced and
   unserviced tourist accommodation to support Eastbourne’s role as a major resort.
   Policy TO1 states that planning permission will be refused for proposals which are
   incompatible with the tourist accommodation use and requires developments within
   this area to have regard to different lifestyles and special requirements of tourists,
   including the effect on residential and visual amenity, and safety and security
   implications. Under Policy TO2 planning permission will not be granted for the
   redevelopment or change of use of tourist accommodation to any other use within
   the Tourist Accommodation Area. The policy goes on to state that planning
   permission will be granted for any other use only in exceptional circumstances and
   that the applicant must demonstrate that the continuing use of the land as tourist
   accommodation is not viable. The TAR SPD sets out further information on
   assessing the viability or potential viability of tourist accommodation, with different
   requirements for sites within the Primary and Secondary sector of the Tourist
   Accommodation Area. The evidence sought relates to marketing evidence, financial
   performance and consideration of alternative tourist uses.
9. Notwithstanding the wealth of information that has been provided with the appeal
   before me, none of the information directly relates to demonstrating the viability or
   lack of it with the guest house to meet the requirements of Policy TO2 of the
   Borough Plan and the TAR SPD. I cannot be therefore satisfied in this respect.
10. Policy HO14 of the Borough Plan also states that HMOs will not be permitted in the
    tourist accommodation area under Policy TO1. The TAR SPD also states that the
    provision of HMOs is a significant threat to the attractiveness of the tourism
    economy.
11. The Council’s Houses in Multiple Occupation Supplementary Planning Document
    (2025) (HMO SPD) provides support for the relevant development plan policies.
    The SPD sets out that HMOs form an important part of the housing mix within the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
 Appeal Decision 6010944


12. town as they increase the range and mix of accommodation, especially for people
    whose housing options are limited. However, it also points to HMOs having the
    potential to negatively impact on communities in terms of the standard of the living
    environment for other residents and businesses, particularly where there are high
    concentrations of HMOs in a specific area.
13. The SPD indicates that based on the Eastbourne HMO Register (May 2025) /2021
    Census the Devonshire Ward, which contains the appeal property, had 247
    licensed HMOs and 74% of all licensed HMOs.
14. Key Principle 2 of the HMO SPD states that areas with high concentrations of
    HMOs are defined where, amongst other matters, a proposal for an HMO would
    result in more than 10% of residential buildings within 100m radius being HMOs.
    The objective is to ensure that a clustering of HMOs would not reach a level which
    would adversely affect residential amenity, increase pressure on local infrastructure
    or undermine community cohesion.
15. There is conflicting evidence before me. The Council has assessed that there is as
    existing 23.9% of properties within 100m radius of 25 Elms Avenue in HMO use
    whereas the Appellant has suggested the percentage is just under 8%, which
    largely appears to result from the application of different methodologies to assess
    the position. Although I have had regard to both approaches, I am more persuaded
    by the Council’s figures which are based on the methodology set out under the
    HMO SPD. Based on the information before me, it appears very probable that the
    10% concentration of HMOs within 100m of the site has been exceeded. The
    proposal would conflict with the guidance set out under the HMO SPD in addition to
    being in conflict with Policy HO14 of the Borough Plan.
16. Whilst the character of the area may have evolved over a long period of time, the
    proposed development and use of the property as an HMO would unacceptably
    increase the existing high concentration of HMOs in the local area, including within
    a 100m radius of the appeal property and would therefore cumulatively add to their
    adverse effects. This harm together with the loss of a guest house would also harm
    Eastbourne’s tourist function and economy and the residential amenities of the
    local area. The proposal would conflict with Policies TO1, TO2, HO14 and HO20 of
    the Borough Plan, Policies B2 and D3 of the Eastbourne Core Strategy Local Plan
    (2013) (Core Strategy) as well as the TAR SPD and the HMO SPD, all of which
    amongst other things seek to protect the tourism economy and the residential and
    environmental amenity of existing and future occupants.
Refuse/recycling and cycle storage facilities
17. The scheme proposals submitted with the application did not show specific
    provision for either refuse/ recycling storage or cycle storage facilities. However,
    and as seen at my site visit, there is rear vehicular access to a single garage as
    well as to a rear patio area. Part of the patio area was taken up with refuse and
    recycling bins at the time of my site visit.
18. Although the front garden area is modest, there would be space within the site to
    address the provision of refuse/ recycling storage and cycle storage, utilising the
    garage and / or part of the rear patio area. Were no other matters of concern and
    planning permission were to be granted, a condition could be imposed to require
    details of this provision to ensure no adverse harm to the character and
    appearance of the local area and to meet sustainable travel demands.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     3
 Appeal Decision 6010944


19. Subject to the imposition of a condition as set out above, I am satisfied that both
    refuse and recycling storage and cycle storage provision could be accommodated
    within the site. There would be no conflict with Policies UHT1, TR2 and TR6 of the
    Borough Plan and Policies D10a and D8 of the Core Strategy, all of which amongst
    other matters seek to secure a high quality of design which respects the local
    context and promote sustainable travel with facilities for cyclists.
20. The Council’s decision notice also references Policy NE9 of the Borough Plan but
    as this relates to the Roselands Avenue Household Waste Site, it does not appear
    to be directly relevant to the proposal before me.
Other Considerations
21. The appeal site lies within the Town Centre and Seafront Conservation Area.
    Section 72 (1) of The Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act1990
    requires me to pay special attention to the desirability of preserving or enhancing
    the character or appearance of conservation areas. The significance of the
    Conservation Area relates to the historical and planned development of the town
    centre and sea front in the mid to late 19th century, with a variety of townscapes
    including the grander scale of the earlier Italianate buildings and later smaller
    terraces unified by the long promenade and beach.
22. The proposed development relates to a change of use with no external works
    proposed. I am therefore satisfied that there would be no harm to the significance
    of the Conservation Area; the character and appearance of the Town Centre and
    Seafront Conservation Area would be preserved. The Council also raised no
    concerns in this regard.
23. I have noted the improvements undertaken to the property, but they do not
    persuade me to a different view. The Appellant has also raised concerns in respect
    of the timescales for determining applications, but my decision is solely based on
    the planning merits of the proposal before me.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
24. Subject to the imposition of an appropriate condition, the development would
    respect the character and appearance of the local area and would meet sustainable
    transport objectives in respect of the provision of refuse/recycling and cycle storage
    facilities. I also acknowledge that the proposal would contribute to Eastbourne’s
    housing mix. However, the adverse impacts I have concluded from the proposed
    development in terms of the impact on the tourism economy and on the residential
    amenity of the area would substantially and demonstrably outweigh the benefits of
    permitting the scheme to proceed. The proposal is not therefore sustainable
    development for which there is a presumption in favour.
25. For the reasons given above and having regard to all other matters raised,
    including in representations, the proposals conflicts with the development plan as a
    whole and there are no considerations that would outweigh that conflict, including
    the Framework. The appeal is therefore dismissed.

L J Evans
INSPECTOR



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    4
