Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 August 2026
by Ryan Cowley MPlan (Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 4th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010416
Stonewood, Almshouse Hill, Bramham, Wetherby, Leeds LS23 6QX
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Mark Rydzewski against the decision of Leeds City Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/01387/FU.
•    The development proposed is change of use of transitional land to domestic garden with decked
     area, first floor side extension, single storey side extension with balcony, single storey rear lean-to
     extension (store) and alterations to side garden to create two parking spaces, retaining features
     (gabions with planting and stone facing) and the removal of two trees that are leaning over third-party
     land.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published. The parts of the Framework relevant to this appeal
       have not substantively changed. I have thus not sought further submissions. I have
       had regard to the latest version of the Framework where relevant in this appeal.
3.     I have used the description of the proposal from the application form in the banner
       header above. However, the two trees cited for removal have already been felled
       following a tree works approval after the planning application had been submitted.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are:
           •    The effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area
                (including whether it would preserve or enhance the character or
                appearance of the Bramham Conservation Area (CA); whether it would
                preserve the setting of the Grade II Listed Building (LB) at Bramham War
                Memorial; and its effect on protected trees);
           •    The effect of the proposal on highway safety; and
           •    Whether the proposal would provide an appropriate biodiversity net gain
                (BNG).




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010416


Reasons
Character and appearance (incl. the CA, setting of the LB and protected trees)
5.     The appeal site comprises a detached 2-storey dwelling and surrounding land
       upon a hillside overlooking Bramham. It is located centrally within the Bramham
       CA and sits within the setting of the Grade II LB, both of which are designated
       heritage assets. Section 66(1) of the Planning (Listed Building and Conservation
       Areas) Act 1990 (the Act) requires special regard be given to the desirability of
       preserving the LB or its setting, or any features of special architectural or historic
       interest which it possesses. Section 72(1) of the Act likewise requires special
       attention be given to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or
       appearance of CAs.
6.     Bramham has a distinct radial village form with the war memorial marking the
       central point at which many of its roads meet. The LB is recognised for its historic
       interest, standing 5 metres tall as a prominent monument to the impact of world
       events on the local community and the sacrifices it made in the 20th century.
7.     Within the historic core of the CA and the immediate setting of the LB, there is a
       fine grain form of development where traditional buildings predominate, and there
       is a strong, unified character. Magnesian limestone remains the primary building
       material; and a rural vernacular style is the principal form. Later developments
       surrounding the core are less densely arranged. I saw during my site visit that the
       area in which the appeal site is located is also characterised by a steep incline
       combined with denser tree cover, which frames this end of the CA.
8.     In so far as it relates to this appeal, the significance of the CA is thus derived from
       its historic layout, traditional architecture, consistent material palette and verdant
       surroundings. These features provide a pleasant and cohesive setting in which the
       LB can be appreciated and where its prominence and significance is maintained.
9.     The existing dwelling is a late-20th century addition to the village, featuring
       contemporary windows and a flat roof single storey extension. It is visible from
       various local vantage points, particularly from the north, given its elevated position.
       Nevertheless, due to the existing vegetation, its sympathetic stone finish, and its
       layout and orientation (including its reduced first floor footprint and modestly sized
       north facing gable), it remains a neutral feature that does not unduly dominate or
       detract from the historic character of the CA or the setting of the LB below.
10. HDG1 of the Householder Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document April
    2012 indicates that extensions, additions and alterations to dwellings should
    respect the scale, form, proportions, character and appearance of the main
    dwelling and the locality. The appeal proposal includes several components, while
    some elements such as the garage conversion would remain broadly sympathetic
    to the existing dwelling, the proposed extensions combined would significantly
    expand the overall size and mass of the building.
11. In particular, the first-floor side extension alone would more than double the width
    of the first-floor front facing elevation. It would feature a single large contemporary
    window in the centre, matching the existing, with expansive areas of blank solid
    stonework around it. Though the proposed side garage extension would be
    comparatively modest, it would provide a new balcony with glass balustrade


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010416


       above, further extending the development and contemporary domestic
       paraphernalia at this level.
12. The increased width of the dwelling and added mass of development would be an
    obtrusive addition to the hillside above the village. It would heighten its prominence
    within the CA and the setting of the LB and emphasise its contemporary form and
    appearance, providing a sharp contrast to the historic features of the CA below.
    This harm would be compounded by the loss of parts of the existing stone
    boundary walls and the proliferation of tarmac to provide driveways at both ends of
    the site that would ultimately detract from the immediate setting of the dwelling.
13. Additionally, to the southwest of the dwelling is an area of protected woodland.
    Recent applications have already permitted removal of several trees in the vicinity
    of the site. The development would be close to remaining trees, and any
    engineering operations or other activity associated with the development here
    could result in harm to root systems. Limited details of tree protection measures or
    construction methods have been provided. Though they are protected, the
    provision of decking and external amenity spaces in proximity to these trees is
    likely to increase pressure to prune or fell them. It has thus not been adequately
    demonstrated that the proposal would not harm protected trees. The loss of
    protected trees in the vicinity of the site would further harm the significance of the
    CA and the setting of the LB.
14. The proposal would have a harmful effect on the character and appearance of the
    area, including by failing to preserve or enhance the character or appearance of
    the CA, failing to preserve the setting of the LB, and through additional harm to
    protected trees. It would conflict with Policies SP13, P10, P11 and P12 of the Core
    Strategy (as amended by the Core Strategy Selective Review 2019) Amendments
    Adopted September 2019 (the Core Strategy), Policies GP5, N19, N20 and LD1 of
    the Unitary Development Plan (Review 2006) (UDPR), Policies NE2, H3 and H5 of
    the Bramham Cum Oglethorpe Neighbourhood Development Plan 2018-2033 and
    Policy Land 2 of the Natural Resources and Waste Local Plan January 2013.
15. These policies, among other provisions, seek to ensure that development provides
    good design appropriate to its location, scale and function; protects the character
    and quality of townscapes and landscapes; maintains green corridors and protects
    existing vegetation including trees. They also seek to ensure that development in
    conservation areas preserves or enhances the character or appearance of the
    area and the historic environment.
16. With regard to Policy HE6 of the Framework, substantial weight must be given to
    the conservation of the CA and LB. The proposal would cause harm to the
    significance of the CA and to the setting of the LB, as well as harm to protected
    trees. This harm would be moderate due to the scale of the development, its
    prominent elevated position and its proximity to the LB. The harm would be
    experienced from various vantage points across the wider CA and in short range
    views of the LB.
17. Where a development proposal would harm the significance of a designated
    heritage asset, the effect on the asset and its significance should be weighed
    against any public benefits. In this case the proposal would provide benefits to the
    appellant by enhancing the internal and external living accommodation and
    parking provision at the property.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010416


18. I recognise that some public benefits may also be accrued through the restoration
    and reuse of a vacant dwelling in a prominent location and securing its ongoing
    maintenance. It has however not been demonstrated that the appeal proposal is
    necessary to secure this.
19. Full details of woodland management and tree planting have not been provided as
    part of the appeal scheme. The public benefits referred to in respect of this are
    pursuant to a separate tree work approval1. These benefits are thus not contingent
    on the appeal proposal and accordingly carry limited weight.
20. Ultimately, the public benefits of the appeal scheme that have been presented are
    very modest, and insufficient to outweigh the identified harm to the significance of
    the designated heritage assets.
Highway safety
21. The proposal would include new and expanded parking spaces at either side of
    the dwelling, in addition to a new garage extension which places the garage closer
    to the road than the existing. There would be no turning spaces provided within the
    appeal site.
22. The vehicle tracking plans show drivers could potentially use the adopted highway
    immediately in front of the dwelling to turn and allow vehicles to enter and exit up
    Almhouse Hill in a forward gear. This would not be a simple manoeuvre for a car
    parked in the easternmost space, where numerous repeated readjustments to its
    position would be required before it could exit driving forward. Moreover, the car
    parked closest to the house would require access to land outside the adopted
    highway and beyond the appellant’s control, where there is a low stone wall.
23. Tracking details for access to the proposed garage and westernmost driveway
    have not been provided and given the site constraints, their utility as car parking
    spaces is not clear. Entering and exiting these spaces without reversing a
    considerable distance would not appear possible in any event. All of the proposed
    parking spaces would thus encourage, if not require, drivers to reverse a
    considerable distance up or down Almhouse Hill.
24. I recognise that the proposal would not increase the number of bedrooms at the
    property and so would not intensify the existing residential use. Additionally, the
    existing parking arrangements already appear to be somewhat constrained.
    However, it is not clear from the evidence before me that entering and exiting the
    existing parking spaces presents the same challenges as the proposed spaces.
25. While vehicle speeds may be low, the road is narrow, on an incline, and shared
    with cyclists and pedestrians until it reaches the footpath further up the hill.
    Visibility at access points to the site may also be curtailed in places by the
    boundary walls and topography. While some walls will be removed, no visibility
    splays have been shown on the submitted plans.
26. The proposed parking arrangements would thus exacerbate existing highway
    safety risks and increase the likelihood of conflict and collisions between vehicles,
    cyclists and pedestrians. Notably, the Local Highway Authority (LHA) formally
    objected to the proposals for similar reasons


1
    Council Ref 26/01313/TR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010416


27. Though there are other residential accesses onto this part of Almhouse Hill,
    several examples I saw during my site visit appeared to benefit from in-curtilage
    turning space. In any event, any existing instances of substandard access at other
    properties would not justify an increase in highway safety risk at the appeal site.
28. The proposal would thus have an unacceptable impact on highway safety. It would
    conflict with Policies P10 and T2 of the Core Strategy and Policy GP5 of the
    UDPR. These policies, among other provisions, seek to ensure that highway
    safety is maximised, car parking is designed in a positive manner, and there is
    safe and secure access for pedestrians, cyclists and people with impaired mobility.
Biodiversity net gain
29. BNG is a legal requirement for planning permission introduced in 2024. All
    applications are required to either provide detailed information proving there will be
    a biodiversity increase; or explain why the requirement does not apply to the
    development. The appellant maintains that the development would benefit from the
    exemptions to the BNG requirement.
30. The red line boundary of the appeal site includes a parcel of land to the rear of the
    dwelling that sits on higher ground. There is a dispute between the main parties as
    to whether this land is within the residential curtilage of the host dwelling or
    belongs to the adjacent woodland. Critically however, there is no substantive
    evidence, such as a Lawful Development Certificate, that confirms the existing
    lawful use of this land.
31. The appellant maintains that the land has in practice functioned as part of the
    domestic garden associated with the house, which would preclude it from the BNG
    requirements. However, I saw little evidence of this on my site visit. The land is
    somewhat segregated from the rest of the appeal site due to the difference in
    levels, it previously featured several large trees, and its topography would limit its
    function as a domestic garden. Additionally, there is no discernible boundary
    between it and the rest of the woodland, which it is linked with via a dirt track.
32. I also note that the application was submitted as a full planning application, rather
    than a householder planning application (for development within the curtilage of a
    dwellinghouse). Moreover, the appellant’s description of the proposal describes
    this land as “transitional land” and seeks to change its use to domestic garden.
    There is thus no compelling evidence that the land is already in use as such.
33. Irrespective of the above, the application form itself sought an exemption from the
    BNG requirement on the basis that there is less than 25 square metres of onsite
    habitat affected, not on the basis that it related to householder development, and I
    must determine the appeal based on the application submission that is before me.
34. The plans before me however indicate that an area of habitat larger than 25
    square metres would be impacted by the proposed development, when accounting
    for the proposed change of use, decking, hardstanding and other associated work.
    BNG is therefore required to be demonstrated, however the appeal scheme is not
    supported by any substantive evidence in respect of this.
35. It has thus not been demonstrated that the appeal scheme would provide an
    appropriate biodiversity net gain. In addition to failing to demonstrate compliance
    with the statutory biodiversity gain objective, the development would conflict with


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010416


       Policy G9 of the Core Strategy. This policy, among other provisions, seeks to
       ensure that developments demonstrate there will be an overall net gain for
       biodiversity commensurate with the scale of the development.
Other Matters
36. Concerns were additionally raised by the LHA regarding the retention of non-
    highway land above the adopted highway and the relocation of a street lighting
    column. Such matters are dealt with under the relevant provisions of the Highways
    Act 1980. Accordingly, and as the appeal is dismissed for other reasons, I have
    not considered these matters further.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
37. Policy S3 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. For development within settlements, this means that policy S4 of the
    Framework should be applied. Policy S4 states that development proposals within
    settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework.
38. In this case, the proposal would provide private benefits to the appellant, but only
    modest public benefits, as set out above. Weighed against this is the identified
    harm to the character and appearance of the area, including harm to designated
    heritage assets and protected trees; harm to highway safety; and inadequate
    biodiversity net gain provision. The proposal would conflict with the national
    decision-making policies in the Framework with regard to these matters, and the
    identified adverse effects would substantially outweigh the benefits of approving
    the development.
39. Consequently, the proposal does not benefit from the presumption in favour of
    sustainable development set out within Policy S4 of the Framework.
40. In conclusion, the development would conflict with the development plan, taken as
    a whole. There are no material considerations that indicate the appeal should be
    determined other than in accordance with the development plan. Consequently,
    the appeal is dismissed.

Ryan Cowley
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
