 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 1 September 2026
 by Martin Andrews MA(Planning) BSc(Econ) DipTP & DipTP(Dist) MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 30 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010111
 Flat B, 83 Rectory Road, Hackney, London N16 7PP
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Neil Brunjes against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
      Hackney.
 •    The application Ref. is 2026/0015.
 •    The development proposed is the demolition of rear existing roof and proposal of a rear dormer
      extension of the property with installation of two Velux Rooflights at front of the existing roof.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issue
2. The main issue is the effect of the proposed rear dormer extension on the character
   and appearance of the host dwelling and the terrace of which it forms part.
Reasons
3. The appeal property is a first and second floor flat with a loft in the roof. The appeal
   scheme is to convert the loft into living space, enabled by a rear dormer roof
   extension and the installation of two Velux roof lights in the front roof slope. The
   Council considers the roof lights to be acceptable, whilst there is also no issue with
   the external materials, which would match the existing.
4. The Officer’s Report sets out the Council’s case in support of its refusal of
   permission, with the Residential Extensions and Alterations SPD 2025 (‘the SPD’)
   as its primary source of reference). Indeed, this is cited in the Notice of Refusal
   together with the development policies which the appeal scheme is considered to
   contravene.
5. For the appellant, the grounds of appeal refer in some detail to other terraced
   properties in the locality that have had roof extensions to the rear and similar in
   form and scale to that now proposed. The aerial photographs (or ‘Figures’) in the
   appeal statement are helpful in this regard and in summary show terrace properties
   in the locality, in particular Rectory Road and Darville Road. Whilst it is correct to
   say that there are a substantial number of rear roof alterations similar to the appeal
   proposal, it would also appear that, including the appeal property, there is a run of
   19 buildings on the same side of Rectory Road as No. 83 with no such alterations
   until No. 59 (Figure 4 refers).



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision Ref. 6010111


6. Other Figures in the appeal statement do show more altered roofscapes, in
   particular in Darville Road and a cluster in Rectory Road. And whilst I would accept
   that there is undoubtedly a mix of unaltered rear roofs and extended roofs in the
   locality, I do not support the claim for the appellant that there is a ‘prevailing
   pattern’ of large dormers similar to the appeal scheme.
7. Furthermore, I am unable to accept the assertion for the appellant that the proposal
   ‘would not disrupt or distort the original roof profile and would remain wholly
   subordinate to the scale, form and design of the host dwelling’. Leaving aside the
   point that the dwelling at Flat B is only part of No. 83, I agree with the Officer’s
   Report that because the extension would be the entire width and almost the full
   depth of the rear roof slope and with full height windows/doors, it would be a
   dominant feature rather than subservient as required by the SPD.
8. The SPD is a recently adopted document (2005) and does not seek to preclude
   dormer additions, but rather to ensure that they are of a size and design that
   balances on the one hand the entirely understandable desire of occupiers to
   increase and enhance their living space and on the other to conserve the character
   and appearance of the more traditional areas of Hackney.
9. I thereby consider that the SPD guidelines reflect the broader requirements of
   Policy D3 of the London Plan 2021 and Policy LP1 of the Hackney Local Plan 2033
   (adopted 2020) for good design. As such, the Design Principles of Section 6 of the
   SPD should in this case be applied to prevent harm being caused to the character
   and appearance of the original building and the wider terrace.
10. In particular, from the evidence summarised in paragraph 5 above and from my on-
    site observations, I do not accept that the appeal property falls within the scope of
    the SPD’s reference to ‘Where a number of larger rear box dormers already exist
    within the immediate vicinity, larger rear dormers might be considered acceptable’
    (underlining my emphasis).
11. For these reasons and having had regard to all other matters I find that the
    proposed rear dormer would have an unacceptably harmful effect on the character
    and appearance of the host dwelling and the terrace of which it forms part. This
    would be in conflict with the afore mentioned adopted policies and with Government
    policy in Section 14: ‘Achieving Well-Designed Places’ of the National Planning
    Policy Framework August 2026.
12. The appeal therefore fails.

Martin Andrews
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
