 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 11 August 2026
 by P D Sedgwick BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 3 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010896
 158-160 High Street, Bromley, Orpington BR6 0JR.
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr Krishnamoorthy Arulruban against the decision of the Council of the
     London Borough of Bromley.
 •   The application Ref is 22/04951/FULL1.
 •   The development proposed is First floor rear extension and roof mounted condenser units.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for First floor infill
   extension and roof mounted condenser units at 158-160 High Street, Bromley,
   Orpington, BR6 0JR in accordance with the terms of the application,
   22/04951/FULL1, and the plans submitted with it, subject to the following
   conditions:
     1) The rating level of noise emitted from the refrigeration condenser units and any
        associated fixed plant, when operating together or independently, shall not
        exceed the representative background sound level (LA90,T) when measured or
        assessed in accordance with BS4142:2014+A1:2019 at the nearest noise-
        sensitive premises.
         Should the plant fail to comply with this condition at any time, it shall be
         switched off and not operated again until compliance can be demonstrated to
         the satisfaction of the Local Planning Authority.
     2) The refrigeration condenser units hereby approved shall operate only between
        the hours of 08:00 and 22:00 Monday to Sunday and shall not operate outside
        these hours without the prior written approval of the Local Planning Authority.
     3) Within 3 months of the date of this decision all plant and associated equipment
        shall be mounted on suitable proprietary anti-vibration mounts and isolation
        measures to prevent the transmission of vibration and regenerated noise
        through the structure of the building according to details approved in writing by
        the Local Planning Authority.
         The vibration isolation measures shall be permanently retained and maintained
         thereafter.
         Should the equipment fail to comply with this condition, it shall be switched off
         and not operated again until compliance is achieved.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision: 6010896




Preliminary Matters
2. I have taken the description of the development in the banner heading above from
   the Council’s decision notice as this gives a more concise description of the
   development. I have removed the reference to the proposal being partly
   retrospective as the first-floor infill extension was complete and the condenser units
   installed at the time of my visit. I have dealt with the appeal on that basis.
3. There was a wooden ground floor rear extension in place during my visit which did
   not form part of the original planning application and is not referred to in any of the
   appeal documents. Therefore, I have not considered that development as part of
   this appeal.
4. Following consideration of the noise impact assessment submitted by the appellant,
   the Council is no longer pursuing reason for refusal 1 in its decision notice, relating
   to the impact of the development in terms of noise and disturbance, subject to
   conditions recommended by the Council’s Environmental Health Officer. Therefore,
   I have not had regard to this issue in determining this appeal.
Main Issue
5. The main issue is the effect of the development upon the living conditions of
   neighbouring occupiers, with particular regard to outlook.
Reasons
6. The appeal site relates to a supermarket with storage on the ground and first floors.
   The first-floor storage comprises 2 elements, a flat roofed rear wing which extends
   from No 160, and according to the Council is lawful and was approved under
   planning application reference 05/01329/FULL1, and a second similar infill
   extension joined to it at the rear of No 158. The Council is concerned that the latter
   infill extension, and the 7 condenser units on the former initial extension, harms the
   outlook from neighbouring properties.
7. The outlook from rear windows above shops and restaurants inevitably includes
   service yards, buildings and associated plant such as cooler units, ducting and air
   filters. The rear of the appeal site and that of the neighbouring row of shops is no
   different in this regard and I note that rear extensions close to the appeal site are
   similar in depth and some also have ducting and plant such as condensers. The
   condensers at the appeal site are more conspicuous than similar plant nearby
   because of the height of the roof on which they are mounted, which exceeds that of
   most rear buildings and extensions close to the appeal site. Nonetheless, they do
   not appear out of place and consequently have not unduly harmed the visual
   amenity of the area in general, as the Council suggest.
8. The condensers are set in slightly from the edge of the roof on the original first floor
   extension, which projects out to the side of No 162’s first floor windows, and are
   located several metres away from them. Thus, although they sit above the
   windows, they are not directly in line with them and their distance and the gaps
   between the units is sufficient that they do not appear oppressive or overbearing, in


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision: 6010896


     the way that a solid structure or one closer to the windows would, albeit they are an
     obvious presence.
9. From the first-floor windows at the rear of the other neighbouring property, No 156,
   the condensers are unlikely to be visible and from the second-floor windows they
   are to the side and peripheral enough as to cause no harm to the outlook of its
   occupants.
10. The side wall of the infill extension runs along the boundary with No 156 which
    according to the council has flats above the ground floor shop. A previous
    extension already projected to the side of No 156’s first floor windows and formed a
    boundary wall along the side of the flat roof, which is used as amenity space by the
    flat’s occupants. Following the infill extension that side wall now extends along the
    full length of No 156’s flat roof and beyond. Thus, it blocks views to the side of the
    amenity space, although they were already limited by the presence of the initial
    extension which projected back to the same extent as the infill, albeit set back from
    the boundary. Also, the wall is the same height as the original wall and therefore no
    more overbearing when viewed from the rear amenity area or first floor windows of
    No 156.
11. Whilst outlook is more restricted looking towards the appeal site, there is no first-
    floor boundary wall on the other side where outlook remains unimpeded, and
    therefore no sense of enclosure arising from the appeal development. Furthermore,
    as already noted, it is common for shops to have rear storage and service buildings
    which impact on outlook from adjoining buildings and rear gardens or balconies.
    Indeed, the impact of the side wall of the infill extension on the outlook of occupiers
    of No 156 is no different to that of the side wall on the adjoining extension on
    occupiers of No 162.
12. The appeal site backs on to the rear boundary of houses on Vinson Close.
    Although the rear extension is close to the boundary, it is in line with the rear of the
    adjacent extension, which the Council describe as lawful, and has a slightly lower
    roof. Mature trees at the end of the gardens prevent views of the development
    when the trees are in full leaf. At other times of the year the distance from rear
    windows on Vinson Close and its position at the end of their gardens is such that
    the development is not overbearing and would not unduly harm the outlook of
    occupants. Also, I note that the size of the extension, combined with the existing
    extension, is no greater than that which was approved in 2005, and no closer to the
    boundary, and was deemed acceptable by the Council at that time.
13. Overall, I conclude that the development does not conflict with Policy 37 of the
    Bromley Local Plan (2019) which requires development to respect the amenity of
    occupiers of neighbouring buildings.
Other Matters
14. Local residents have raised concerns regarding design, parking and safety. The
    Council assessed the design of the development as being acceptable and I found
    no reason to disagree with their assessment. The extension is on the first floor and
    would have no impact on parking. No evidence has been provided to me that the
    building and condenser units are unsafe or represent a fire hazard and such
    matters relating to the construction of a building are dealt with by building
    regulations. More particularly, my remit is limited to assessing the planning merits
    of the development, and I have reached my decision on this basis.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
 Appeal Decision: 6010896


Conditions and Conclusion
15. For the reasons set out above I conclude that the appeal should be allowed.
16. Planning permission is sought retrospectively therefore there is no need to specify
    the plans to be followed. I have used the conditions recommended by the Council’s
    Environmental Health Officer with some alterations to provide a date for compliance
    with antivibration mitigation, rather than those in the Council’s Statement of Case,
    as they specifically limit noise levels and operating hours based on the appellant’s
    noise impact assessment and are necessary to protect residential amenity.

P D Sedgwick
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      4
