Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 27 August 2026
by Rachael Pipkin BA (Hons) MPhil MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 09 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010375
Land Rear of 21-27 Brixey Road, Poole BH12 3PB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission under section 73 of the Town and Country Planning
     Act 1990 (as amended) for the development of land without complying with conditions subject to
     which a previous planning permission was granted.
•    The appeal is made by Mr L. James of James & James Property Ltd against the decision of
     Bournemouth Christchurch and Poole Council.
•    The application Ref is P/26/01143/CONDR.
•    The application sought planning permission to Sever the land and erect 3 x dwellings with associated
     access and parking, including enabling partial demolition works to No 25 Brixey Road without
     complying with a condition attached to planning permission Ref P/25/04203/FUL, dated 2 February
     2026.
•    The condition in dispute is No 2 which states that: The development hereby permitted shall be
     carried out in accordance with the following approved plans: Location and block plan, drawing
     number 01. Received 17 October 2025. Proposed site plan, drawing number 02 Rev A. Received 14
     November 2025. Proposed floorplans and elevations (house 1 and 2), drawing number 04. Received
     17 October 2025. Proposed floorplans and elevations (house 3), drawing number 05 Rev A.
     Received 14 November 2025. Proposed bike store, drawing number 06. Received 17 October 2025.
•    The reason given for the condition is: For the avoidance of doubt and in the interests of proper
     planning.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    The Council refused the proposal on four grounds. Reasons for refusal 3 and 4
      cited on the decision notice related to the absence of payments for Strategic
      Access Management and Monitoring (SAMM) as mitigation of recreational impacts
      on protected European habitat sites, namely the Dorset Heathlands Special
      Protection Area (SPA) and Ramsar Site, the Dorset Heaths Special Area of
      Conservation (SAC) and the Poole Harbour SPA and Ramsar site. In its appeal
      submissions, the Council has advised that due to the application having been
      made prior to mitigation fees being increased on 1 April 2026, the scheme did not
      trigger a requirement for uplifted contributions. As such, the Council confirmed it
      was no longer pursuing these two reasons for refusal. I have no reason to consider
      this matter further.
3.    As part of their appeal submissions, the appellant has proposed a further
      amendment to the scheme to alter the fenestration for the master bedroom of
      Unit 3 to allow for the smaller casement window in that design to be obscurely
      glazed to prevent views into the garden of Unit 2. This amendment would alter the
      position of the casement window to both first floor bedroom windows but retain the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010375


      same size of opening. This change is of a minor nature, which would not prejudice
      the interests of interested parties, nor require consultation in order for me to accept
      the amendment. For this reason, I have accepted this change and proceeded to
      determine the appeal on this basis.
Background and Main Issue
4.    The original planning permission granted consent to Sever the land and erect 3 x
      dwellings with associated access and parking, including enabling partial demolition
      works to No 25 Brixey Road, subject to conditions. The appellant sought to secure
      changes to this permission by varying condition 2 to allow material amendments to
      the approved plans to expand the living accommodation of Unit 3 through the
      introduction of first floor accommodation. Amendments to the site layout to
      accommodate increased vehicle and cycle parking were also proposed.
5.    The principle of development of the site has been accepted. Changes to site layout
      have been found acceptable. Therefore, the main issue is the effect of the
      proposed amendments to the scheme on the living conditions of occupants of 19a
      Brixey Road, in respect of overshadowing, loss of daylight and sunlight and
      overbearing impact and on future occupants of Unit 2, with regard to overlooking
      and loss of privacy.
Reasons
6.    The approved scheme will occupy a backland position behind development
      fronting Brixey Road. Approved Unit 3 which is a single-storey dwelling will lie to
      the south of No 19a Brixey Road, a modest part single / part two-storey dwelling,
      which occupies a similar backland position behind No 19 Brixey Road. Unit 3 will
      be positioned close to the boundary with No 19a, adjacent to its small garden /
      patio area.
7.    The appeal scheme proposes to raise the ridge of approved Unit 3 by
      approximately 1.8 metres in order to create additional accommodation within the
      roofspace. As this unit will be constructed to the south of No 19a, the additional
      height would increase overshadowing of this property, particularly its limited
      outdoor garden space to the detriment of its occupants. Technical evidence has
      not been submitted to demonstrate it would not give rise to a loss of daylight and
      sunlight, and in the absence of this, given the relationship between Unit 3 and
      No 19a, I cannot be certain that it would not.
8.    The increased height would result in a building some 6.6 metres in height at a
      short distance from the shared boundary. A windowless dormer to its northern
      roofslope, required to provide space for a staircase, despite this being positioned
      to face towards the garage rather than habitable accommodation within No19a,
      would increase the bulk of the building. In combination, the increased height and
      bulk of the building would appear overbearing when viewed from this property.
      Significant harm to the living conditions of the occupants of No 19a would arise
      from this.
9.    A dormer to the front roofslope, facing into the appeal site is also proposed. The
      window to the master bedroom within this dormer would be very close to the
      boundary with approved Unit 2 despite being positioned to primarily face towards
      the parking area. It would enable views into Unit 2’s small garden area and
      potentially through the rear patio doors into the house itself. The use of obscured

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010375


      glass to the casement window closest to Unit 2 would help to reduce the extent of
      overlooking but there would nevertheless be oblique views into the garden from
      the unobscured window with associated harms, both actual and perceived, to the
      living conditions of future occupants of Unit 2 due to loss of privacy.
10. The scheme would cause significant harm to the living conditions of No 19a
    through overshadowing and its overbearing impact as well as to future occupants
    of Unit 2 through overlooking. It would therefore conflict with Policy PP27 of the
    Poole Local Plan 2018 which requires new development to be compatible with
    surrounding uses and avoid harmful impacts upon amenity for both local residents
    and future occupiers.
Other Matters
11. The Council’s second reason for refusal related to the impact of wastewater
    generated by new residential development creating an additional nitrate load that
    would adversely affect the integrity of the Poole Harbour SPA and Ramsar
    designated sites. The appellant disputes that the development falls within the
    catchment area for this. Had I been minded to allow the appeal, as the competent
    authority under Regulation 63 of the Conservation of Habitats and Species
    Regulations 2017, I would have been prevented from granting permission unless I
    could be certain that the proposal would not adversely affect the integrity of these
    protected sites. However, there is no need for me to consider this matter further as
    the scheme is unacceptable for other reasons.
12. The Council has an unmet housing need. However, the scheme would not
    increase housing supply over what has already been approved. This does not
    attract weight in favour of the proposal.
Conclusion
13. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

Rachael Pipkin
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
