 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 01 September 2026
 by Nicola Davies BA DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 15 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010238
 225 Faversham Road, Kennington, KENT TN24 9AF
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Peter Chopra against the decision of Ashford Borough Council.
 •   The application Ref is PA/2026/0333.
 •   The development proposed is for a first floor side extension for surgery and waiting room.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2. A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) has
   been published since the planning application was determined by the Council. I
   have had regard to the revised Framework in reaching my decision.
Main Issues
3. The main issues raised by this appeal are the effect of the proposed development
   on the character and appearance of the area and whether it would preserve or
   enhance the character or appearance of Kennington Conservation Area (the CA).
Reasons
4. The Kennington CA Assessment identifies that Faversham Road has a variety of
   styles from the late 19th century through to the 1930’s with the main interest
   focusing on the detailing at first floor level and around the eaves. These are
   distinctive characteristics of the area that contribute to the architectural value of the
   area and makes the area special and worthy of CA status. This provides the CA
   with a distinctive quality to both the character and appearance of the area and
   gives this area architectural significance. The appeal property falls within the CA
   and, therefore, forms part of its significance. The distinctive characteristics of
   detailing are seen at the appeal building and, in its own right, make a positive
   contribution to the character and appearance of Kennington CA.
5. Most of the properties in the vicinity and along Faversham Road are large in size.
   The host property is also a large building having benefitted from extensions. The
   original gable frontage is traditionally detailed. The property is sited within a
   visually prominent location within Kennington CA and at a highway crossroads
   junction.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6010238


6. The proposal would create a significant increase in the bulk and massing of built
   form at the side of the existing building. I accept that the first floor extension would
   be set back from the frontage of Vicarage Road. Notwithstanding this, given its
   corner location the first floor addition would be clearly visible in public views.
7. The property on the opposite side of Upper Vicarage Road has separation between
   its side elevation and the plot boundary. This is visually apparent in public views
   from Faversham Road, despite there being a high wall with tall vegetation behind
   along part of the side boundary at Upper Vicarage Road (a photograph of which
   has been provided). I acknowledge there is a single storey side extension in place
   that extends up to the boundary with Upper Vicarage Road, this can be seen in the
   photographs that have been provided, and the proposal would have a smaller
   footprint than this existing extension. Nonetheless, the proposal would create a
   conspicuously prominent development that would have a visually over-dominant
   appearance at the junction and where there is a spaciousness to the character and
   appearance of the locality. This would be so even with the land gradient that
   places the site at a slightly lower land level to that of Upper Vicarage Road.
8. Further to the above, the absence of traditional detailing applied to the proposal’s
   front elevation at first-floor level and around its eaves would also be apparent in
   views from Faversham Road. Similarly, the featureless flank wall presented at
   Upper Vicarage Road would be out of keeping with the articulation found in the
   elevations of the existing building and that of other buildings in the locality. As
   such, the proposal would not respect the existing building’s detailed design.
9. Taking these matters collectively, the proposal would not respect the existing
   building’s architectural features despite the potential use of matching materials,
   finishes and roof design that includes an overhang within the scheme. The
   proposal would harm both the character and appearance of the area and fail to
   preserve or enhance the character or appearance of Kennington CA. As such, the
   proposal would undermine the purposes of the CA designation.
10. The site does not host a designated listed building nor is it a world heritage site and
    there are no matters of archaeological interest at the site. Nonetheless, Policy HE9
    of the 2026 Framework requires an assessment of a proposal’s impact on the
    significance of the conservation area as a whole, and the effects of this considered
    in accordance with Policies HE5 and HE6 of the Framework.
11. Given the size and scale of the proposal in the CA, I consider there would be harm
    to both the character and appearance of the CA. In accordance with Policies HE5,
    HE6 and HE9 of the Framework I must weigh the harm against the public benefits
    of the proposal.
12. The proposal seeks to increase access to National Health Service (NHS) dentistry
    in the local area, including for children and vulnerable groups, and this would
    amount to a public benefit. There is a deficiency in NHS dental services in the
    Ashford area that places a burden on local services. It has been said that the
    extension could allow for an additional 3,000 to 4,000 NHS patients per year to be
    treated at the expanded dental practice. It is also asserted that the development
    would increase jobs for the local community and would facilitate apprenticeship
    opportunities. Whilst it is not disputed that these would be clear social benefits, no
    substantiated evidence has been submitted that would demonstrate that these



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision 6010238


     benefits would be delivered by this development. Alternatively, they could be
     delivered through a different less harmful scheme.
13. The weight that can be afforded to these benefits is tempered when considered
    against the level of harm identified. As such, the public benefits carry modest
    weight and do not outweigh the harm identified. I conclude therefore that the
    proposed development would fail to accord with national policy.
14. For these reasons, I conclude that the proposed development would be harmful to
    the character and appearance of the area and would not preserve or enhance the
    character or appearance of Kennington CA. The proposal would, therefore, conflict
    with Policies SP6 and ENV14 of the Ashford Local Plan, Section 72 of the Planning
    (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 and the provisions of the
    revised Framework. These policies seek, amongst other matters, development to
    be of a high quality design and demonstrate a careful consideration of and a
    positive response to the character, distinctiveness and sense of place and for
    development within CAs to preserve or enhance the character and appearance of
    the CA and its setting.
15. The proposal would satisfy other aspects of Policies SP6 and ENV14 of the Local
    Plan in respect of ease of movement, legibility, mixed use/diversity, safety/crime,
    parking, amongst other matters. Whilst this may be so, the proposal is required to
    satisfy these policies in all respects and, for the above reasons, I have found that it
    does not.
Conclusion
16. Having regard to the above findings, the appeal should be dismissed.



Nicola Davies
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
