Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 August 2026
by R Gravett BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010523
Joiners Arms, Church Street, Willow Holme, Carlisle CA2 5TF
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Ms Maggie Lo of Maggie Lo Catering Supplies Ltd against the decision of
     Cumberland Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/0177.
•    The development proposed is to install a new ventilation system.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted to install a new
       ventilation system at Joiners Arms, Church Street, Willow Holme, Carlisle
       CA2 5TF in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 26/0177, and the
       plans submitted with it, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development shall begin not later than three years from the date of this
              decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans:
              Location Plan;
              Proposed Rear Elevation Drawing;
              Proposed Side Elevation Drawing;
              Proposed Ventilation Drawing; and
              Design and Specification for Extraction Ventilation System.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (‘the Framework’) was published on
       17 August 2026. The Framework is a material consideration of critical importance
       which should be taken into account from the day of publication. However, there are
       no substantive changes in the new Framework relevant to this appeal and it has
       not therefore been necessary to seeks the views of the parties on this matter.
3.     The Council’s only Reason for Refusal was that the proposal was not supported by
       sufficient information to enable an assessment of visual impacts which could arise
       from the development, and that the drawings and documents submitted were
       either unclear or contained errors. In response to this, the appellant has submitted
       various amended plans and additional documents which were not before the
       Council at the time of its decision, including a revised Design and Access


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010523


         Statement, revised ventilation and elevation plans, and a ‘Design and
         Specification’ document.
4.       The ‘Procedural Guide – Planning Appeals – England’1 advises that the appeal
         process should not be used to evolve a scheme. It is important that what is
         considered by an Inspector at appeal is essentially the same scheme that was
         considered by the Local Planning Authority and by interested parties at the
         application stage. However, the revised plans and information do not involve a
         substantial difference or a fundamental change to the development, rather they
         more accurately show the ventilation system as originally proposed. Consequently,
         I am satisfied no one would be prejudiced and I have therefore based my decision
         on the amended plans and additional documents before me.
Main Issue
5.       The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
         appearance of the area.
Reasons
6.       The former Joiners Arms is a two-storey detached building which fronts Church
         Street (A595) and returns the corner of Byron Street, which provides access to a
         Sainsbury’s car park. To the rear, the building has a lower two-storey outrigger
         with a single-storey ‘lean-to’ extension. It is proposed to duct a new ventilation
         system through the roof of this lean-to which would have a stainless-steel external
         extract flue projecting above the eaves of the outrigger.
7.       From the west on the A595, the flue would be hidden by the gable of the flank
         elevation of the host building and the canopy of the adjacent car wash. From the
         opposite direction, the flue would be seen just above the hipped roof of the
         outrigger, but it would be viewed against the backdrop of the larger McVitie’s
         (Carr’s) factory buildings.
8.       On the approach to the A595 junction from the Sainsbury’s, the flue would be
         prominent on the rear elevation of the host building. However, it would be lower in
         height than the ridge of the main roof and it would not appear incongruous in its
         commercial surroundings, viewed in the context of the busy road junction and
         alongside the large existing flue on the flank of the building on its opposite side.
9.       I therefore conclude that the proposed development would not cause harm to the
         character and appearance of the area. There would be no conflict with Policy SP6
         of the Carlisle District Local Plan (2016) (LP) which seeks to ensure that proposals
         respond to local context and the form of surrounding buildings.
10. The Council has raised no concerns in respect of harm to living conditions. Based
    on my own observations, and the absence of residential uses in proximity, I have
    no reason to form a different view. Consequently, as LP Policy CM5 seeks only to
    prevent adverse impacts on the environment, health or amenity of future or
    existing occupiers, I do not find it to be determinative to this main issue.
Other Matters
11. The proposed use of the building falls outside the scope of this appeal.

1
    For appeals relating to applications dated on or before 31 March 2026. Updated 16 July 2026


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  2
Appeal Decision 6010523


Conditions
12. In addition to the standard time condition, I have imposed a condition requiring that
    the development is carried out in accordance with the approved plans and the
    specification in the interests of certainty. It has not been necessary for me to
    impose a condition which would require details of the materials to be used as
    these are included in the approved ‘Design and Specification’ document.
Conclusion
13. For the above reasons, the proposal accords with the development plan and there
    are no material considerations to indicate a decision should be taken other than in
    accordance with it. Therefore, I conclude that the appeal is allowed

R Gravett
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
