    Appeal Decision
    Site visit made on 18 August 2026
    By Terrence Kemmann-Lane JP DipTP FRTPI MCMI
    an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
    Decision date: 24 August 2026


    Appeal Ref: 6010971
    10 Little Woods Mews, Colchester, CO4 5YG
    •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
        against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    •   The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Purohit against the decision of Colchester City Council.
    •   The application Ref is 260359.
    •   The development proposed is loft conversion with rear dormer and front velux windows.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issues
2. The main issues in this case are: i) the effect of the proposed dormer on the
   character and appearance of the house, terrace and surrounding street scene; and
   ii) its effect on the private amenity spaces of the surrounding neighbouring
   dwellings as a result of overlooking.
Reasons
3. The site is an end-of-terrace 3-storey house at 10 Little Wood Mews, part of a
   recent development that has a design and format consistency over several blocks.
   The layout of the blocks is in the form of a shallow part crescent. I am told that
   permitted development rights (class A-E) have been removed from the site and
   wider estate.
4. Due to the height of the block and the close spacing between rows, it is virtually
   impossible to see the roof slope from the front, other than from the houses
   opposite. In visual terms the proposed front roof lights would have no material
   effect on the appearance of the house or the streetscene.
5. The proposed rear dormer would be set down from the ridge, but its front face
   would virtually align with the rear elevation of the house. It would be set in a little
   from the unattached gable end, but would otherwise extend the full width of the
   roof, running right across to the boundary of its attached neighbour. This form and
   bulk do not conform to the planning policy of the council. The Essex Design Guide
   Supplementary Planning Document1 advises that dormers should be minor
   incidents on the roof plane and should remain clearly subordinate to the main roof.
   Their purpose should be to light the roof-space, not to gain extra headroom. The
   proposed dormer clearly does not conform to this guidance.

1
  It appears to me that the contents of the Essex Design Guide, whilst mainly directed are achieving good design
in new development, provides sound advice in relation to alterations to existing development.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6010971



6. It can be the case that a large dormer in a rear roof slope will be so hidden from
   public gaze that it can be judged acceptable. But that is not the case here. Because
   of the curved layout of the terrace, the rear roofs are plainly in view from
   neighbouring gardens. This dormer would stand out clearly as a discordant and
   intrusive element within an estate that relies to a large extent on the repetition of its
   facades and roof forms for its design quality. In addition, the dormer would be
   clearly seen from beyond this development, such as from the vicinity of No.206
   Bergholt Road.
7. Turning to the second issue, the proposal includes 2 velux windows to the front
   elevation. The adjacent neighbouring property has objected to these due to
   concerns regarding overlooking into their private amenity spaces and rear garden.
   However, given the angle of outlook afforded and having regard to the existing
   second floor, the proposed rooflights would not cause harmful overlooking. The
   proposal also includes the addition of a third-floor side elevation window. The
   neighbouring property to the east has objected to this window due to concerns
   regarding overlooking. However, a condition could be added to any approval to
   ensure that this window is obscure glazed and fixed shut.
8. The windows in the proposed rear dormer would be relatively small and would be
   sited immediately above the windows in the rear elevation below. Therefore, there
   would be no material additional overlooking of neighbouring gardens as a result.
   Furthermore, looking across the rear garden of the appeal property (which I viewed
   from the second-floor rear windows) there would be no overlooking to development
   beyond that of Little Woods Mews due to an extensive bank of trees. Of course,
   these could be removed, but the overlooking in that case would not be materially
   different to that from the existing second-floor windows. I therefore conclude that
   there would be no harmful effect on the private amenity spaces of the surrounding
   neighbouring dwellings as a result of overlooking.
9. My overall conclusion is that, for the reasons that I have set out in paragraphs 5
   and 6, the proposed rear dormer is of poor design and would have a detrimental
   effect on the character and appearance of the house, terrace and surrounding
   street scene. As a result, the appeal will be dismissed.

Terrence Kemmann-Lane
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
 Appeal Decision 6010971




10. LPA - The Essex Design Guide SPD advises that dormers should be minor
    incidents on the roof plane and should remain clearly subordinate to the main roof.
    Their purpose should be to light the roof-space, not to gain extra headroom. It is
    considered that the proposed new first floor rear dormer addition/extension to this
    end of terrace property would have a harmful impact on the character of the host
    dwelling and terrace that it forms a part of. The proposed development, by reason
    of its excessive scale and prominent siting (as it can be clearly seen from several
    points at 245 Bergholt Road and from the wider surrounding area given the open
    nature of the site to the rear– see photo below), fails to respect the character and
    appearance of the host dwelling and surrounding streetscape. The dormer
    proposed on the rear elevation comprises one excessive roof dormer, forming a
    single expansive and visually dominant roof structure.
11. As such, it is considered that the proposed third-storey rear dormer addition would
    have a harmful impact on the character of the host dwelling and surrounding area
    and rhythm and symmetry of the terrace that the property forms a part of. In
    addition, the proposed dormer addition would be finished in cladding. The use of
    this material is uncharacteristic of the surrounding area as all neighbouring
    properties within this development have been built in brick. The use of cladding
    would therefore appear incongruous within the local area and fails to respect the
    use of materials of the host dwelling or local area. The proposed dormer addition
    therefore would result in an incongruous addition that fails to respect or harmonise
    with the character and appearance of the existing host building. In addition, the
    contrasting material would detract from the distinct brick character of the host
    building and would contribute to the rear dormer extension appearing dominant and
    discordant in its context. Moreover, the scale and bulk of the proposed dormer
    addition raises concerns, particularly where the dormer extends across almost the
    entire length of the roof width. In addition, the rear dormer is extremely bulky, which
    creates a visually intrusive form. The use of cladding further exacerbates the visual
    impact. Rather than appearing as a subservient roof addition, the proposal disrupts
    the rhythm of the roofscape and introduces an awkward and cluttered appearance.
    As such, the proposed development fails to respond to the character and
    appearance of the host dwelling. The proposal will be to the detriment of the
    character and appearance of the area. As such, it is considered that the proposal is
    contrary to the aforementioned national and local policies. It is highlighted that
    Permitted Development rights (class A-E) have been removed from the site and
    wider estate. This includes permitted development rights for the addition of
    dormers, to ensure that any roof alterations/ additions are appropriate to the
    character and design of the host dwelling and wider estate.
12. Amenity - In terms of neighbouring amenity, the proposed dormer includes 2 velux
    windows to the front elevation. The adjacent neighbouring property has objected to
    this due to concerns regarding overlooking into their private amenity spaces and
    rear garden. However, given the angle of outlook afforded by the proposed
    rooflights, and having regard to the existing second floor windows on the front
    elevation of the dwelling, it is considered that the proposed rooflights will not result
    in new angles of outlook that will cause harmful overlooking. The proposal also
    includes the addition of a third-floor side elevation window. The neighbouring
    property to the East has objected to this window due to concerns regarding


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     3
 Appeal Decision 6010971



     overlooking. However, a condition can be added to any approval to ensure that this
     window is obscure glazed and fixed shut to prevent any harmful overlooking. The
     proposal also includes the addition of a rear third floor dormer with two new third
     floor windows. Given the third-floor nature of these new windows it is considered
     that the proposal is likely to result in new angles of outlook which may overlook into
     the private amenity spaces of the properties to the rear of the site. As such, there
     are concerns regarding overlooking.
13. Appel -
14. The appeal dwelling is a 4-bedroom townhouse. The intent of the proposed loft
    conversion is to utilise our large and unused roof space to create an additional
    bedroom. Any additional space in the loft conversion would be used to create a
    study or for storage. The proposed plan also involves us removing a wall on the
    second floor between 2 small bedrooms – creating a singular larger room. The
    proposed development would allow us to continue to enjoy a 4- bedroom
    townhouse but with more equally sized bedrooms.
15. While the proposed dormer is large, it would not encompass the full width of the
    house nor the full height of the tall roof - it would be significantly inset from the
    ridge, inset from the eaves, and inset from the side edges of the roof plane. The
    design ensures that a substantial degree of subservience to the existing roof is
    retained and would thus not be an overly dominant addition. The Council’s refusal
    references the ‘Essex Design Guide SPD’ and paraphrases a passage relating to
    dormers. We believe that the passage paraphrased was inappropriate source
    material to rely upon as it appears to be in relation to new housing rather than to
    additions to existing housing.
16. The Planning Inspectorate has previously affirmed our interpretation. In appeal
    decision APP/A1530/W/25/3370040 (see Appendix 1), para 9. states: “9. While the
    Council has referred to the advice in the Essex Design Guide in relation to dormers,
    as the extract provided relates to the use of dormers in new housing, it is not
    directly applicable to the appeal scheme which relates to an extension to an
    existing property.” The allowed appeal cited above, relates to a refusal by the
    Council for the construction of a rear dormer (See Appendix 1). The same
    justification was provided by the Council in reference to an over-dominance of a
    rear dormer and is directly comparable to the refusal our proposed development
    received. Consequently, the reasoning of the Planning Inspectorate in the appeal
    decision cited above is directly applicable to this appeal. By applying to this appeal,
    the same reasoning as was applied in the appeal cited above, we see no reason for
    a different outcome to be reached. For the same reasons as is given in para 6. in
    that appeal decision, we argue that our proposed dormer would not be and overly
    dominant addition to the rear of the property and, consequently, would preserve the
    character and appearance of the appeal dwelling.
17. We have also provided a large number of examples in Appendix 2 where the
    Council has provided planning permission to equivalent or less modest dormers in
    the last 5 years. By showing what has previously been deemed to be acceptable,
    and therefore by extension not overly dominant, guidelines can be created on an
    otherwise largely subjective topic. We contend that, within the context that the
    various examples provided create, that there was no objective reason behind
    judging the proposed dormer to be overly dominant. The proposed rear dormer


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     4
 Appeal Decision 6010971



     would not be visible at street level on Little Woods Mews and it would not have any
     visual impact on the front side of the terrace. Any harm that the Council claims
     would be suffered by the terrace would only be applicable from the rear and in
     private.
18. Private views of the terrace, rhythm, and symmetry - The proposed rear dormer
    would not be visible from within other dwellings on Little Woods Mews but it may be
    visible from some of the gardens. However, this would result in little harm, if any.
    This height of the dwellings makes views of the rooves achievable only by travelling
    to the ends of each garden and looking up. While views are achievable, they would
    not occur naturally in everyday life, challenging the concept that they would be in
    any way intrusive. Further, we are not entirely sure what character would be under
    threat in this context. We would contend that the rear roof slope of a cookie-cutter
    designed terrace is not of any particular architectural importance to warrant its
    appearance being awarded any undue protection. Should there be any material
    impact from this new view, it would be largely diminished as many houses on Little
    Woods Mews already have views of a large rear dormer at 206 Bergholt directly
    from the second floor of their homes. Due to its size and colour, it is a prominent
    feature of the rear view. Given this existing view, we contend that an additional
    smaller dormer, which is only visible outside and from unnatural viewing angles,
    would not be visually intrusive nor materially out of character with what residents
    can already see from the comfort of their own homes.
19. More tangible claims that the Council make are that the proposed development
    would: • have a harmful impact on the rhythm of the terrace - disrupting the rhythm
    of the roofscape and introducing an awkward and cluttered appearance; and • have
    a harmful impact on the symmetry of the terrace.
20. There are two reasons which either negate or mitigate the claimed harmful impact.
    The first is that the appeal property is located at the end of the terrace. Any
    suggested erosion of the rhythm and symmetry would be a cutting short of any
    rhythm, not destroying it entirely. The rhythm would be left intact for the rest of the
    terrace, and would shift the line of symmetry down by a single dwelling. Were the
    appeal dwelling located in the middle of the terrace we believe the Council’s
    assertion would carry more weight. The second reason is that appeal dwelling
    already acts to disrupt the rhythm and symmetry of the terrace, both at the front
    and at the rear. 10 Little Woods Mews sits higher than the rest of the terrace. Its
    doors and windows are noticeably not level with those of the neighbouring houses
    (see Appendix 5). Further, the appeal dwelling doesn't share a roof plane (upon
    which the proposed dormer would sit) with the rest of terrace (see Appendix 5).
    Given that the appeal dwelling is unique in that it already disrupts the rhythm and
    symmetry of the terrace, it negates the suggested impact that the proposed dormer
    would have. We contend that given the appeal dwelling’s limited visibility, location
    at the end of the terrace, and its existing contribution to an awkward and cluttered
    appearance, the proposed development would not result any further harm to
    character or appearance to the terrace.
21. Public Views - The Council asserts that the proposed dormer would diminish the
    character and appearance of the surrounding street scene. In its delegated report,
    it says that the proposed development would be prominently sited - clearly visible
    from several points at 206 Bergholt Road2 and from the wider surrounding area.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     5
 Appeal Decision 6010971



     The Council’s depiction here is incomplete and misleading. The Council fails to
     mention that: i)other than at the area around 206 Bergholt Road, the proposed
     dormer would not be visible anywhere else in the public realm. By “several points at
     245 Bergholt Road”, the Council means 2 points – either side of 206 Bergholt
     Road. Given the proximity of each point to each other, we consider these to be a
     singular vantage point; ii) the vantage point is considerably distant from the
     proposed development – around 50 metres away. Further, it is not in the New
     Braiswick Park estate but rather is located in another area with a distinctly different
     character. To access the vantage point, one must travel around 200 metres from
     the appeal dwelling (a few minutes away on foot); iii)views of the proposed dormer
     would be largely perpendicular from the normal directions of traffic crossing
     vantage point - one would need to turn their gaze close to 90 degrees from their
     direction of travel; and iv)206 Bergholt Road, where the vantage point is, has a
     large and eye-catching rear dormer visible at street level – which is much more
     likely to attract someone’s view, and would make a dormer visible in the distance
     stand out much less by comparison. (See Appendix 6 for photos and information on
     points a. to c. above. See Appendix 3 on point d. above. ) The dormer would not be
     visible in most public places and thus it is unconvincing to claim that the proposed
     dormer would be visually intrusive or would diminish the character of the
     streetscape. That there exists one public place in Colchester where the proposed
     dormer would be visible does little to make the Council’s assertion more
     compelling. It is all the less convincing given that any views obtainable would be at
     a distance and, owing to the small window of opportunity and the unnatural viewing
     angle from the street, unlikely obtained frequently or fortuitously.
22. Private views - While the proposed dormer would be almost entirely hidden from
    public view, it would still be viewable from certain private spaces. However, we
    contend that it would not materially affect the character of the local area. We
    discussed the private views obtainable from Little Woods Mews itself earlier and we
    will not repeat those points. The only other private spaces that views would be
    obtainable are from the properties behind Little Woods Mews on Bergholt Road.
    The space between Little Woods Mews and Bergholt Road is a collision of worlds -
    it marks the boundary of the relatively modern New Braiswick Park estate. The
    difference in the character between the two roads is stark, with dwellings from one
    side seeming alien to other. The houses on Bergholt Road are less uniform than
    those found on New Braiswick Park estate. They are older, come in all shapes and
    sizes, and still benefit from full permitted development rights. Arguably, for
    residents of Bergholt Road, the mere existence of Little Woods Mews is
    incongruous, visually intrusive, and acts to diminish the character of the local area.
    Given that there is such variation on Bergholt Road, including 2 rear dormers and
    other additions, and given its inherently different character, we contend that an
    additional view of a dormer in already alien view would not cause any additional
    harm nor be out of place from what is already present in the neighbourhood.
23. New Braiswick Park Estate and Permitted Development Rights - Certain
    permitted development rights were removed for the entirety of the New Braiswick
    Park estate via planning permission provided LPA: O/COL/03/1019. This may
    explain why any additions to dwellings, including rear dormers, are hard to find
    within the estate. We believe that our proposed development would have likely
    fallen under permitted development had the relevant rights not been removed.
    Nonetheless, without these rights it means we do not have the luxury of a fall-back

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     6
 Appeal Decision 6010971



     position. In LPA: O/COL/03/1019, the stated reason for the condition removing
     certain permitted development rights was: “To safeguard the visual amenity of the
     area, to protect the amenity of adjoining residents and to prevent overdevelopment
     of the site by controlling future extensions, alterations and associated
     development.”
24. We touch upon protection of the amenity of adjoining residents, as well as
    overdevelopment, in other parts of this appeal. We earlier explained how the
    proposed development would not affect the visual amenity of the area.
    Consequently, in this case, removal of our permitted development rights acts as a
    heavy-handed measure which goes beyond what is necessary to achieve the
    condition’s purpose. By extension, the denial of permission for the proposed
    development does little to help or hinder the protection of visual amenity.
25. The Council is a gate keeper for any alterations to the estate but this has not
    prevented it from grating permission for rear dormers in the past. We note 2
    examples: LPA: 212221 and LPA:162787 (resubmitted as LPA:172592). We
    acknowledge that both of these proposals differ substantially from the proposed
    development in this appeal. However, it is relevant to note how the Council treated
    certain aspects of each and how it is inconsistent with their treatment of appeal
    dwelling.
26. With respect to 211 Axial Drive (LPA: 212221), we only wish to note that
    permission was granted and that the dormer material suggested was aluminium
    (see Appendix 7). Our understanding is that the Council did not to take issue with
    this material and its visual impact. This is surprisingly inconsistent with the
    Council’s strong opinions on the cladding suggested in our proposed development.
    The development that exists at 87 Apprentice Drive (LPA: 162787 & 172592 is
    relevant to this appeal as the Council granted permission to build a triple rear
    dormer. What stands out is the size of the dormers, how visible they are, and the
    local area in which they were built (see Appendix 8). While the three dormers seem
    small and well spread on paper, in reality they are large, imposing, and take up a
    large proportion of the roof. They are also viewable at street level given that a
    footpath exists next to the dwelling. The visual impact of the three smaller dormers
    would be almost identical to that created by a single larger dormer, as the spacing
    between the triple dormer is negligible and the footprint on the roof would be the
    same. Given the similarity between three smaller dormers to a singular large
    dormer, the increase in usable internal space and the more efficient use of building
    resources, would mean that the benefit of a single larger dormers appears to far
    outweigh the negligible visual benefits that could be achieved with three smaller
    dormers. This development exists on the same estate as the appeal dwelling and
    there are no other rear dormers in close proximity. Given how visible and large
    these dormers are, the same arguments that were used against our proposed
    development as to the impact on the character of the dwelling and neighbourhood
    could have been used against this dwelling in the same manner. Large
    comparisons can be drawn between 87 Apprentice Drive and the appeal dwelling.
    We contend that for the same reasons as to why the development there was not
    contrary to national or local policies, that the Council should not have found the
    proposed development to be so.
27. Reason for Refusal 2 - The rear dormer windows - In the reason for refusal, the
    Council contends that the rear dormer windows would: “result in considerable

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
 Appeal Decision 6010971



     overlooking into the private amenity spaces of the surrounding neighbouring
     dwellings to the detriment of residential amenity.” A slightly more measured
     approach is taken in the delegated report which states: “it is considered that the
     proposal is likely to result in new angles of outlook which may overlook into the
     private amenity spaces of the properties to the rear of the site. As such, there are
     concerns regarding overlooking.” The Council has failed to take into consideration
     the position of these windows and the current level of privacy enjoyed by the
     neighbours. With respect to other residents on Little Woods Mews, considerable,
     and reciprocal, overlooking already exists. This is somewhat inevitable considering
     the proximity and height of the dwellings. Views of neighbouring gardens on Little
     Woods Mews can already be achieved from the second-floor rear windows of the
     appeal dwelling.
28. With respect to the dwellings located to the rear of the appeal dwelling, on Bergholt
    Road, a similar situation exists where there is already a substantial amount of
    overlooking. Direct views of the dwellings on Bergholt Road can be obtained from
    the second-floor rear windows of the appeal dwelling. At the time of writing, there
    are some trees which obscure certain views of gardens on Bergholt Road, but we
    imagine this natural screen would be much less effective in the winter months. See
    Appendix 9 for distances. The windows in the proposed dormer would be higher
    than those on the second floor of the appeal dwelling but this difference in height
    would not create viewing angles that would increase the amount of overlooking to
    such an extent that it would have a material, or harmful, impact the limited privacy
    currently enjoyed by neighbouring residents. While any loss of privacy of the
    neighbouring dwellings would be negligible, we would be open to some limited
    conditions to further protect privacy as a fall-back position. If needed, these would
    include the use of obscure glazing below the height of 1.7m. As the plan is to use
    this space as a bedroom, we would accept conditions reluctantly as we would want
    to preserve as much access to natural light and ventilation as possible. A happy
    compromise can be reached between privacy and enjoyment of the room, as long
    as glazing above 1.7m is not obscured and remains openable.
29. The side window – the Council did not specifically refer to the third-floor side
    window in the refusal however it was mentioned in the delegated report. It says:
    “The neighbouring property to the East has objected to this window due to
    concerns regarding overlooking. However, a condition can be added to any
    approval to ensure that this window is obscure glazed and fixed shut to prevent any
    harmful overlooking.” We agree with the assessment here. Given that the
    uncontested ‘Velux’ windows would still allow natural light and ventilation into the
    room, we would be happy to accept the condition suggested above on the side
    window.
30. m




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    8
