Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by K Townend BSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21 August 2026.


Appeal Ref: 6010271
43 Westminster Road, Worcester, Worcestershire WR5 1PB
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Peter Styles against the decision of Worcester City Council.
•   The application Ref is 25/00909/FUL.
•   The development proposed is new dwelling to the side of 43 Westminster Road, Worcester.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. The South Worcestershire Development Plan Review (the SWDPR 2026) was
   adopted by the Council on 25 March 2026 and replaces, in full, the South
   Worcestershire Development Plan, 2016 (the SWDP 2016). This appeal was
   received before the adoption of SWDPR 2026 and as such, at that time it was
   emerging policy and Policies from the SWDP 2016 were referred to in the decision
   notice.
3. I have received copies of the relevant adopted SWDPR 2026 policies and both
   main parties have had an opportunity to comment on them. I have, therefore,
   determined the appeal against the recently adopted policies.
4. A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the revised Framework) came into
   force on the 17 August 2026. It is a material consideration which should be taken
   into account from the day of publication. Although the revised Framework is
   significantly different from the previous versions, as it has introduced policy lettering
   and numbering and separated plan-making policies from decision-making policies,
   the wording of the details most pertinent to this appeal are unchanged. Having
   considered the revisions and in light of the principles of natural justice, in this
   instance it is not necessary to invite any submissions from the parties on the
   revised Framework.
5. As part of final comments, the appellant submitted a proposed amended plan,
   providing the main first floor bedroom window in the side elevation and a second,
   obscure glazed, window in the rear elevation. The changes in the amended plan
   would result in a substantial change to the application and the interested parties
   have not had an opportunity to consider the scheme, as amended. Consequently, I
   have not accepted the amended plan for the purposes of this appeal. In the
   interests of natural justice, I have determined the appeal on the basis of the plans
   as considered by the Council.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010271


Main Issues
6. The main issues are:
        •    the effect of the development on the character and appearance of the area;
        •    whether the proposed development would provide acceptable living conditions
             for the occupants of the neighbouring properties, in particular 45 Westminster
             Road with regard to overlooking and loss of privacy to the garden; and

        •    the effect of the development on biodiversity and the requirement for 10%
             Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG).
Reasons
Character and appearance
7. The appeal site comprises a parcel of land between 43 and 45 Westminster Road
   (the host dwellings). It is currently part grassed garden and part driveway. The
   houses either side of the appeal site are each one of a pair of semi-detached
   houses. The wider area is a mix of semi-detached houses and short terraces. The
   appeal site and the houses either side are set back from Westminster Road with
   the frontages enclosed with a low metal fence, allowing views across the site. No.
   45 Westminster Road is paired with 101 Canterbury Road and this pair is sited at
   an angle facing the junction of the two roads, rather than being parallel to the
   roads. Nos 43 and 41 are at a slight angle to the road, but not on the same level as
   45 and 101.
8. The appeal site forms part of a gap between Nos 43 and 45 due to the different
   orientation of the pairs of semi-detached houses. Although the appellant has
   referenced other properties in the immediate area where the gaps between houses
   are smaller, the appeal site is one of a number of gaps where pairs of semi-
   detached houses, which face the junctions, create larger gaps with the houses
   directly facing the roads.
9. The gaps between 124 and 126 Canterbury Road and 120 and 122 Canterbury
   Road are narrower, however, there is also a substantially larger gap to the other
   side of these pairs, where it turns into Liverpool Road. This wider gap provides a
   general sense of openness to these corner properties and off sets the smaller
   gaps. The spaces between 85 and 87 Canterbury Road and 1 and 3 Carlisle Road
   are both narrower than the appeal site but are not as prominent as the appeal site.
   The gap between 51 and 53 Norwich Road is wide at first floor, albeit narrower at
   ground floor due to the single storey extension to No 53. These other gaps, noted
   by the appellant, are all materially different to the appeal site. The Inspector for the
   previous appeal between the two host dwellings 1 noted that the gap was reflected
   on the opposite side of the road and also at other locations nearby.
10. These gaps, although varying in width, form part of the character of the area and an
    element of symmetry and openness which contribute positively to the spacious and
    green character. The symmetry is not based on the building line between 44 and 45
    Westminster Road but on the symmetry formed by the similar gaps and corner
    properties repeated throughout the area. These gaps also define the corners of the
    roads and contribute significantly and positively to the street scene.

1
    Appeal ref APP/D1835/W/24/3337040


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010271


11. The proposed dwelling would form a short terrace with No 43 and follow the
    building line of that pair of semi-detached houses. Nevertheless, the appeal
    proposal would significantly reduce the gap and would not preserve a substantial
    gap. The development would erode the sense of openness that is an important part
    of the street scene. Moreover, it would erode one of the designed gaps between
    the corner properties and the road-fronting properties that is part of the character of
    the estate and would, therefore, result in a loss of symmetry and uniformity with the
    wider area.
12. The appellant contends that the proposed development would comply with the
    Worcestershire Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document (the Design
    Guide SPD) which advises that extensions should be at least one metre off the
    shared boundary at first floor level. However, even if I were to apply this guidance
    for side extensions to the proposed development for a new dwelling, it advises that
    at least one metre should be retained, to prevent terracing. That the development
    would retain a gap would not automatically equate to it being appropriate to the
    character and street scene. Moreover, the Design Guide SPD has been
    superseded by other guidance.
13. Although I accept that the appearance of No 43 is different from No 41, as it is not
    rendered and the porch has been removed, it is not visually harmful to the area.
    The proportions, scale and design remain similar and I also saw other brick
    properties and various porches across the estate. Moreover, the proposal seeks to
    replicate the brick elevations of No 43, rather than mirroring No 41, and the
    proposal would also be narrower than either 41 or 43. The design is not of such
    significance so as to outweigh the harm I have identified to the character and
    appearance of the area from the reduction in the gap.
14. Overall, even though the appeal is proposed as a short terrace, the reduction of the
    gap would be harmful to the character and appearance of the area and disrupt the
    rhythm of the gaps between the properties on the corners. It would, therefore,
    conflict with Policy SWDPR 28 of the SWDPR 2026 which, amongst other matters,
    requires all development to be of a high quality design, integrate effectively with its
    surroundings, that the siting and layout of a development should reflect the given
    characteristics of the site, and that the development must complement the local
    character of the area.
Living conditions
15. The layout of the estate and existing houses would create some degree of
    overlooking between the rear elevations of existing properties and the gardens of
    neighbouring properties. Nevertheless, the appeal proposal would bring the rear
    first floor window closer to the garden area of 45 Westminster Road than the
    existing windows in No 43.
16. This would result in increased opportunities for overlooking of the neighbouring
    garden, which would be harmful to the living conditions of the occupiers of that
    property.
17. The amendment proposed with the appeal, to relocate the window to the side of the
    proposed dwelling, would reduce the overlooking and not result in unacceptable
    adverse effects on living conditions. However, other than within the appeal
    statement, no plans of such amendments have been submitted. Furthermore, this
    would also result in a blank first floor elevation to the rear, which would also be

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010271


     harmful to the character and appearance of the area due to being visible across the
     rear gardens from Canterbury Road.
18. On the basis of the plans submitted with the planning application the development
    would result in unacceptable living conditions for the occupants of the neighbouring
    properties, in particular 45 Westminster Road with regard to overlooking and loss of
    privacy to the garden. It would, therefore, be contrary to Policy SWDPR 35 of the
    SWDPR 2026 which requires all development proposals to be designed to create a
    high standard of amenity for existing and future occupiers.
Biodiversity net gain
19. The appeal site, in part, is laid to grass. On the basis of the evidence before me I
    cannot be certain that the development would not affect more than twenty-five
    square metres of on-site habitat and would, therefore, be required to achieve 10%
    BNG. Even if the rear garden is to remain garden and biodiversity enhancements
    have been recommended by the Council, I have no compelling evidence that the
    enhancements would secure 10% BNG over the existing habitat value, as is
    required by the relevant legislation.
20. The pre-development value of the site is required as part of the planning application
    or appeal, it is not a matter that can be secured by condition and the appellant’s
    reference to the Planning Practice Guidance would only apply where the pre-
    development value is known. Without an assessment of the habitat value of the
    existing site, it is not clear whether the proposed enhancements would achieve the
    uplift required.
21. For the above reasons, based on the evidence before me, I cannot be certain that
    the requirement for 10% Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG) would be achieved. This
    would be contrary to the requirements of Schedule 7A of the Town and Country
    Planning Act 1990.
Other Matters
22. Following the adoption of the SWDPR 2026 the Council has now identified a five
    year housing land supply. Even if Worcester City Council has only contributed a
    limited number to the overall supply for South Worcestershire, I have no compelling
    evidence that there is not a five year housing land supply.
23. Nevertheless, the appeal proposal would contribute towards additional housing in
    the area. Moreover, the development would have economic and social benefits and
    some environmental benefits from the proposed solar PV panels. However, as one
    dwelling the benefits would be limited and I give limited weight to this matter. The
    environmental harm I have identified, to the character and appearance of the area,
    would substantially outweigh the limited benefits of the development.
Conclusion
24. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

K Townend
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
