Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 1 September 2026
by H Marriott MPlan MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010197
5 Wellesley Street, King's Lynn, Norfolk PE30 1QD
      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
      The appeal is made by Mr Nick Suiter of E.N. Suiters & Sons Ltd against the decision of King's Lynn
       and West Norfolk Borough Council.
      The application Ref is 25/02106/F.
      The development proposed is described as ‘proposed residential flat development (four duplex flats)
       following the demolition of the existing building’.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2. An application for costs was made by Mr Nick Suiter of E.N. Suiters & Sons Ltd
   against the decision of King's Lynn and West Norfolk Borough Council. This
   application is the subject of a separate Decision.
Preliminary Matters
3. On 17 August 2026, the Government published a revised National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework). This latest version of the Framework has introduced
   plan-making and national decision-making policies. It is effective from the day of
   publication. The main parties were given the opportunity to comment on the revised
   Framework, and any comments received have been taken into consideration.
4. The site is located close to the Grade II listed buildings known as Nos 3-15 (Odd)
   Portland Street (the Portland Street Terrace). In considering whether to grant
   planning permission, I have been mindful of my statutory duty under Section 66(1)
   of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act) to
   have special regard to the desirability of preserving the building or its setting or any
   features of special architectural or historic interest which it possesses.
5. The appeal site is situated outside of but adjacent to the Norfolk Street
   Conservation Area (CA). Although there is no statutory protection for the setting of
   a CA in the Act, policy HE4 of the Framework requires consideration of any harm
   to, or loss of, the significance of a designated heritage asset, including from
   development within its setting.
6. A number of planning applications for the redevelopment of the site have previously
   been refused by the Council1. The 2021 refusal for 6 dwellings was also dismissed

1
    including Council refs: 19/00249/F, 20/01000/F and 24/00842/F.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010197


        at appeal2 (the previous appeal). While I have determined the appeal on its own
        merits, I have had regard to the findings of the previous appeal insofar as they are
        relevant to the matters before me.
Main Issues
7.       The main issues are:
                  the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of
                   the area, including the setting of the CA and Portland Street Terrace;
                  the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of
                   neighbouring occupiers with particular regard to outlook and privacy; and
                  whether or not the site would meet the flood risk exception test.
Reasons
Character and appearance
8.       The appeal site is a former vehicle repair workshop located close to the central
         part of King’s Lynn. The adjacent CA designation encompasses part of the town’s
         historic core, including Norfolk Street which links the historic commercial centre
         with the former East Gate. Its special interest derives from its historic street
         pattern, its role as one of the main routes through the town and its concentration of
         historic buildings. The area’s townscape, varied building styles and historic
         commercial character contribute to the significance and special interest of the CA
         as a whole.
9. The Council’s CA Character Statement3 (the Character Statement) describes
   Wellesley Street, together with Portland Street and Waterloo Street as forming part
   of the earliest ‘railway’ development in King’s Lynn following the opening of the first
   station, comprising a planned grid of streets arranged around three rectangular
   blocks, including frequent residential terraces. While not located in the CA,
   Wellesley Street contains a mixture of historic and later developments. Reference
   within the Character Statement to Wellesley Street having suffered mixed fortunes
   in the 20th Century, indicates that some of the more recent developments along the
   street do not positively contribute to the character and appearance of the area.
10. The appeal property, 5 Wellesley Street (No 5), sits between the rebuilt Salvation
    Army building and a terrace of two-storey dwellings. The Grade II listed Portland
    Street Terrace backs onto No 5 and comprises a mid-19th Century terrace of brown
    brick houses arranged in a unified composition of three storeys beneath a
    continuous roof, with railings fronting Portland Street. The significance of the
    Portland Street Terrace is derived from its age, architectural quality, surviving
    historic form and detailing, and its contribution to the planned ‘railway’
    development. It is identified in the Character Statement as giving a prosperous air
    to the street and as a fitting entrance to the town from the original railway station.
11. No 5 comprises a single storey commercial building with a simple utilitarian
    appearance, characterised primarily by a flat roof, with pitched roof at the rear,
    that sits in line with the height of the eaves of the adjoining terrace, rendered and
    brick elevations, large vehicle access doors and limited architectural detailing. The
2
    Appeal ref: APP/V2635/W/21/3288475.
3
    Norfolk Street Area Conservation Area Character Statement (2003).


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 2
Appeal Decision 6010197


     appellant’s Heritage Statement confirms that limited remains of the former 19th
     Century building remain on site, with the exception of a partially collapsed wall
     forming the west boundary and chimney remains to its rear. By contrast, the
     adjoining terrace exhibits a greater degree of architectural interest, including bay
     windows and vertical emphasis typical of its age. While No 5 contributes to the
     varied character and enclosure provided by buildings along the street, it makes a
     neutral contribution to the significance of the adjacent CA.
12. The residential layout would not reflect the prevailing pattern of development in the
    area. Although the two dwellings fronting Wellesley Street would continue the
    established building line, the two dwellings to the rear would create a backland,
    back-to-back form of development, with two principal elevations, that would be at
    odds with the character of the surrounding area and would erode the legible grid
    pattern of development where buildings typically address the streets. Furthermore,
    while the overall pitched roof form would broadly reflect that of the adjoining
    terrace, the deep M plan roof would appear uncharacteristic of the surrounding
    terraces, which generally comprise simple pitched roofs with subordinate outriggers
    or extensions. As well as being visible from the street, the proposed building would
    also be appreciable in views from the rear windows and garden areas of
    surrounding properties and alleyways, as well as from the alleys running alongside
    Portland Street Terrace, further reinforcing its discordant appearance within the
    street block.
13. I acknowledge that the earlier residential terraces in the area do not feature
    projecting bay windows. Nevertheless, and despite the use of traditional materials
    and railings, as an extension to the adjoining later terrace the proposed flat
    frontage would fail to respond positively to its architectural character. It would lack
    the articulation and visual interest provided by the bays and detailing of that terrace
    and would appear as a simplified and incongruous addition within the street scene.
    Moreover, although the fenestration would be symmetrical, it would not reflect the
    regular rhythm of individual entrances addressing the street that characterises
    nearby terraces. Although the design shares some similarities with Wellington
    Court on the opposite site of the street, that building is detached and sits between
    more modern development.
14. While the current scheme has sought to reduce the scale, massing, height and
    numbers to units to address the concerns raised by the Inspector in determining the
    previous appeal, including the removal of the crown roof, this does not mean that
    the revised proposal is an acceptable one. Notwithstanding its smaller footprint, the
    provision of a communal garden with bin and cycle storage, and the increased
    separation from the Portland Street Terrace, the duplex layout and undistinguished
    design would introduce a form of development that is at odds with the established
    railway development character that positively contributes to the setting of the
    adjacent CA and the listed buildings.
15. The appellant contends that there is no conflict with a specific design standard,
    code or masterplan applicable to the appeal site. However, that does not alter my
    assessment, which is ultimately a matter of planning judgement. Overall, the
    proposed development would not successfully reinforce the distinctive character of
    this part of Wellesley Street. It follows that the proposal would fail to accord with the
    statutory duty under s66(1) of the Act and there would be harm to the significance
    of the listed building as a designated heritage asset. For the same reasons, the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010197


     proposed development would result in harm to the significance of the CA through
     development within its setting.
16. Where a development proposal would harm the significance of a designated
    heritage asset, Policy HE6 of the Framework requires the effect on the asset and
    its significance to be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the
    proposal.
17. Public benefits would be derived from the redevelopment of a previously developed
    site for housing in a sustainable location close to the town centre, within walking
    and cycling distance of a range of services and facilities. The proposal would also
    replace a building that appears to be deteriorating in condition. In addition, while
    the building is currently used for storage, the proposal would remove the potential
    for the site to revert to a workshop use, with potential for greater levels of noise,
    disturbance and emissions affecting nearby occupiers.
18. The Frameworks states that great weight should be given to the asset’s
    conservation, irrespective of whether any potential effects amount to a positive
    effect, harm, substantial harm, or total loss of its significance. Even cumulatively,
    the weight of public benefits in favour of the proposed development would not be
    sufficient to outweigh harm to the significance of designated heritage assets
    identified.
19. I conclude that the proposed development would result in a harmful effect on the
    character and appearance of the area, including harm to the setting of the CA and
    Portland Street Terrace. In this regard, it would conflict with Policies LP02, LP18,
    LP20, LP21 and LP40 of the King’s Lynn and West Norfolk Local Plan
    2021 -2040 (2025) (LP) insofar as they require residential development to result in
    a sustainable design which respects and enhances local character, to be of high
    quality design, to conserve and enhance the historic environment in a manner
    appropriate to its significance and to respond sensitively and sympathetically to the
    local setting and pattern of adjacent streets.
Living conditions
20. The rear elevation of the proposed building would extend only marginally beyond
    the rear elevation of the Salvation Army building and would be set in from the rear
    outrigger/extension to the adjacent terraced dwelling. It is unclear whether the
    existing historic wall between the Salvation Army building and No 5 would be
    retained. However, whether any covenant exists requiring its retention is a private
    matter. In any event, the proposed development would occupy a smaller footprint
    than the existing building and would be set back from the rear boundary of the site.
    Having regard to these factors, I am satisfied that the proposed development
    would be unlikely to result in any unacceptable loss of outlook or undue sense of
    enclosure for the occupiers or users of the neighbouring properties either side of
    No 5.
21. The proposed development would include first-floor bedroom windows within its
    rear elevation facing towards the rear of Portland Street Terrace. While a degree
    of mutual overlooking already exists between properties within that terrace, No 5
    does not currently have any functional rear-facing window/door openings, as any
    former openings are blocked or otherwise largely unused. Notwithstanding the fact
    that they could be, the occupiers of the properties within the Portland Street


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010197


       Terrace immediately to the rear of No 5 currently experience a relatively good
       degree of privacy.
22. The occupiers of the dwellings within the Portland Street Terrace to the rear of
    No 5 would therefore be likely to experience a greater perception of being
    overlooked as a result of the proposed development. Nevertheless, having regard
    to the separation distances involved and the established urban character of the
    area, where a degree of overlooking is commonplace, I do not find that the
    proposed development would result in a material loss of privacy and the amended
    scheme has addressed the concerns of the Inspector in determining the previous
    appeal in these regards.
23. I conclude that the proposed development would not result in an unacceptable
    effect on the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers with particular regard to
    outlook and privacy. In this regard, there would be no conflict with Policy LP21 of
    the LP insofar as it requires new development to be assessed against their impact
    on neighbouring uses, including in respect of overlooking, overbearing and
    overshadowing.
24. While reference is made to Policies LP18 and LP40 of the LP, neither policy
    contains specific criteria relating to the effect of development on living conditions of
    neighbouring occupiers. Consequently, those policies have not been determinative
    in my assessment of this main issue.
Flood risk
25. The evidence before me indicates that while the site benefits from flood defences
    protecting King’s Lynn, it lies within Flood Zone 3 and the Tidal Hazard Zone.
    Therefore, in principle, the appeal is at higher risk of fluvial flooding, including in
    the event of a breach of the River Ouse.
26. There is no dispute between the main parties that the sequential test is passed.
    Nevertheless, an exception test should be applied where it has first been
    demonstrated that it is not possible for development to be located in areas with a
    lower risk of flooding, and the considerations in Policy F6 of the Framework are
    relevant.
27. In considering whether the proposed development would provide wider
    sustainability benefits to the community that outweigh the flood risk, there is
    overlap with the public benefits identified in the heritage balance above. Those
    benefits include the provision of housing and redevelopment of a deteriorating site
    within the urban area. While I have concluded that those benefits are insufficient to
    outweigh the harm to the significance of the affected heritage assets, the
    exception test requires a different exercise. In this regard, having regard to the
    site’s location and the protection afforded by existing flood defences, I am satisfied
    that the wider sustainability benefits to the community as a matter of principle,
    would be sufficient to outweigh the flood risk associated with the proposed
    development.
28. The Environment Agency raises no objection on flood risk grounds subject to the
    mitigation identified in the Flood Risk Assessment (FRA), including raising finished
    floor levels to the maximum practical height, the provision of flood doors and dam
    boards and the availability of safe refuge at first floor level. While the FRA
    acknowledged that finished floor levels cannot be raised above the maximum

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010197


       predicted flood depth due to access requirements, the EA is nevertheless satisfied
       that the residual risk can be appropriately managed. In the absence of substantive
       evidence that the development would increase flood risk elsewhere, I am satisfied
       that the proposal would meet the remaining parts of the exception test.
29. Subject to conditions, I conclude that the proposed development would meet the
    flood risk exception test. In this regard, there would be no conflict with Policies
    LP06 and Policy LP25 of the LP insofar as they require new development to be
    designed and adapted to incorporate climate change and flood risk resilience and
    require the exceptions test set out in the Framework to be met.
Other Matters
30. I have had regard to the appellant’s efforts to engage in pre-application
    discussions with the Council and to evolve the design in response to previous
    decisions relating to the site. The appellant also contends that, while a full viability
    case has not been advanced, a further reduction in the scale of the development
    may not be deliverable given the constraints of the site. However, I have not been
    presented with any substantive evidence to substantiate that position. Even if I
    had, it may not have overcome the harm I have identified. In any event, each
    proposal must be assessed on its own merits and my determination is based on
    the specific plans and evidence before me.
31. The Council has found the appeal proposal to be acceptable in all the other
    respects, including the principle of demolition, archaeology, contamination, parking
    or highway safety. Based on the evidence before me, I have no reason to reach a
    different view on those matters. However, in addition to my findings on flood risk,
    these are neutral matters which neither weigh for or against the proposal.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
32. The appeal site lies within a settlement where the principle of redevelopment is
    acceptable. Policy S3 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of
    sustainable development. Policy S4 of the Framework states that development
    proposals within settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so
    would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against
    the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
33. In accordance with Policies L2 and L3 of the Framework, I attach substantial weight
    to the redevelopment of this previously developed underutilised site in a
    sustainable urban location, close to public transport services while providing
    acceptable living standards for neighbours. While I am not aware of an acute need
    for new housing in the area, the proposed development would nevertheless
    contribute to the supply of housing. The proposed development would likely
    incorporate modern construction methods and energy-saving measures, provide
    economic benefits through future occupier expenditure and employment during
    construction. These are all matters that gain Framework support.
34. However, I have found that the development results in an unacceptable effect on the
    character and appearance of the area, with particular regard to the setting of heritage
    assets. This is a matter that results in conflict with the development plan as whole.
    Consequently, there is conflict with paragraph 1 of Policy DP3 of the Framework,
    which requires development proposals to respond to their context (the history,
    character and features of their site and its setting), so that they integrate with and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6010197


     enhance their surroundings. It follows that there would also be conflict with the built
     form and identity principles listed in paragraph 2. Policy DP3 states that development
     proposals should be refused if, without clear justification, they conflict with paragraph
     1 or relevant aspects of the principles in paragraph 2. Moreover, in line with Policy
     S4, the circumstances in which the benefits of approving development proposals are
     likely to be outweighed by adverse effects include situations where the development
     proposals would fail to comply with Policy DP3 of the Framework. There would also
     be conflict with Policies HE4 and HE6 of the Framework relating to heritage, a matter
     which attracts considerable weight.
35. Taking into account the above conclusions, I find that the benefits of approving the
    development would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects, when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
    Accordingly, the proposed development would not be sustainable development.
36. Drawing the above together, the development conflicts with the development plan
    and the material considerations, including the Framework, do not indicate that the
    appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it. For the reasons given
    above the appeal should be dismissed.

H Marriott
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
