Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 September 2026
by John Felgate BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 9th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010292
Rose Cottage, Kentish Lane, Hatfield, Hertfordshire AL9 6JP
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mrs Sally Fitzgerald against the decision of Welwyn Hatfield District Council.
•    The application reference number is 6/2025/2623/HOUSE.
•    The development proposed is the replacement of a previously existing outbuilding.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary matters
2.     The application seeks retrospective planning permission for works that have been
       started. At the time of my visit, the parts that had been completed comprised the
       steel frame of the walls and roof, the plinth walls in brick and blockwork, and the
       concrete floor slab.
3.     The appellant states that she was unaware of the need for planning permission,
       because the new building was intended as a replacement for an earlier one on the
       same site. I see no reason to doubt this explanation.
4.     On 17 August 2026 a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the NPPF) was
       published. The appellant and the Council were invited to comment on the
       relevance of the new policies to this appeal, and I have taken account of their
       responses.
Main issues
5.     The main issues in the appeal seem to me as follows:
       ▪ whether the proposal would comply with the relevant policies relating to
         development in the green belt;
       ▪ the effects on the character and appearance of the area;
       ▪ and the effects on living conditions at the adjoining property, Cherry Tree
         Cottage.
Reasons for decision
Green belt policy
6.     The Local Plan for the area is the Welwyn Hatfield Borough Local Plan (the LP),
       adopted in October 2023. In that plan, Policy SADM 34 states that development
       proposals in the green belt are to be treated in accordance with relevant national


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010292


       policy, and that replacement buildings will permitted where the new building is not
       materially larger than the one it replaces, and is for the same use.
7.     The national policy to which the above LP policy refers is now the revised NPPF.
       In that document, Policy GB6 states that ‘inappropriate’ development in green
       belts is to be regarded as harmful by definition, and should not be approved except
       in very special circumstances. In this context, all development is to be treated as
       inappropriate unless it falls into one of the categories in NPPF Policy GB7.
8.     One of these exceptions, under Policy GB7’s section (b), is where the
       development is the replacement of an existing building. However, as in LP Policy
       SADM 34, this exception is only available where the new building is not materially
       larger than the one that is to be replaced. And in addition, the NPPF policy also
       requires that the existing building should be lawful in planning terms, and be of
       permanent and substantial construction.
9.     In the present case, the former building that stood on the site until recently was
       evidently a single-storey timber shed, which stood in the garden of Rose Cottage,
       and is said to have housed various kinds of vehicles and aircraft, for hobby
       purposes. That building was about 12m long by just over 6m wide. The new
       building which is now under construction would have an almost identical footprint.
10. However, the previous building evidently had a gambrel-style roof, with a low
    eaves line at a height of around 2m, and its main ridge at about 4.6m. Whereas, in
    the partially-completed replacement building, the eaves are at 4.6m and the ridge
    at 5.8m. In addition, the roof has been turned through 90 degrees, so that the
    gables are on the building’s long sides, rather than its ends. These changes in the
    shape and orientation of the roof add significantly to the new building’s overall
    height and volume. The replacement building would therefore be materially larger
    than the original.
11. In addition, the appellant’s photographs show the former building to have been
    constructed primarily of what appears to have been timber boarding and plywood
    panels, mounted on a lightweight frame, with no internal linings or finishes, and
    with its windows formed out of transparent plastic sheeting. These are materials
    that would not normally be described as either permanent or substantial. The
    building is said to have been erected in 1995, but has now been demolished, after
    no more than about 30 years. The appellant’s photographs show that, prior to this,
    the building had already fallen into some disrepair, and the accompanying
    statement confirms that by then it was no longer watertight. All the evidence
    therefore points to the fact that the original building was not of permanent or
    substantial construction, but was in fact essentially always a short-life structure
    which, by the time it was taken down, had already outlived its useful life.
12. Consequently, on both of these grounds, relating to size and permanence, the
    appeal proposal falls outside the terms of the exception that NPPF Policy GB7(b)
    provides for replacement buildings.
13. As residential garden land outside any built-up area, the appeal site could
    potentially be considered as previously developed land (PDL). But the exception
    for development on PDL, at Policy GB7 section (e), is limited to cases where the
    scheme does not cause substantial harm to the green belt’s openness. In the
    present appeal, it is clear in my view that the increase in built volume would result
    in a considerable loss of openness, in both visual and spatial terms. It follows, to

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010292


       my mind, that the resultant harm to the green belt would be substantial. The
       exception under Policy GB7(e) is therefore not applicable in this case.
14. I also acknowledge that, in some circumstances, a detached outbuilding may also
    potentially benefit from the exception for extensions and alterations. However, that
    provision is dependent on the development not resulting in disproportionate
    cumulative additions over and above the size of the original dwelling. In this case,
    taking account of the various other extensions and outbuildings already in
    existence at the property, that threshold appears to have been already passed.
15. In the light of all the above therefore, I find that the proposed scheme falls outside
    the terms of any of the allowable exceptions to green belt policy, within NPPF
    Policy GB7. I also find that the development would result in substantial harm to
    the green belt’s openness. It follows that the proposal would constitute
    inappropriate development in terms of NPPF Policy GB6, and this in turn means
    that it would conflict with LP Policy SADM 34. The harm to the green belt, by
    reason of inappropriateness, and due to the loss of openness, carries substantial
    weight in the overall planning balance.
Effects on the area’s character and appearance
16. The lane which runs alongside the appeal site and Cherry Tree Cottage provides
    access to those properties and to two farmsteads, and then continues as a public
    bridleway, joining the Hertfordshire Way walking route at the village of Newgate
    Street. The appeal building stands about 10m or so from the lane, and I saw on
    my visit that, even in summer conditions, it is clearly visible through the frontage
    trees. In winter views, its visibility would be likely to be increased.
17. In its present, partly completed state, the building frame appears as a large and
    prominent structure, with its height and mass clearly dwarfing the existing one-
    and-a half storey garage/annex nearby. When completed, with the addition of the
    proposed cladding panels to the walls and roof, the building would take on a more
    solid form, and this would be particularly noticeable in the case of the long, gabled,
    side elevation, facing towards the lane. As a result, the new building would
    become still more visually dominant.
18. Whilst the general style and materials might bear some resemblance to an
    agricultural building, they would not be sympathetic to their immediate residential
    surroundings. In particular, the transverse ridge, running across the building’s
    width rather than its length, would be contrary to the more conventional building
    forms seen nearby, so as to appear visually jarring in this location.
19. I note the suggestion that additional planting could be carried out to reduce the
    new building’s visibility. But given the proximity of the building’ to the boundary,
    and to the existing trees, it is not clear whether sufficient space is available, or
    whether any such new planting would have any reasonable prospect of survival.
    In any event, new tree planting would take several years to have any significant
    screening effect.
20. Overall therefore, it seems to me that the proposed development would result in an
    unattractive and unpleasing building, out of scale with its neighbours, and at odds
    with their architectural style. As such the scheme would cause harm to the area’s
    character and appearance, contrary to LP Policy SP9, which requires a high
    quality of design and respect for the site’s local context.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010292


Effects on the adjoining property
21. The new building stands close to the boundary with Cherry Tree Cottage.
    However, the majority of the boundary is adequately screened with trees and
    bushes. The building would be visible from the upper floor windows of the dwelling
    itself, but only at a distance of nearly 30m. At that distance, the development
    would have no significant impact on outlook, and would not appear overbearing.
    there would therefore be no material impact on living conditions, and no conflict in
    this regard with LP Policy SADM 11.
Other matters
22. I note the appellant’s willingness to make modifications to the scheme if
    necessary, and to accept conditions to that effect. But there is no evidence of any
    such modifications or conditions that would overcome the planning objections
    identified above, in terms of green belt policy or character and appearance.
Planning balance and conclusion
23. For the reasons set out above, I have found that the completion of the proposed
    building would amount to inappropriate development in terms of green belt policy,
    and would also cause additional harm to the green belt due to the resulting loss of
    openness. In these respects the proposal would conflict with LP Policy SADM 34.
    Harm would also be caused to the area’s character and appearance, because of
    the poor quality of the design, contrary to Policy SADM 11. The scheme would
    therefore be contrary to the statutory development plan.
24. The development would, in part, replace a previous building, which had evidently
    reached the point where its removal was a benefit to the area. But that building no
    longer exists, and cannot now be re-erected. The benefit gained from its removal
    is therefore not dependent on the appeal proposal. And in any event, due to the
    excessive size and poor design of the replacement building, the development now
    proposed would not represent an improvement over the original. Given that the
    works already carried out must have involved a substantial cost, it is presumed
    that the completion of the scheme would help to meet some kind of need of the
    appellant’s own. But in the absence of any information regarding the nature of that
    need, this carries little weight. No other potential benefits or special circumstances
    have been identified.
25. NPPF Policy GB6 makes clear that the ‘very special circumstances’ that are
    necessary to justify development in green belts will not exist unless the harm is
    clearly outweighed by other considerations. In this case, on the evidence available
    to me, there appear to be no such other considerations of any significant weight. It
    follows that the harm to the green belt is not outweighed.
26. I have considered all the other matters raised, but none changes the above
    conclusion. The appeal is therefore dismissed.

J Felgate
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
