 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 3 September 2026
 by D Cleary MTCP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 23 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010549
 The Triangle, 5-17 Hammersmith Grove, Hammersmith and Fulham, London W6 0LG
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
     planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Romulus Investments Limited against the Council of the London Borough of
     Hammersmith and Fulham.
 •   The application Ref is 2025/02533/FUL.
 •   The development proposed is the removal of the existing revolving doors and erection of a single
     storey glazed extension over the existing entrance steps, erection of handrail and new steps to the
     side over the existing forecourt facing Hammersmith Grove.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the removal of the
   existing revolving doors and erection of a single storey glazed extension over the
   existing entrance steps, erection of handrail and new steps to the side over the
   existing forecourt facing Hammersmith Grove at The Triangle, 5-17 Hammersmith
   Grove, Hammersmith and Fulham, London W6 0LG in accordance with the terms
   of the application, Ref 2025/02533/FUL, subject to the conditions in the attached
   schedule.
Application for Costs
2. An application for costs has been made by Romulus Investments Limited against
   the Council of the London Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham. That application
   is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3. During the course of the appeal, a new National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. Although the format has altered,
   the considerations material to this decision have not fundamentally changed. I am
   satisfied that no party has been prejudiced and I have had regard to the latest
   version of the Framework in reaching my decision.
Procedural Matters and Main Issue
4. As the appeal responds to the Council’s failure to determine the application within
   the prescribed period, there is no decision notice. Nonetheless, the Council has
   stated that the application would have been refused, and the reasons they have
   identified inform the main issue. Specifically, the Council has confirmed that, had
   the appeal not occurred, planning permission would have been refused on the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6010549




     grounds that the development would not provide safe and inclusive access for all
     users.
5. Therefore, the main issue is whether the development would provide safe and
   inclusive access.
Reasons
6. The appeal building fronts Hammersmith Grove, with its principal pedestrian
   entrance formed within a projecting element of the ground-floor façade. The
   entrance sits above pavement level and is approached from the public footway via
   a short flight of steps. The projecting structure contains a set of revolving doors
   framed by a glazed surround, giving the entrance a pronounced and clearly
   identifiable presence within the elevation.
7. The appeal proposes the removal of the existing entrance and its replacement with
   a larger foyer. This would also be set above street level and accessed via steps
   from the footway. As such, the existing entrance does not provide level access from
   the street, although the provision of handrails would represent a modest
   improvement in accessibility over the current arrangement.
8. Notwithstanding the absence of a level pedestrian entrance from Hammersmith
   Grove, the building does have a secondary access on the Beadon Road elevation.
   This entrance is level and provides step-free access for users and visitors, which
   appears to accord with the requirements of DA6 of the SPD¹. This suggests that at
   least one of the main doorways into a service-use building should have a level
   threshold. However, this entrance is located to the rear of the building and is
   accessed via a barrier-controlled vehicular access, and requires users to cross the
   car park with no obvious demarcation. Furthermore, there is an absence of
   noticeable signage at the Hammersmith Grove entrance directing step-free users to
   this alternative access. I therefore share some of the Council’s concerns that the
   existing arrangements are not ideal, although step-free access is, nonetheless,
   available.
9. There is nothing before me to indicate that the existing access arrangements have
   not been operating effectively. In addition, the appellant has suggested a package
   of proportionate measures to improve inclusive access to the building. These
   include the implementation of an access management plan, improved signage at
   the Hammersmith Grove entrance, the provision of a dedicated disabled parking
   bay within the car park, along with clearer pedestrian demarcation on the surface of
   the car park.
10. I am also mindful that the proposed entrance alterations would be a temporary
    measure prior to the implementation of Phase 2 of a planning permission for the
    redevelopment of the site. While I do not have full details of that scheme, there is
    nothing before me to suggest that the permission is not extant or that it would not
    be implemented. In this context, the appeal proposal represents an interim
    intervention, and the proportionality of the works is an important consideration.
11. Taken together, while it may be desirable for the appeal proposals to provide level
    access directly from the street, I do not consider this to be essential in the
    circumstances. The availability of an existing level entrance, combined with the
    appellant’s proposed access improvements and the temporary nature of the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
 Appeal Decision 6010549




     development, leads me to conclude that the absence of level access at the main
     entrance would not result in unacceptable harm. Subject to the suggested
     measures, and with all matters considered, I am satisfied that the development
     would represent an enhancement over the existing arrangements.
12. For the above reasons, the development would deliver safe and inclusive access to
    the building. The development complies with Policy D5 of the London Plan 2021,
    where development should achieve the highest standards of accessible and
    inclusive design. In coming to my decision, I have also had regard to the guidance
    contained within DA1 and DA6 of the SPD.
Conditions
13. Both the Council and the appellant have suggested conditions. I have considered
    these in light of the tests in the Framework and the Planning Practice Guidance.
    Where appropriate, I have adjusted the wording of the conditions to improve
    relevance, precision and enforceability.
14. I have imposed the statutory implementation condition [1], along with a condition
    listing the approved plans to provide certainty [2]. In the interests of the character
    and appearance of the area, it is necessary to impose a condition specifying the
    external materials [3]. To minimise the effects of the development during
    construction a condition requiring the submission of a Construction Logistics Plan
    to be agreed with the Council is required [4]. A package of inclusive access
    measures, to be agreed by the Council, is also necessary in the interests of the
    main issue [5]. This includes the detailed measures suggested by the Appellant.
15. I have had regard to the Council’s suggestion for the removal of the development
    prior to the implementation of the extant planning permission. However, as the
    existing building is to be demolished under Phase 2 and new access arrangements
    are proposed, such a condition is unnecessary.
Conclusion
16. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed and planning
    permission is granted.

D Cleary
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
 Appeal Decision 6010549




                                  SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS
    1. The development hereby permitted shall not commence later than the expiration
       of 3 years beginning with the date of this planning permission.
    2. The development hereby approved shall be carried out in accordance with the
       following approved plans:
        TRE-DMA-00-DR-A-1100 (proposed site plan)
        TRE-DMA-00-DR-A-1101 (proposed plan)
        TRE-DMA-ZZ-DR-A-2100 (proposed elevation A)
        TRE-DMA-ZZ-DR-A-2101 (proposed elevation B)
        TRE-DMA-ZZ-DR-A-3100 (proposed cross section)
    3. The development hereby approved shall be carried out in accordance with the
       external materials detailed within the application.
    4. Prior to commencement of the development hereby permitted, a Construction
       Logistics Plan (CLP) shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
       Planning Authority. The CLP shall be in accordance with Transport for London
       Guidance. The CLP shall cover the following minimum requirements:
        a) site logistics and operations;
        b) construction vehicle routing;
        c) Details of the estimated number, size and routes of construction vehicles per
        day/week and details of the use of Ultra Low Emission Zone (ULEZ) compliant
        vehicles e.g. Euro 6 and Euro VI;
        d) details of the access and egress arrangements;
        e) delivery locations on the site;
        f) details of any vehicle holding areas; and other matters relating to traffic
        management as reasonably required by the Local Planning Authority;
        g) Efficiency and sustainability measures to be undertaken for the works; and,
        h) membership of the Considerate Contractors Scheme.
        The works shall be carried out in accordance with the relevant approved CLP.
        Approved details shall be fully implemented and retained and maintained
        throughout the construction phase of the development.
    5. Prior to the completion of the development hereby approved, a package of
       inclusive access measures for the building shall be submitted to, and approved
       by, the Local Planning Authority. The measures shall include:
        a) An Access Management Plan (AMP) to include details of staff assistance
           arrangements, contact details, procedures for arranging assisted entry,
           maintenance, monitoring and compliance processes, and the arrangements
           for periodic review and reporting to the LPA;

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          4
 Appeal Decision 6010549




        b) Signage on Hammersmith Grove to advise/direct step-free users of the
           Beadon Road entrance;
        c) Details of physical demarcation and pedestrian priority measures within the
           Beadon Road car park;
        d) Details of a single blue badge parking space within the existing car park,
           which should be located next to the building entrance.
        The measures approved under b), c) and d) shall be carried out in strict
        accordance with the approved details prior to first use of the development
        hereby approved. Thereafter, the site shall operate in accordance with the AMP
        approved under a).


                                           END OF SCHEDULE




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            5
