Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 30 June 2026 by Elizabeth Davies BSc (Hons) MISEP, CEnv
Decision by A M Nilsson BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010231
42 Hazel Cottage, Stubbs Wood, Chesham Bois, Buckinghamshire HP6 6EX
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Purchase against the decision of Buckinghamshire Council.
•   The application Ref is PL/26/00509/FA.
•   The development proposed is a single storey rear extension and front and rear dormer windows.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a single storey rear
   extension and front and rear dormer windows at 42 Hazel Cottage, Stubbs Wood,
   Chesham Bois, Buckinghamshire HP6 6EX in accordance with the terms of the
   application, Ref PL/26/00509/FA, subject to the following conditions:
     1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
        the date of this decision.
     2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
        approved plans: Drg No. SW PA 01 Rev A, Drg No. SW PA 02 Rev A, SW PA
        03 Rev B, SW PA 04 Rev B and SW PA 05 Rev A.
     3) The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
        development herby permitted shall match those used in the host dwelling.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. The Council’s Decision Notice included two reasons for refusal. The second reason
   for refusal is due to the lack of a Preliminary Roost Assessment to consider the
   potential impact of the development on bats. The appellant has submitted a Bat
   Survey (May 2026) with the appeal, seeking to address the Council’s concerns. As
   part of the assessment, the roof of the appeal property was inspected internally and
   externally and was found to be in a good condition with no features suitable for
   roosting bats. I have consulted the Council on the Assessment, and they have
   confirmed they agree with the conclusions of the report and no longer wish to
   defend the second reason for refusal. I have no reason to form a different view and
   will consider the appeal based on the other reason for refusal.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010231


Main Issue
4. The main issue in the appeal is the effect of the proposed development on the
   character and appearance of the host property and the street scene along Stubbs
   Wood.
Reasons for the Recommendation
5. The appeal property is a detached, two storey residential dwelling. Whilst visible
   from Stubbs Wood, it is set back, with gardens to the front and rear. The appeal
   proposal is for a single storey rear extension that would replace an existing
   conservatory and front and rear dormer windows to facilitate a loft conversion. The
   Council considers the single storey rear extension and rear dormer to be
   acceptable. I have no reason to disagree with this conclusion. This
   recommendation has therefore focused on the two proposed front dormers.
6. Stubbs Wood is typically characterised by large, detached dwellings. The area is
   leafy and the properties are well spaced and set back from the road. A variety of
   dwelling designs and roof styles are present which contributes to the character and
   appearance of the area.
7. The proposed front dormers are modest in size and would be set in from the roof
   edge, positioned below the ridge and sufficiently up from the eaves so as not to
   appear overly dominant or out of proportion. The pitched roof design of the dormers
   would sit comfortably with the hip roof of the appeal dwelling and the use of
   matching tiles will help to assimilate with the existing roof.
8. Given the scale and design of the dormers and the size of the existing roof, two
   dormers is not an excessive number, nor would it result in an overly congested or
   busy roofscape. The proposed dormers would be centrally and symmetrically
   located giving a pleasing proportionality to the roof, not an unbalanced or cluttered
   appearance as suggested by the Council.
9. On the basis of the above, the proposed development would not cause harm to the
   character and appearance of the host dwelling. Nor, given the variety of roof
   designs that exist along Stubbs Wood, would it be detrimental to the street scene.
   The proposal would accord with Policy CS20 of the Core Strategy for Chiltern
   District (2011) and with Policies GC1, H13 and H15 of the Chiltern District Local
   Plan (1997) (as altered and consolidated) (the Local Plan) which seek, amongst
   other things to ensure a high standard of design that reflects and respects local
   character and appearance. The proposals would also accord with Policy H18 of
   the Local Plan which provides guidance for the design of dormer windows and
   states that dormers should respect the scale, proportions, existing windows and
   other features of the roof and external materials should match.
10. It would also accord with guidance in the Residential Extensions and Householder
    Development Supplementary Planning Document (2013) which provides guidance
    on the scale, siting and design of dormer windows.
Conditions
11. I have imposed the standard conditions relating to the commencement of
    development and specifying the relevant plans in order to provide certainty. I have
    included a condition requiring the external materials to match the existing dwelling
    to protect the character and appearance of the appeal property.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010231


12. The appeal property has been found to have no features suitable for roosting bats.
    The Preliminary Roost Assessment sets out some best practice construction
    techniques to ensure works are undertaken using a precautionary approach based
    on the small possibility bats could be encountered. In this case, whilst it is
    advisable for the best practice advice to be followed, it is not necessary to condition
    the advice as suggested by the Council, as it is not necessary to make the
    development acceptable in planning terms.
Conclusion and Recommendation
13. For the reasons given above, the proposal would comply with the development plan
    when taken as a whole and there are no material considerations, including the
    Framework, that would outweigh this finding. Consequently, I recommend that the
    appeal should be allowed.

Elizabeth Davies
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
14. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed.

A M Nilsson
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
