 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 11 August 2026
 by P D Sedgwick BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 3 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010832
 124 Bexley Road, Bexley, Erith DA8 3SP.
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Moore against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of Bexley.
 •   The application Ref is 26/00587/FUL.
 •   The development proposed is Conversion of roof space including hip-to-gable enlargement, rear
     dormer extension and rooflights to front roof slope and change of use from Dwelling House (Class
     C3) to Larger House of Multiple Occupation (Sui Generis) for up to 7 occupants.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2. I note that the Council’s Officer Report concluded that the hip-to-gable
   enlargement, rear dormer extension and rooflights would not result in harm to the
   character or appearance of the existing dwelling or surrounding area. I have no
   reason to disagree with the opinion of the Council in this matter. Taking this into
   account, the only outstanding matters in dispute are the impact of the proposed
   development in terms of noise and disturbance.
Main Issue
3. The main issue, therefore, is the effect of the proposed development upon the living
   conditions of neighbouring occupiers, with particular regard to noise and
   disturbance.
Reasons
4. The appeal property is a semi-detached bungalow set back from the pavement on
   the A220 Bexley Road. The existing plans indicate a 2-bedroom bungalow with
   living accommodation comprising a living room/lounge, 2 bedrooms, a
   kitchen/dining room and shared bathroom on the ground floor and a void in the roof
   space. At the time of my visit construction work was ongoing with the roof
   extensions appearing to be complete.
5. The level of activity associated with 7 individuals would substantially exceed that
   which might be expected of a single 4-person household, with each occupant
   having a different schedule in terms of coming and going for work, shopping,
   leisure, disposing of waste and using the communal facilities such as the garden
   and kitchen, along with increased activity from deliveries and visitors.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision: 6010832


6. Residents and visitors would have to walk along the side passage, which is
   adjacent to No 122’s side passage and opposite a window on their side wall, to
   enter the house via a side entrance into the communal kitchen. Consequently, they
   would pass closer to the side and front windows on No 122 than was the case
   when the entrance was at the front of the appeal property. The adjoining side
   passages and front gardens are relatively open with no features that would screen
   the additional activity from No 122’s windows or offer any modest reduction in
   noise.
7. The cumulative noise impacts from the additional occupants talking, listening to
   music and other entertainment, opening and closing doors and using the rear
   garden would exceed what might reasonably be expected given the modest size of
   the appeal property and neighbouring houses. Both neighbouring occupiers would
   be adversely impacted because they have adjoining gardens with low boundary
   features and windows close to those of the appeal property. No 126 would also be
   affected by internal noise and movement because of its shared party walls with the
   appeal property.
8. Overall, I conclude that the proposed development would harm the living conditions
   of the occupiers of the neighbouring properties and thus conflict with Policy DP11
   of the Bexley Local Plan (2023) and Policy D13 and D14 of the London Plan (2021)
   which seek to protect neighbouring residents from development that would cause
   unacceptable levels of noise or other disturbance.
Other Matters
9. The appellant’s statement of case refers to planning consent (26/00585/FUL) for a
   House of Multiple Occupation (HMO) (Class C4) for a maximum of 6 occupants
   which follows a previous permission for a 5-person HMO. I understand that the
   former consent includes the same alterations and extensions as those proposed,
   although I have not been provided with details of that application or the Council’s
   assessment of it.
10. The building works on site suggest that there is a real prospect that the fall-back
    position afforded by the extant permissions will be implemented and as such I
    accord them significant weight. Notwithstanding the Council accepted that a 6-
    person HMO was acceptable, it would inevitably increase noise and disturbance
    and in my view an additional occupant would lead to an overall cumulative increase
    significantly over and above that which the neighbours currently experience such
    that it would harm their living conditions.
11. Local residents have raised concerns regarding the loss of a smaller housing unit,
    parking, biodiversity net gain and waste management. However, as I am dismissing
    the appeal for the proposal’s effect on the living conditions of neighbouring
    occupiers, I have not pursued these matters further.
     Conclusion
12. For the reasons given above, and having regard to all matters raised, I conclude
    that the appeal should be dismissed.

P D Sedgwick
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      2
