 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 18 August 2026

 by Megan Thomas K.C.
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 17 September 2026

 Appeal Ref: 6010429
 16 Wellington Drive, Bracknell RG12 9NG
 • The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 • The appeal is made by Mr Indi Bhambra against the decision of Bracknell Forest Council.
 • The application ref. is 25/00557/FUL.
 • The development proposed is “New dropped kerb and vehicle crossing, paved driveway and
    low fence. Change of use from amenity land to garden land.”



Decision

1. The appeal is dismissed.

Procedural Matter

2. On 17th August 2026, the Government revised the National Planning Policy Framework ‘NPPF’
   and so I considered it necessary in this case to invite the main parties to make any relevant
   comments on the revised NPPF in so far as relevant to the appeal, if they so wished. I have
   taken into account the revised NPPF and comments made in response to the invitation.

Main Issues

3. The main issues in the appeal are the effect of the proposed development and change of use
   on the character and appearance including protected trees, the effect on highway safety and
   the issue of biodiversity net gain.

Reasons

Character and appearance

4. The appeal site mainly comprises a semi-detached two storey dwellinghouse on the west side
   of Wellington Drive which is located on the Harmans Water Estate in Bracknell. The dwelling
   is within a settlement as defined in the adopted Local Plan. The site is located on
   the inside of a bend in the road and is opposite the Harmans Water Primary School. There are
   footways on both sides of Wellington Drive. The main vehicular entrance to the school is on
   the east side of Wellington Drive several metres north east of the appeal site. In the area of
   road near to the appeal site and outside it, vehicles can park on parts of the west side of the
   road subject to some time restrictions. There are the normal restrictions preventing vehicles
   parking or waiting outside the school entrances on the east side of Wellington Drive. I viewed
   these on my site visit.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6010429


5. Open amenity space lies within curtilage of no.16 to the front (eastern) side of the
   dwelling. There is also open amenity space to the southern side. The rear boundary
   backs on to the side of the rear garden of no. 18 Wellington Drive. The dwelling adjoins
   no.14 at the northern side elevation. There is a group Tree Preservation Order
   (TPO 1283) covering three trees close to the red-lined appeal site but their trunks site
   outside the site. T01 is to the south, and T02 and T03 are to the north.

6. The proposal includes the creation of a paved area for the parking of two vehicles in the area to
   the front of the dwelling. The paved area would be permeable non-migratory paving with a
   width of about 4800mm. Fences in line with the width of the dwelling are proposed, about
   0.91m high dropping down to about 0.6m. The vehicles would cross the footway (which is
   included in the appeal site) and there would be dropped kerbs. The Highway Authority has
   indicated that other than the footway there is also adopted highway on part of the land to the
   west of the footway which is grassed and is within the appeal site. The appellant has not
   disputed this and has indicated that he is not seeking any fencing in those areas.

7. A sense of openness of the frontages of dwellings on the Estate is a significant factor in setting
   its character and appearance and it prevails even though there are some instances of
   fencing/enclosure and paved areas on frontages and/or vehicles parked on frontages.
   However, the overall sense and pattern of openness was confirmed by my site visit and applies
   to the area around the appeal site. The introduction of fencing, whether close-boarded or
   otherwise, would be at odds with this character and would interfere with the visual openness.
   The housing on the Estate is said to have been constructed pursuant to the New Towns Act
   1946 and the original design concept was to have dwellings set within open landscaping areas.
   Whilst some dilution has taken place, openness, green amenity areas and open views remain
   significant features and relieve the areas of hard surfacing on the Estate.

8. The three trees of the group TPO continue to contribute significantly to visual amenity.
   Their likely root protection areas impinge in part on the appeal site and there is
   insufficient evidence before me to be able to conclude that the proposals could be
   implemented without damaging the roots and harming the health of the trees. Any
   deterioration in their appearance would be detrimental to the character and
   appearance of the area.

9. I have borne in mind the appellant’s representations and have particular sympathy with
   the desire to have fencing to prevent pedestrians using the frontage area to
   access/egress the alleyway to the north of no.14. However, none of the representations
   outweigh the harm to character and appearance of the area.

10. On this issue, I conclude that the proposals would lead to unacceptable harm to the
    character and appearance of the area.


Highway user and pedestrian safety

11. For vehicles exiting the proposed paved area and turning onto Wellington Drive the necessary
    visibility splay area to the south (right) would not be within the appellant’s control and is not
    adopted highway and so the appellant cannot deliver unimpeded visibility in this area. There is
    no evidence to show that a vehicle could turn on the paved area and exiting the site in a reverse
    gear is undesirable in highway safety terms as is reversing from the highway over the footway
    into the paved area, so as to enable exit in a forward gear. Furthermore, the Highway Authority
    has indicated that they would not allow any paved area or parking on the adopted highway
    behind the footway and so the proposal as shown is also apparently unworkable for that
    reason.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             2
 Appeal Decision 6010429


12. As the proposal is so close to the primary school entrance, at peak times there are notable
    flows of pedestrians and movement of vehicles around no.16. For the reasons given above
    combined with the numerous movements of both pedestrians and vehicles, the proposal (even
    though relating to vehicle movements of one dwelling) would result in an unacceptable
    increase in conflicting turning movements and the creation of danger to other road users,
    particularly school age pedestrians. If planning permission were granted it would attach to the
    land, therefore, whilst the appellant and current occupiers may not intend to or have to use the
    proposed parking area in peak school related times of the day, future occupiers would be free
    to do so. Consequently, I cannot attach any weight to that factor in favour of granting
    permission.

13. On this issue, I conclude that the proposal would result in unacceptably adverse highway
    safety conditions and would be a hazard to other road users and pedestrians.



Biodiversity net gain

14. Policy LP 53 (Biodiversity) of the Bracknell Forest Local Plan states that development
    proposals will be expected to achieve a minimum 10% net gain for biodiversity to retain,
    protect, enhance, and buffer ecological features. There is nothing in the policy which conflicts
    with the 2026 NPPF. Biodiversity Net Gain became mandatory for this type of planning
    application in 2024 and planning applications must where appropriate I be accompanied by
    the minimum information set out in Article 7 of The Town and Country Planning (Development
    Management Procedure) (England) Order 2015.

15. In this case, the habitat which is affected by the proposed development is more than 25 sqm
    and so information which demonstrates that the proposal can achieve at least a 10% gain in
    biodiversity is required. As this has not been provided with the application or appeal
    documentation, there is insufficient evidence before me to convince me that the 10% or more
    increase could be achieved. For this reason the proposal is unacceptable and a planning
    condition could not overcome this failure.

16. The appellant has set out the benefits there would be if the proposal obtained
    permission and was implemented. In accordance with Policy S4 (Principle of
    development within settlements) the benefits would in this case be substantially
    outweighed by the adverse effects I have identified above, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the NPPF.

17. In addition, the proposal is contrary to policies 28, 54, 25 and 53 of the Bracknell Forest
    Local Plan (adopted 2024) and policy HO4 of the Bracknell Town Neighbourhood Plan.


Conclusion

18. Having considered all representations made, for the reasons given above, I dismiss the appeal.



Megan Thomas K.C.
Inspector




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              3
