 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 29 August 2026
 by J D Westbrook BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 15 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010672
 Kensington Hall, 25-27 Kensington Street, Bradford, BD8 9LZ
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mohammed Ashraf against the decision of the City of Bradford Metropolitan
      District Council.
 •    The application Ref is 25/02921/FUL
 •    The development proposed is the construction of a front extension for retail use.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. The front extension to the retail store has already been constructed and the
   application is, therefore, of a retrospective nature.
Main Issues
3. The main issues in this case are the effects of the front extension on:
     •   The character and appearance of the area along Kensington Street, and
     •   Highway safety on Kensington Street and the streets around it.
Reasons
4. The appeal property is a ground floor retail unit within a large building on a corner
   plot at the junction of Kensington Street and Willow Street. The building, as with the
   other properties in the area, is constructed from stone and includes residential units
   above the shop. The front extension projects around 4.7 metres from the original
   shop front and extends across almost the whole of the front elevation. It consists of
   a dark aluminium framework around double-glazed units and has a grey-coloured
   corrugated mono-pitch roof. It has a floor area of some 70 sq metres and effectively
   extends the retail outlet area out to the rear of the pavement.
Character and appearance
5. The Council contends that the proposed extension, by way of its design, materials,
   and use of solid roller shutters, appears visibly discordant with the traditional stone
   building, thereby harming the visual amenity of the host property.
6. Policy DS1 of the Council’s Core Strategy (CS) states that development proposals
   should contribute to achieving good design by, amongst other things, being

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6010672


     informed by a good understanding of the site/area and its context. Policy DS3 of
     the CS indicates that development proposals should be appropriate to their context
     in terms of scale, details and materials. In particular designs should respond to the
     existing positive patterns of development which contribute to the character of the
     area. Policy DS5 of the CS indicates that development proposals should be
     designed to ensure a safe environment; include appropriate design arrangements
     for servicing, waste handling and storage; and not harm the amenity of residents.
7. In this case, Kensington Street is a largely residential road with a small number of
   retail outlets. All of the properties along the southern part of the street, with the
   exception of the appeal property, are set back from the rear of the pavement – in
   the case of dwellings behind a front garden or parking area, and in the case of the
   retail outlets by forecourts. On the western side of the road there is a consistent
   building line. The extension at the front of the appeal property is a substantial
   structure which projects beyond the building line across the whole depth of the
   original forecourt. It is, therefore, out of scale with the rest of this part of the road
   and it appears as a prominent element, out of character with its surroundings.
8. The existing windows and doors in the appeal property are dark grey in colour
   similar to that of the extension and, therefore, the extension does not, of itself,
   appear out of context with the host building. However, the mono-pitch corrugated
   roof cuts across the top of the original front door of the building, creating an
   awkward and incongruous juxtaposition.
9. There is a very small service yard at the rear of the property which is accessed
   from a narrow roadway that runs along the back of the properties on Kensington
   Street. Because the front extension projects across the whole of the original
   forecourt, it would appear that space for servicing is extremely limited, while
   pedestrian circulation space at the entrance to the retail unit is also curtailed by the
   narrowness of the pavement. I do not consider this to represent high quality design,
   having a lack of appropriate servicing arrangements and potentially unsafe
   circulation space remaining around the entrance.
10. In conclusion on this issue, I find that the extension is harmful to the visual
    appearance of the original façade of the property by way of its scale and design,
    and is harmful also to the character and appearance of the southern end of
    Kensington Street by way of its scale and negative impact on the context and
    pattern of development along the road. On this basis, it conflicts with Policies DS1,
    DS3 and DS5 of the CS.
Highway safety
11. The Council contends that the proposed extension is constructed over a previously
    approved parking area conditioned under planning permission 16/01075/FUL
    without the provision of any replacement parking. This puts additional pressure on
    existing parking arrangements that are detrimental to highway safety.
12. From the information before me, it would appear, therefore, that a retail unit was
    originally permitted at the appeal property by the Council in 2016. The retail use
    was part of a combined planning permission for that use on the ground floor with
    residential units above. A condition attached to the permission required the
    forecourt to be used for car parking associated with the joint uses. The front
    extension is effectively built over the entire forecourt area such that there is now no
    dedicated parking on site for occupiers or shoppers.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         2
 Appeal Decision 6010672


13. There are parking bays marked out along the western side of the road from a point
    close to the junction with Thornton Road up to and including most of the frontage of
    the appeal property. There are no marked bays on the eastern side, where some
    dwellings have off-road space, but there would not appear to be any other parking
    restrictions. Similarly, there would not appear to be restrictions on Willow Street,
    which crosses Kensington Street beside the appeal property.
14. At the time of my visit, which was an early afternoon, all of the marked bays on
    Kensington Street were occupied, and there were cars parked all along the
    available space on the eastern side, largely dependent on parking over part of the
    pavement. In addition, on-street parking space on Willow Street was largely all
    occupied, while cars and vans were parked on pavements around the junction of
    Kensington Street with Willow Street and on double yellow lines also around that
    junction. There was a consistent turnaround of vehicles parking as and when a
    space became available.
15. It would appear that the number of residential and commercial properties in the
    vicinity generates large amounts of parking pressure and that the extension of retail
    floorspace over the forecourt at the appeal property can only add to that pressure.
    In this respect, I agree with the contention of the Highway Authority that the loss of
    the off-street parking facility at the appeal property has likely resulted in further
    indiscriminate parking taking place on the highway, resulting in conditions
    prejudicial to pedestrian and highway safety.
16. The appellant has provided some documentation relating to two sites for potential
    alternative parking provision in the vicinity. The first is to the rear of two adjacent
    small commercial units from a row on Girlington Road, with access from Back
    Kensington Street, and the second is to the front and side of residential properties
    at the junction of Willow Street with Whetley Lane.
17. With regard to the first site, one of the commercial units would appear to be already
    let to the appellant for storage purposes while the other appears to be occupied by
    a halal butchers which is open to the public and has a frontage to the proposed
    parking area at the rear. At the time of my visit there were vehicles parked outside
    of the butchers’ outlet, apparently patrons of the shop, while the licence granted to
    the appellant, as the licensee, only applies to parking of vehicles operated by the
    tenants of the appeal property. In any event, the space covered by agreements is
    only a part of a much larger and busy service yard, with access at the junction of
    Back Kensington Street and Willow Street. The service area was occupied by a
    large number of vans and commercial vehicles at the time of my visit, and I do not
    consider this site as suitable replacement for lost on-site parking facilities at the
    appeal property.
18. The second site is currently unused and is situated to the front and side of a
    building on a corner plot. The eastern end of Willow Street, outside the corner plot
    is the termination of a cul-de-sac, and there would not appear to be any access
    from Willow Street onto the area of land supposedly available for dedicated parking
    associated with the appeal property. Furthermore, there would not appear to be
    vehicular access to the land from Whetley Lane either. I have no details of any
    agreement for the appellant to use this land, and, in any case, it would not appear
    possible to access the land under current circumstances.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
 Appeal Decision 6010672


19. In conclusion on this issue, I consider that the front extension at the appeal
    property is harmful to highway safety in the area by reason both of increased trade
    generated by the additional floorspace and loss of on-site parking provision that
    was required by an earlier planning permission. This results in parking overspilling
    into inappropriate locations in the vicinity with danger to pedestrians and vehicles
    alike. I do not consider the alternative parking provision suggested by the appellant
    to be adequate or appropriate to the area. On this basis, the proposed extension
    conflicts with Policy TR2 of the CS which relates to parking policy. Policy TR2
    requires new developments to take a design-led approach to parking that is well
    integrated within the overall layout, so that it supports the street scene and local
    character and creates a safe and pleasant environment.
Other Matters
20. I note that there has been a significant number of letters of support for the
    development, including a large petition. The support is for a local facility that
    provides a service in the area to the north of Thornton Road. I acknowledge that
    the appeal property is a local outlet and that it enables residents to shop without
    having to cross the busy Thornton Road to access the existing large supermarket
    nearby. I have some sympathy with this point of view, but this is not reason to allow
    an extension that is harmful to both the character and appearance of the area, and
    highway safety on the roads surrounding the appeal property. in any case, the shop
    could remain even if slightly smaller.
21. There has been concern raised by the occupier of a neighbouring dwelling
    regarding possible loss of light to front windows in the dwelling and potential
    harmful environmental practices emanating from the appeal property. In this case,
    the appeal property is situated to the north of the neighbouring dwelling and is
    unlikely to cause any significant loss of light. Matters relating to environmental
    practices are for consideration under other forms of legislation.
Conclusion
22. In conclusion, I find that the front extension at the appeal property is harmful to the
    character and appearance of the area around Kensington Street, and is also
    harmful to highway safety on streets around the property. Accordingly, I dismiss
    this appeal.



J D Westbrook
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        4
