Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 August 2026
by Ryan Cowley MPlan (Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1st September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010787
16, 18 & 20 Banksfield Avenue, Yeadon, West Yorkshire LS19 7JX
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mrs P Brierley, Mr G Hirst, Mr D Wilson against the decision of Leeds City
     Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/06990/FU.
•    The development proposed is change of use of land to domestic garden and erection of fencing to
     rear.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for change of use of
       land to domestic garden and erection of fencing to rear at 16, 18 & 20 Banksfield
       Avenue, Yeadon, West Yorkshire LS19 7JX in accordance with the terms of the
       application, Ref 25/06990/FU, subject to the following condition:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: 4729/03/001; 4729/03/100; 4729/03/101;
              4729/03/102; and 4729/03/103.
Preliminary Matters
2.     In the banner heading and formal decision above, I have used the description of
       the development from the Decision Notice, omitting that which is unnecessary to
       accurately describe the development. This describes the development more
       concisely than the description contained in the application form.
3.     I saw on my site visit that the fences to which the appeal relates have already
       been installed and the change of use has thus already occurred. The appeal is
       therefore considered retrospectively.
4.     On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published. The parts of the Framework relevant to this appeal
       have not substantively changed. I have thus not sought further submissions. I have
       had regard to the latest version of the Framework where relevant in this appeal.
Main Issue
5.     The main issue is the effect of the development on the free and unobstructed use
       of the public right of way (PROW).
Reasons
6.     The appeal relates to 3 residential properties located in an existing residential
       area. To the east of the appeal site is a PROW, known as Otley Lane (definitive

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010787


       footpath Aireborough No. 121), which runs the full length of the rear boundaries of
       all 3 properties. On the opposite side of the PROW is a landscaped embankment
       leading up to further residential development beyond.
7.     The evidence indicates that the definitive width of the public footpath is 1.2 metres
       as currently recorded within the definitive statement. It comprises a well-trodden
       albeit unmade track, flanked by tall garden fences and dense vegetation, that
       transitions into a grass surface at either end. The footpath can be accessed to the
       north from Banksfield Crescent. To the south, it is intersected by other paths
       leading north-east and north-west to Millbank and Banksfield Avenue respectively,
       the latter of which provides an alternative north-south route for pedestrians.
8.     The appeal scheme has enclosed a strip of land at the rear of the properties and
       incorporated it into the residential curtilages through the erection of new boundary
       fencing. The new fencing clearly projects beyond the fenceline of adjoining
       neighbouring properties and into the open corridor at the rear, through which the
       PROW passes. This has reduced the overall width of this corridor from
       approximately 4 metres to a minimum of 2 metres. I observed during my site visit
       that there are other points where the route narrows, due to either the alignment of
       other rear fences or the vegetation on either side.
9.     The appellants note that the route is used by cyclists and horses on occasion.
       However, the proper purpose of the PROW here, as a footpath, is to provide a way
       allowing people to pass and re-pass on foot with "normal accompaniments" which
       can include dogs, pushchairs, prams and wheelchairs. The evidence before me
       indicates that the definitive width can still be accommodated alongside the fence
       and the definitive alignment does not appear to have been encroached upon.
       Notably, I was able to walk the full length of this stretch of the footpath unimpeded,
       with sufficient room to pass others.
10. Moreover, while just a snapshot in time, I saw that this stretch of the footpath was
    not heavily trafficked, though there were several pedestrians using the network of
    walkways in the wider area. There is otherwise no substantiated evidence before
    me regarding the volume of pedestrian traffic along this route. Given the suburban
    nature of the area, the condition of the footpath and the alternative routes
    available, occasions where more than 2 or 3 pedestrians must pass each other
    along this part of the footpath, either on foot or using pushchairs or wheelchairs,
    are likely to be very infrequent
11. The Council’s Definitive Map Officer states that a minimum width of 4 metres
    should be provided where the PROW is enclosed on both sides, as in this case, to
    preserve natural surveillance of the route. While the Council may routinely request
    this, I have not been provided any planning policy or supplementary guidance that
    sets out this requirement. In any event, while the appeal scheme reduces the width
    of the corridor to below 4 metres, given the footpath’s alignment and the retained
    width, adequate visibility is maintained throughout.
12. While concerns have been raised regarding cumulative impacts on the PROW
    should other fencelines along this row be moved, there is no evidence of any such
    proposals before me currently. Ultimately, each case must be considered on its
    individual merits, and the effect of any future proposals, should they come forward,
    must be assessed at that time.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010787


13. In conclusion, the development does not have a harmful effect on the free and
    unobstructed use of the PROW. Accordingly, I have not identified any conflict with
    Policies P10 of the Core Strategy (as amended by the Core Strategy Selective
    Review 2019) Amendments Adopted September 2019 or Policies GP5 and LD1 of
    the Unitary Development Plan (Review 2006). These policies, among other
    provisions, seek to ensure that development respects and enhances existing
    landscapes, streets and spaces, protects existing, historic and natural assets, and
    is accessible to all users. Likewise, the development does not conflict with Policy
    TR8 of the Framework (formerly Paragraph 105), in respect of its aim of ensuring
    that developments protect and enhance the network of public rights of way.
Other Matters
14. The appellants signed Ownership Certificate A within the original application form
    and maintain that the land to which the appeal relates is within their ownership.
    However, the Council’s Definitive Map Officer has drawn into question the validity
    of these claims. This is ultimately a separate legal matter beyond the scope of this
    appeal, and this decision does not grant any ownership rights to the appellants.
15. My attention has been drawn to other legislative provisions pertaining to PROW,
    including those contained in the Highways Act 1980 and the Wildlife and
    Countryside Act 1981. No evidence has been presented that demonstrates the
    development conflicts with other regulatory regimes. Nonetheless, such matters
    are beyond the scope of the planning system and do not alter my assessment of
    the planning merits of the case.
Conclusion
16. The development adheres to the development plan as a whole and there are no
    other considerations that would outweigh this finding. Accordingly, for the reasons
    given, the appeal succeeds.

Ryan Cowley
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
