 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 17 August 2026
 by C J Leigh BSc(Hons) MPhil MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 25 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010730
 9 Yew Tree Road, Slough, SL1 2AA
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Ms J Nijjar against the decision of Slough Borough Council.
 •   The application Ref is P/13960/008.
 •   The development proposed is the change of use from 5 bed (6 person) House in Multiple Occupation
     (Use Class C4) to 9 bed (9 person) House in Multiple Occupation (Sui Generis Use)

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for change of use from 5
   bed (6 person) House in Multiple Occupation (Use Class C4) to 9 bed (9 person)
   House in Multiple Occupation (Sui Generis Use) at 9 Yew Tree Road, Slough, SL1
   2AA in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref P/13960/008, subject to
   the following conditions:
     1)      The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
             date of this decision.
     2)      The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
             drawings EX-01 Rev P1 and PL-01 Rev P1.
     3)      The development hereby permitted shall be occupied by no more than nine
             residents at any one time.
Main issues
2. The main issues in this appeal are as follows:
     •    Whether the proposed development would be consistent with development plan
          policies relating to the range of housing in the Borough.
     •    Whether the proposed development would provide satisfactory living
          accommodation for future occupants.
     •    The effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of existing
          occupants.
Reasons
Range of housing
3. Core Policy 4 of the Slough Strategy 2006-2026 sets out the type of housing sought
   in the Borough. Amongst other matters, the Policy states that there will be no net
   loss of family accommodation.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6010730


4. The appeal property is used as a small House in Multiple Occupation (HMO) for six
   persons in five bedrooms, and so is not family accommodation. I am informed this
   was a change from a dwellinghouse through the exercise of permitted development
   rights. The Council’s position is that the property could be readily converted back
   into a single family dwellinghouse.
5. However, there is no indication that the appellant would do this in the short or the
   longer term, and I am unaware of any incentive or requirement to do so. I have also
   not been informed of any mechanism that the Council might have to seek such a
   change; Core Policy 4 states it will resist loss of family accommodation and hence
   refers to an existing situation, with no reference to seeking to change or control
   possible future uses to which a building not used as family accommodation might
   be put.
6. I acknowledge the evidence provided by the Council set out in the policies of the
   Slough Strategy 2006-2026, emerging Proposed Spatial Strategy 2020, and
   supporting housing strategy documents that shows a need for a range of housing in
   the Borough, including new family housing and the protection of family
   accommodation. But the appeal property is not in use as family accommodation
   and so the change from a six person small HMO in Class C4 use to a large nine
   person HMO would not conflict with Core Policy 4.
7. The Council have referred to appeals concerning the change of use from six person
   HMOs to larger HMOs where it was concluded there would be conflict with Core
   Policy 4. The appellant has similarly referenced appeals relating to the change of
   use to larger HMOs, including where no conflict with Core Policy 4 was found. I do
   not have full details for the properties, evidence or material facts in those cases that
   led to the particular conclusions at that time. I have assessed the current appeal
   with regards to the evidence presented to me and observations at the site visit. My
   findings remain the same.
8. Thus, on the first main issue I conclude the proposed development would not
   conflict with the development plan policies relating to the range of housing in the
   Borough.
Standard of accommodation
9. Saved Policy H20 of the Local Plan for Slough (2004) requires HMOs to provide
   satisfactory living accommodation and facilities. The supporting text to this Policy
   states there is a variety of standards and legislative control for HMOs, and that
   proposals will be tested against planning criteria and standards applied by the
   Council’s Environmental Health Section.
10. The proposed layout shows nine bedrooms, all with en-suite facilities. The
    appellant has provided the Council’s HMO Standards in Licensable Properties, and
    the rooms satisfy these standards. The Council’s delegated report states that the
    bedrooms would satisfy the requirements of the Nationally Described Space
    Standards 2015 if used as single rooms. As that is the proposed development, and
    the HMO would be subject to licencing, I am satisfied individual rooms provide
    adequate space and facilities.
11. The Council raise concern regarding the size of the kitchen space and the absence
    of communal areas. The HMO Standards state a kitchen for 9+ sharers must have
    a minimum size of 11 sq m. The kitchen/diner at the property would be 22.96 sq m,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision 6010730


     which is notably greater than this minimum. I concur with the appellant that the
     likelihood of all nine residents using the kitchen/diner at the same time is low, given
     occupancy of the HMO by unrelated individuals. There are also two utility rooms
     and a utility/dining room at the property that would provide further space for
     occupants. On the basis of the HMO standards and the proposed layout, I consider
     there would be sufficient communal space for occupants.
12. The rear of the property has an existing communal open area, which is accessible
    from the rear of the kitchen/diner. The Council consider this to be deficient in space
    and have cited a standard from their Residential Extensions Supplementary
    Planning Document (2011). I have been provided with a copy of that and it is stated
    it is to be used when assessing extensions to residential properties and
    implementation of certain saved Policies of the Local Plan, which do not include
    Policy H20. This appeal relates to an HMO, where Policy H20 sets out the
    requirement that they have an appropriate amount of amenity space and so the
    SPD does not apply.
13. Notwithstanding this fact, I have had regard to whether the existing amenity space
    would be satisfactory for the number of occupants arising from the proposal. I
    consider the existing space would remain to provide a sitting out area of reasonable
    size for the occupants, which is accessible and useable. The existing window on
    the side elevation of the rear projection that faces this area would be closed off as
    part of the conversion to a bedroom, and hence no disturbance to the occupant of
    that room.
14. On the second issue it is my conclusion that the proposed development would
    provide a satisfactory standard of accommodation for future occupants and so
    comply with the relevant policy of the development plan, namely save Policy H20 of
    the Local Plan which seeks to ensure HMOs provide satisfactory living
    accommodation and facilities and an appropriate amount of amenity space.
Effect on existing living conditions
15. I saw at my site visit the appeal site lies on a busy road close to Slough town
    centre, with regular traffic along the road and pedestrian flow. There is car parking
    to the front of the appeal property and the building to the south. Access to the HMO
    is taken from the side, near these parking areas, and that would remain
    unchanged.
16. The increase in number of occupants is likely to give rise to further comings and
    goings form the property, and use of the building and amenity areas. However, I do
    not consider this would alter the character of the property or the site to the extent
    where there would be a material change in the levels of disturbance arising from
    occupiers. Access to the property remains the same, with occupiers quickly into the
    busy area of the parking area and the street.
17. On the third main issue it is my conclusion the proposed development would not be
    harmful to the living conditions of adjoining occupiers. Hence, there would not be
    conflict with Policy H20 of the Local Plan which requires HMOs to not result in the
    loss of amenity for adjoining occupiers.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
 Appeal Decision 6010730


Other matters
18. Car parking is shown to the front and rear of the property, and a cycle store to the
    rear of the property. The Council’s Transport Officers raised no objection to this
    provision, and the delegated report commented that there are on-street parking
    restrictions in the area. The site is close to the town centre and well located for
    facilities that can be reached by foot or other means. I concur that the level of
    parking is sufficient, and the proposal would not be harmful to highway safety or the
    free flow of traffic.
19. The proposals would not involve any external changes to the building, save for
    some minor alterations to windows. I have also commented above that the
    increased occupancy of the property would not lead to a material change in the
    activities arising from the building. I therefore consider the development would not
    lead to any change in the character and appearance of the area.
Conditions
20. The Council have not suggested any conditions in the event of the appeal being
    allowed. The submitted drawings show the proposed works to the property, and the
    details of the cycle store, and so I have attached a condition specifying the
    approved drawings in the interests of precision. I have also attached a condition
    specifying the level of occupation of the HMO in the interests of precision and
    enforceability of the permission.
Conclusions
21. For the reasons given above I conclude the proposed development is consistent
    with the development plan. The appeal is therefore allowed.

C J Leigh
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       4
