Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 9 September 2026
by Hannah Guest BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010276
76 Andover Road, Cheltenham, GL50 2TW
•    The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
     1990 (as amended) against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an
     application for listed building consent.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Graham Rix against Cheltenham Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00312/LBC.
•    The works proposed are partial demolition of structurally defective section of garden wall and
     rebuilding it like-for-like in character and appearance.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and listed building consent is granted for partial demolition
       of structurally defective section of garden wall and rebuilding it like-for-like in
       character and appearance at 76 Andover Road, Cheltenham, GL50 2TW in
       accordance with the terms of the application Ref 26/00312/LBC and subject to the
       following conditions:
       1) The works authorised by this consent shall begin not later than 3 years from
          the date of this consent.
       2) The consent hereby granted shall be carried out in accordance with the
          following approved plans: 3HV LBC (d) and 3HV Sect.
       3) No works, including any demolition or dismantling of the wall, shall take place
          until full details of the following have been submitted to and approved in writing
          by the local planning authority:
                a. Plans and elevations at a scale of 1:20 showing a measured condition
                   survey of the existing wall, indicating areas of defect, areas to be
                   deconstructed, and areas to be reconstructed;
                b. Foundation design, including a cross-section at a scale of 1:10; and
                c. lime mortar mix and repointing profile.
           The works shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details.
       4) All existing bricks capable of reuse shall be carefully salvaged, cleaned and
          reused in reconstructing the wall. Any bricks found during dismantling to be too
          damaged or deteriorated for reuse shall be replaced with new or reclaimed
          bricks of a size, colour, texture, bond and finish in accordance with details and
          samples previously submitted and approved in writing by the local planning
          authority.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010276


Preliminary Matters
2.       On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
         Framework) was published. Parts of the Framework relevant to the appeal were
         amended. The Council and the appellant were given an opportunity to comment on
         those amendments during the appeal process. I am therefore satisfied that neither
         party would be prejudiced by my determining the appeal on that basis.
3.       The appeal property forms part of a listed building, known as Number 72 to 80 and
         Attached Railings to Number 721. There is no dispute between the parties that the
         garden wall subject of this appeal (hereon referred to as the garden wall), given it
         is a structure fixed to the listed building, it should be treated as part of the listed
         building2. From the evidence before me and my observations on site I can find no
         reason to disagree.
4.       The appeal relates to an application for listed building consent where the listed
         building lies within a conservation area. Therefore, as required by sections 16(2)
         and 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the
         Act), I have had special regard to the desirability of preserving the building or its
         setting or any features of special architectural or historic interest which it
         possesses, and have paid special attention to the desirability of preserving or
         enhancing the character or appearance of the conservation area.
5.       Third parties have questioned the validity of the application. However, whether or
         not there have been any procedural errors, there is discretion to accept and
         determine an appeal where it is appropriate to do so. In this case, the application
         form clearly describes the proposed works as including the partial demolition of the
         garden wall. Furthermore, interested parties have been made aware of both the
         application and the appeal and have had the opportunity to participate in the
         process. I am therefore satisfied that no party would be prejudiced by my
         determination of the appeal. Any matters relating to the need for, or grant of,
         planning permission are separate issues for the appellant and the Council to
         address.
6.       Interested parties have also suggested that the proposed works are linked to the
         completion of the permitted garage/annexe development at No. 76 Andover Road.
         While I acknowledge that the appellant refers to delaying completion of the
         garage/annexe until the garden wall has been repaired, the evidence before me,
         together with my site observations, indicates that the garage/annexe is a free-
         standing structure. Furthermore, no works involving a physical connection or tying-
         in between the garden wall and the garage/annexe form part of the proposal
         before me. I have therefore determined the appeal on that basis.
Background and Main Issues
7.       The Council failed to determine the application within the prescribed period.
         Following the submission of the appeal, it prepared an appeal statement indicating
         that it would have been minded to recommend listed building consent was granted
         for the proposed works based on the application as submitted.
8.       However, prior to the application being determined and the appeal being
         submitted, several new buttresses were erected on the side of No. 74 Andover
1
    National Heritage List for England. List Entry Number: 1386687.
2
    Section 1(5)(a) of Planning (Listed Building and Conservation Areas) Act 1990.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                   2
Appeal Decision 6010276


         Road. The Council considers these works may have altered the structural
         behaviour of the garden wall and, consequently, affected the accuracy of the
         application information.
9.       Having had regard to the written evidence before me and the representations
         made to both the application and the appeal, I consider the main issues in this
         appeal to be whether the proposed works would:
         •    preserve the Grade II listed building, Number 72 to 80 and Attached Railings to
              Number 72, or any features of special architectural or historic interest which it
              possesses; and
         •    preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the Central Conservation
              Area.
Reasons
Special interest and significance
10. Interested parties have asserted that the appellant has not adequately assessed
    the significance of the garden wall or the extent of any harm arising from the
    proposed works, contrary to Policy HE5(1) of the Framework. Nonetheless, based
    on the evidence before me, including the Heritage Report prepared by Edward
    Holland3, and my observations on site, I have been able to determine the special
    interest and significance of the designated heritage assets relevant to the appeal
    and to assess the effects of the proposed works.
11. Number 72 to 80 and Attached Railings to Number 72, comprise a Grade II listed
    building located on Andover Road, close to the centre of Cheltenham (hereon
    referred to as Nos. 72-80 Andover Road). Dating from the period 1840-18504, the
    asset comprises a terrace of 5 houses with attached railings to the left-hand side.
12. From the evidence before me and my observations on site, I find the special
    interest and significance of the listed building derives principally from its
    architectural and historic interest as a well-preserved mid-19th century Regency-
    influenced terrace. It retains many features that contribute to its special interest,
    including its unified design, sash and tripartite windows, stucco finish with
    embellishments, balconies, railings and historic internal features. The building also
    possesses historic value as part of the expansion of Cheltenham during its
    development as a spa town. As part of an area of artisan housing, and one of a
    series of similarly designed terraces along Andover Road, it illustrates the planned
    and coherent nature of the town's historic development.
13. Pertinent to the appeal, the garden wall forms the boundary between the rear
    gardens of Nos. 74 and 76 Andover Road. It is approximately 1.6 to 1.7 metres in
    height, around 230mm thick, and is constructed of brickwork laid in a lime-based
    mortar. Owing to its historic, physical and functional associations with the listed
    building, it makes a positive and meaningful contribution to the building's special
    interest.
14. The appeal site is also located within Cheltenham's Central Conservation Area
    (CCA), which encompasses the town centre and is reputedly the largest

3
    Desk-Based Heritage Report, Re Listed Building Consent application 21/02385/LBC, dated 14th December 2021.
4
    Listing description.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                3
Appeal Decision 6010276


       conservation area in Europe. The CCA is characterised by its Regency origins and
       planned townscape, exhibiting a strong sense of architectural unity and formality. It
       contains a wide variety of historic buildings, spaces and landscapes that reflect
       Cheltenham's evolution as a historic spa town. Its coherent streets, terraces, villas,
       civic buildings, generous green spaces and tree-lined avenues collectively
       contribute to its distinctive character and appearance and significance.
15. The Tivoli Character Area, within which the appeal site is situated, derives much of
    its character from its coherent residential townscape rather than from the grander
    individual buildings found elsewhere in the wider CCA. The area is characterised
    by a compact urban grain, planned terraces and villas, consistent building lines,
    traditional materials and architectural detailing. Together, these elements create a
    strong sense of visual coherence and enclosure that contributes to the area's
    distinctive identity. Traditional brick boundary walls are a prevalent feature and
    make an important contribution to the character and appearance of the townscape.
16. Nos. 72-80 Andover Road and the garden wall, as part of the listed building,
    contributes positively to the character and appearance of the CCA by reinforcing
    the historic pattern of enclosure, plot division and development that characterises
    both the Tivoli Character Area and the wider conservation area.
       Works and effects
17. Policy HE4 of the Framework states heritage assets, as an irreplaceable resource,
    should be conserved in a manner appropriate to their significance. To achieve this,
    development proposals which would affect the significance of heritage assets,
    including any contribution made by their setting should avoid (or if that is not
    possible, minimise) harm to the significance of heritage assets, and instead
    conserve this significance.
18. Any harm to, or loss of, the significance of a designated heritage asset (including
    from development within its setting) should have a clear and convincing
    justification in accordance with the policies in Chapter 20 of the Framework
    regarding conserving and enhancing the historic environment.
19. I am also mindful that Historic England's guidance advocates a repair-led
    approach to historic buildings, whereby the minimum work necessary is
    undertaken to secure their long-term conservation, retaining as much historic
    fabric as practicable and avoiding unnecessary intervention. It also recognises that
    the aim of repair is not ordinarily to restore a building or feature to a pristine
    condition, but to manage change in a way that sustains its significance.
20. The proposed works, as shown on Drawing No. 3HV Sect, are to partially
    reconstruct a section of the garden wall, chainage 12.5 metres to 36.86 metres,
    using the existing bricks, where possible, and lime-based mortar. This includes the
    provision of new foundations, including specialist foundations within the root
    protection zone of the apple tree located within the garden of No. 74 Andover
    Road. The proposed works also include repairs to the remaining wall, chainage
    0 metres to 12.5 metres, through brick replacement and repointing.
21. I have before me three structural reports5 prepared between May and December
    2025. While the instructions and purpose of each report may differ, each
5
 Clarke, Nicholls, Marcel Civil & Structural Engineers (May 2025), Andrew Duignan Engineers (July 2025) and Davidson Walsh
Consulting Structural & Civil Engineers (December 2025).


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               4
Appeal Decision 6010276


       addresses the condition of the garden wall and the structural issues affecting it.
       The reports were prepared by appropriately qualified professionals and differences
       of professional opinion are not unusual.
22. Collectively, the reports identify deterioration of the garden wall, as well as
    movement/lateral displacement associated with the root growth of a mature apple
    tree, which necessitates remedial works. The reports also agree that the
    buttresses introduced in 2023 on the side of No. 74 Andover Road have not
    successfully stabilised the garden wall and provide, at most, only limited restraint.
23. I saw on my visit that the garden wall is showing signs of deterioration, including
    spalling, loose bricks, cracks and missing mortar. Sections of the garden wall have
    also shifted from their original alignment over time, resulting in sections with a
    noticeable lean, and it no longer follows a consistently straight line.
24. In this case, the three structural reports provide compelling justification for
    remedial works to stabilise the garden wall. That conclusion does not depend on
    whether the garden wall presents a potential risk to public safety. In terms of the
    scope of those works, all three reports identify reconstruction of defective sections
    of the garden wall as a means of restoring its structural integrity, although the
    report prepared by Clarke, Nicholls, Marcel (CNM) identifies this as an alternative
    to reinforcing the garden wall with engineered buttresses, which I address below.
    The CNM report does not conclude that either intervention would be the more
    appropriate solution.
25. During the application process, several additional buttresses were constructed on
    the side of No. 74 Andover Road. I saw on my visit that the buttresses appear to
    broadly follow the recommendations set out at Items 21.0 and 24.0 of the CNM
    report. However, given they are in situ, I was unable to visually assess whether
    they have been adequately tied to the exposed outer face of the garden wall.
26. Interested parties are of the view that these buttresses have successfully stabilised
    the garden wall. However, the Council has confirmed that it considers these
    buttresses may be detrimental to the character and appearance of the structure
    and that they require listed building consent, which has not been sought. Even if
    the structural behaviour of the garden wall has changed, there is no substantive
    evidence before me, such as a structural report, to demonstrate that these
    additional buttresses have reinstated its structural integrity and, more importantly,
    that they would ensure its long-term stability. In this regard, I am mindful that
    previous buttresses have failed to fully stabilise the garden wall and I note the
    concern expressed in the report prepared by Davidson Walsh (DW) that such
    measures may not prevent failure between buttress locations and therefore may
    not provide a satisfactory long-term solution.
27. Given this, notwithstanding the construction of the additional buttresses, I am
    satisfied that the evidence before me remains sufficient to understand the
    condition of the garden wall, assess the need for remedial works and evaluate the
    effects of the proposed works.
28. The proposed works are based on recommendations set out in the executive
    summary and section 9.1 of the DW Report, which was commissioned
    independently by the Council and takes account of the earlier CNM report and
    report prepared by Andrew Duignan (AD). Interested parties consider that the
    proposed works go further than the recommendations of any report. Nevertheless,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010276


       on a plain reading of the DW Report as a whole, it recommends reconstruction of
       the section of garden wall, chainage 12.5m to 30.0m, together with the remaining
       length alongside the Coach House up to the southern boundary. The extent of
       reconstruction shown on Drawing No. 3HV Sect is broadly consistent with that
       recommendation.
29. The proposed works would unavoidably result in the loss of some historic fabric
    where existing bricks are too deteriorated to be reused. The works would also
    realign the garden wall, correcting the leaning sections and restoring a vertical
    alignment. As a result, they would principally affect the garden wall's evidential
    value through the loss of historic fabric and the alteration of its evolved form and
    character, including the loss of its lean and meandering alignment. To a lesser
    extent, they would also affect its aesthetic and historical value, insofar as the
    existing garden wall reflects its gradual development over time.
30. Accordingly, for the purposes of section 16(2) of the Act, the proposed works
    would not preserve those elements of the listed building’s special interest
    associated with the wall’s surviving historic fabric and evolved form. The resulting
    reduction in the garden wall's authenticity and integrity would give rise to a limited
    degree of harm to the significance of the listed building, albeit the harm would be
    minimised through the reuse of existing undamaged brickwork, with any
    replacement materials selected to closely match the existing wall in terms of
    colour, bond, size and texture. In making this assessment I recognise that it is the
    effect on the listed building’s significance rather than the scale of the proposed
    works which should be considered.
31. The reconstructed wall would continue to reinforce the historic pattern of enclosure
    and plot division that contributes to the significance of the CCA. While the
    proposed works would alter the wall's evolved form and character, controls over
    materials and detailing would ensure that its contribution to the character and
    appearance of the CCA as a whole would be preserved. Consequently, the
    proposal would not harm the significance of the CCA and would satisfy the
    requirements of Section 72(1) of the Act and accord with the associated provisions
    of the Framework.
Public benefits and heritage balance
32. Policy HE6 (4) of the Framework states where a development proposal would
    harm the significance of a designated heritage asset the effect on the asset and its
    significance should be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the
    proposal.
33. The proposed works would secure the long-term structural stability of the garden
    wall, thereby supporting its continued contribution to the significance of the Grade
    II listed building, Nos. 72-80 Andover Road and CCA. This is a meaningful public
    heritage benefit. The proposed works would also result in modest economic
    benefits resulting from their implementation. Together these carry considerable
    weight in favour of the proposed works.
34. Consequently, having had full regard to the statutory duty under section 16(2) of
    the Act, and giving considerable importance and weight to the limited harm that I
    have identified, together with substantial weight to the conservation of the heritage
    asset, I conclude that, in this case, the public benefits of the proposal would
    outweigh that harm.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6010276


Other Matters
35. From the evidence before me, particularly the reservations expressed in the DW
    Report regarding the efficacy of engineered buttresses, I am not satisfied that
    reinforcing the garden wall with buttresses would secure an equivalent long-term
    heritage benefit. Although buttresses might retain more of the garden wall’s
    evolved form and alignment, there is no structural evidence demonstrating that the
    recently constructed buttresses have restored its structural integrity or would
    prevent further deterioration between buttress locations. Nor is there sufficient
    design or heritage information before me to establish that a properly specified
    buttress scheme would represent a less harmful and satisfactory long-term
    alternative to the proposed works.
36. Interested parties place significant weight on the Council's refusal of applications
    in 2021 which sought consent for works involving the garden wall. While I note
    those decisions, they do not determine the outcome of this appeal. The proposed
    works before me must be determined on their own merits in light of the evidence
    currently available. In this instance, I have had regard to the structural evidence
    before me that post-dates those decisions, including the Davidson Walsh report
    commissioned independently by the Council, and I have assessed the proposed
    works having regard to the identified need for remedial works and the effect of
    those works on the significance of the designated heritage assets. For these
    reasons, I do not consider the earlier refusals to justify withholding listed building
    consent in this case.
37. Interested parties have raised concerns regarding the ownership of land and
    whether the proposed reconstruction and realignment of the garden wall could be
    undertaken without affecting neighbouring land. However, questions of legal title,
    ownership and boundary position are private matters to be resolved between the
    relevant landowners. Listed building consent would not confer any right to enter
    land outside the appellant's control or interfere with private property rights.
    Drawing No. 3HV LBC (d) does not indicate any separate land take or relocation of
    the garden wall. While the proposed works may result in some adjustment to the
    alignment of sections of the garden wall as part of its reconstruction, I have not
    been provided with substantive evidence that the works could not be carried out as
    proposed. Any dispute regarding legal boundaries, ownership of land, or the rights
    necessary to implement the development would remain a private matter between
    the relevant landowners and carry little weight in my assessment of the appeal.
38. Interested parties also refer to the appellant preventing the implementation of part
    of an approved remedial scheme designed to stabilise the garden wall.
    Nonetheless, from the evidence before me, it is clear that the appellant has been
    trying to resolve the condition of the garden wall through alternative remedial
    measures and there is no substantive evidence before me to demonstrate
    deliberate neglect of or damage to the garden wall.
Conditions
39. The Council has suggested 5 conditions be imposed. In imposing conditions, I
    have had regard to the approach in the Framework and the Planning Practice
    Guidance. I have accordingly modified the wording or form of certain conditions
    without altering their fundamental aims.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6010276


40. In addition to the standard time limit condition, a condition identifying the approved
    plans is necessary in the interests of certainty. For the same reason, and in the
    interests of preserving the special interest and significance of the listed building
    and the character and appearance of the conservation area, a further condition is
    required to secure details of the sections of the garden wall that require
    deconstruction and reconstruction, the design of the foundations, and the
    specification of the lime mortar mix and repointing profile. I have combined the two
    conditions suggested by the Council into one. A condition requiring the reuse of all
    undamaged bricks, together with the use of new or reclaimed bricks that match the
    existing brickwork, is also necessary for the same reasons.
Conclusion
41. For these reasons, and subject to the conditions identified above, I conclude that
    the appeal should be allowed and listed building consent granted.



Hannah Guest
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
