Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by A Knight BA PG Dip MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 16 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010354
Three Acres Farm, The Common, South Creake, Norfolk NR21 9JB
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Matthew Myhill against the decision of King's Lynn and West Norfolk Borough
       Council.
•      The application Ref is 26/00461/F.
•      The development proposed is self-build single dwelling house using the fall-back position giving up
       the current Class Q for two dwellings at South Creek, Three Acres, Fakenham, Norfolk.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was issued on 17
         August 2026. The main parties have been given the opportunity to comment on
         any implications for the appeal, and I have taken their responses into account in
         reaching my decision.
3.       The proposed development was described on the application form as ‘single
         dwelling house using the fall-back position giving up current Class Q permission
         for two dwellings’. I have used the description found on the decision notice in the
         banner heading above, as it more accurately describes the proposal. In particular,
         it clarifies the location of the Class Q permission in question.
4.       The Council confirms that the second reason for refusal has now been overcome
         as the appellant has made a required GIRAMS payment in full.
Background
5.       The appeal site (the site) is largely laid to lawn and is in use as part of a wider
         caravan site. To the south is Three Acres, a portion of land also owned by the
         appellant which includes a barn.
6.       At Three Acres, an application for prior approval under Class Q of the General
         Permitted Development Order (2015) was approved in 20251 (the Class Q
         approval). This involved the barn being converted into two dwellings.
7.       Later that same year, planning permission was refused for the erection of a
         detached dwelling on a portion of land immediately west of the current appeal site2


1
    Application Ref: 25/00084/PACU3.
2
    Application Ref: 25/01201/F.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010354


         (the refused scheme). A subsequent appeal was dismissed3 (the previous appeal).
         The refused scheme, like the current appeal scheme, involved the appellant
         forgoing the ‘fallback’ of the Class Q approval.
Main Issues
8.       The main issues are:
             •   whether the site would be a suitable location for the proposed development
                 having regard to the development plan; and
             •   the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of
                 the area.
Reasons
Location
9.       The appeal site is outside the development boundary for South Creake, defined in
         the King’s Lynn and West Norfolk Local Plan 2021-2040 (2025) (the Local Plan) as
         a rural village in Tier 5 of the Settlement Hierarchy, as set out in Policy LP01.
10. Local Plan Policy LP02 states that residential schemes outside of Tier 5
    development boundaries will not normally be supported except for in certain
    circumstances, none of which are relevant to the appeal. Indeed, there is no
    dispute that the appeal scheme does not have the support of the Council’s spatial
    strategy.
11. Given the above, the site would not be a suitable location for the proposed
    development having regard to the development plan.
Character and appearance
12. The site is within a small enclave of development set out along Fakenham Road
    (the enclave). It contains a somewhat eclectic mix of land uses, including a handful
    of dwellings, caravan sites, and light industries. The dwellings are positioned
    intermittently throughout the enclave. They are generally adjacent to the road or at
    least partially visible from it. Bungalows are particularly common.
13. The proposal is to erect a two-storey dwelling in the form of a chalet-style
    bungalow. Roof dormers and a gable projection would identify the presence of a
    substantial first floor. I see little about the design which is particularly ‘rural’.
    However, two storey dwellings can be found across the enclave, most notably at
    its southernmost limb. Indeed, many such local dwellings do not have an
    especially ‘rural’ design. In that respect, the proposed dwelling would not be out of
    place with the others in the enclave.
14. Nevertheless, the prevailing character of the enclave is decidedly rural. Though it
    is not undeveloped, it is surrounded by open fields for a considerable distance in
    each direction. The road is unlit, lacks pavements, and is largely enclosed by
    mature greenery. There are significant open, green gaps between many of the
    developed sites, giving a dispersed feel. Even the busiest sites in the enclave
    appear as isolated pockets of development in an otherwise open, countryside
    setting.

3
    Appeal Ref: APP/V2635/W/25/3373292.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010354


15. Near the appeal site it is uncommon to find more than two dwellings even broadly
    alongside each other. Where two dwellings are positioned near to each other, it is
    common for there to be notable gaps to at least one side of the pair. This is a
    marked contributory factor in the open, dispersed feel described above.
16. The appeal site is largely undeveloped. It, along with the open land between it and
    the road, acts to separate visible development found on plots to the north and
    south of it. In these respects, it adheres and contributes to the characteristics of
    the enclave.
17. The proposed dwelling would be set back from the road, positioned behind an
    existing, well-established hedgerow which itself is visible only partially from the
    road. Even so, the dwelling would be taller than the hedgerow and visible over it.
    Vehicular movements and general domestic activity would be noticeable, as would
    illumination after dark. Whilst I have little reason to feel that the hedgerows are
    likely to be lost, I cannot be certain they will be retained in perpetuity, or that they
    are effective in blocking inward views all year round. Furthermore, the dwelling
    would be visible from at least one neighbouring dwelling, from within the site, and
    from immediately adjacent land.
18. Overall, the presence of the dwelling would be readily apparent, as would the
    resulting erosion of the open gap between existing developments and the creation
    of a more continuous, albeit loose, stretch of built form with a more planned and
    consistent feel than is characteristic of the enclave.
19. The combination would be harmfully at odds with the existing sporadic pattern of
    development and associated rural character. The development would have a
    harmful effect on the character and appearance of the area, contrary to Local Plan
    Policies LP18 and LP31 where they require development to respond to context
    and character and enhance or preserve special qualities and local distinctiveness.
Other Considerations
Framework Policy S5
20. The appellant directs me to Framework Policy S5(1)(e), which supports limited
    infilling within groups of houses. As I have described above, the enclave contains
    a mix of land uses including, but not limited to, dwellings. Given this, I find little
    reason to view the enclave as a group of houses rather than an intermittently
    developed area containing a mix of uses.
21. Whilst the appeal scheme would fill a gap between developed sites, the land to the
    north does not evidently contain a house. Whilst I noted a mobile home on that
    land, I do not know whether it is residentially occupied or its planning status and
    have been presented with little reason to consider the mobile home to be a house
    for the purposes of the Framework policy. Overall, I do not find the appeal scheme
    to benefit from the support of Framework Policy S5(1)(e).
22. The appellant also directs me to Framework Policy S5(4). This supports proposals
    that do not fall within one of the categories in the policy, but only in exceptional
    circumstances where the benefits substantially outweigh the adverse effects. The
    appellant’s case on this point turns on the fallback position provided by the Class
    Q approval, which I recognise to be greater than theoretical.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010354


23. Both the appeal scheme and Class Q approval involve the provision of housing
    some 1.7km beyond the development boundary for South Creake. The Local Plan
    classifies South Creake as a rural village, meaning a settlement that provides only
    a limited number and range of services to help meet some of the daily needs of its
    residents.
24. Given the above, occupiers of either the appeal scheme or the Class Q approval
    would likely rely on private motor vehicles on a day-to-day basis. The appeal
    scheme would provide one less house and so result in less vehicle movements to
    and from an unsuitable location for residential development. It would be the less
    harmful of the two in that respect.
25. At the same time, I have found the appeal scheme to be harmfully at odds with the
    existing sporadic pattern of development and associated rural character. As such,
    it would have a harmful effect on the character of the countryside. The Class Q
    approval involves minimal alterations to a building which already exists, and so it
    would be significantly less harmful than the appeal scheme in that respect.
26. Bringing these matters together; The degree of difference between the two
    schemes in respect of vehicle movements is modest both in the wider context and,
    given the mix of uses it contains, in the context of the enclave. The erosion of the
    character of the countryside, however, would be prominent in the local setting.
27. I therefore find that the benefits of the appeal scheme, including the avoidance of
    the fallback scheme, would not substantially outweigh the adverse effects. It does
    not have the support of Framework Policy S5(4).
Fallback
28. Notwithstanding the above, as set out in the previous appeal the usual test applied
    to a fallback position is whether it would result in equal or greater harm than the
    appeal scheme. That the appellant has cited fallback in respect of Framework
    Policy S5(4) does not negate the need to also apply that usual, and less stringent,
    test.
29. I have set out above that the Class Q approval would be more harmful than the
    appeal scheme in terms of generating vehicle movement, albeit only slightly so.
30. At the same time, and notwithstanding the good health of the Council’s latest
    housing land supply figures, the Framework cites the Government’s objective of
    delivering a substantial increase in the supply of homes. Again, whilst at just one
    dwelling the difference between the schemes is slight, the Class Q approval would
    provide one more home overall. In that respect, and notwithstanding its location,
    the fallback scheme is preferable to the appeal scheme.
31. As I have also set out above, the appeal scheme would have a notably greater
    harmful effect on the character of the countryside than the Class Q approval.
    Framework Policy DP3 requires proposals to respond to their context (the history,
    character and features of their site and its setting) so that they integrate with and
    enhance their surroundings. It also states that proposals should be refused if,
    without clear justification, they conflict with that requirement.
32. I have found the appeal scheme would not integrate with and enhance its
    surroundings. That harm is not justified by avoiding the Class Q approval, as that


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010354


       would be the less harmful scheme in terms of the requirements of Framework
       Policy DP3. As such, the policy gives a clear directive to dismiss the appeal.
33. The appellant informs me that the appeal scheme would provide better access
    arrangements and residential amenity, though I have few further details. Even if
    that is so, I have nothing before me to show that the Class Q scheme would be
    harmful in either respect.
34. Similarly, whilst the Class Q approval would result in more potential for domestic
    paraphernalia and offer less opportunities for landscaping, I have little evidence
    that this would make the Class Q scheme harmful. Even if I accept the appeal
    scheme to be the superior of the two in these respects, fundamentally and overall,
    the appeal scheme would nevertheless harm the character and appearance of the
    area to a degree which the Class Q approval would not.
35. The appeal scheme would be exempt from providing Biodiversity Net Gain. Even if
    it was nevertheless possible to obtain biodiversity benefits from the appeal
    scheme, I have little evidence that the Class Q Approval would harm biodiversity.
36. Overall, the appeal scheme would be more harmful than the Class Q approval
    and, as a result, the fallback position does not weigh in favour of the appeal.
Self-Build
37. The Self-Build and Custom Housebuilding (SBCH) Act (2015) (the Act) requires
    local authorities to create a register of those seeking serviced plots, and to have
    regard to it when carrying out planning functions. The Housing and Planning Act
    2016 states that local planning authorities must give suitable planning permissions
    to meet the demand for SBCH. The Planning Practice Guidance states that SBCH
    registers are likely to be material considerations in decisions involving relevant
    schemes.
38. The Council does not dispute that it has a shortfall of SBCH plots. The extent of
    the shortfall is unclear, but it weighs in favour of the appeal that the scheme would
    deliver one plot towards addressing it.
39. That said, I have little evidence that the shortfall cannot be met through schemes
    which do not harm surrounding character and appearance. Indeed, I note that
    Local Plan Policy LP31 supports SBCH proposals only where they respect local
    character and comply with other relevant policies in the plan. The Local Plan was
    adopted relatively recently, and some ten years after the Act came into force.
    Whilst none of this is conclusive, it does little to suggest that the SBCH shortfall is
    so severe, or the opportunities to meet it so limited, that it can only be met by
    eroding neighbourhood character and appearance.
Other
40. There would be temporary economic benefits associated with the construction of
    the appeal scheme, and ongoing local economic benefits relating to the occupation
    of the site thereafter. Both, however, are true of the Class Q approval in any event.
41. Overall, I find that the other considerations in the appeal do not outweigh the harm
    identified.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010354


Other Matters
42. The Council raised no objection to the principle of a new dwelling at the appeal site
    when determining the refused scheme, be that in relation to the location of the site
    or matters of character an appearance. The previous Inspector saw no reason to
    do so either.
43. The Council has, however, cited conflict with its spatial strategy in its reasons for
    refusing the current appeal scheme. Whilst I see no reason for one scheme to be
    found in conflict with strategic policies and the other not, those policies are plainly
    applicable. As such, I have considered them in my determination. My findings
    regarding character and appearance are specific to the effect of the proposal
    before me.
44. Given the above, I do not find that the approach taken to the refused scheme and
    the previous appeal prevents me from determining the appeal as I have.
Conclusion
45. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
46. The appeal is dismissed.

A Knight
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
