 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 29 July 2026
 by Philip Willmer BSc Dip Arch RIBA
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 19 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010735
 New House, St Mary’s Road, Long Ditton, Surbiton, Surrey, KT6 5EU.
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr Ahmed Moustafa against the decision of Elmbridge Borough Council.
 •   The application Ref is 2026/0356.
 •   The development proposed is described as brickwork front boundary wall. Brickwork piers with
     coping stone on top of piers. Metalwork decorative railings between brickwork piers. Pair of
     decorative vehicular entrance gates.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issues
2. I consider the main issues in this case to be:
     •   The effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of the
         street scene and the wider area; and,
     •   The effect of the proposed development on the health and long-term viability of
         the protected trees.
Reasons
3. New House is a relatively recent two-storey detached dwelling, facing towards and
   taking vehicular access from St Mary’s Road.
4. The appellant sought retrospective planning permission for a new front boundary
   wall complete with railings, new entrance gates and associated brick piers built to
   the rear of the pavement on St Mary’s Road. I was therefore able to see the
   development in place on the occasion of my site visit.
Character and appearance:
5. As I observed St Mary’s Road, in the locality of the appeal site is primarily
   residential. The dwellings are generally set well back from the footpath behind
   high, dense and verdant hedging. Where gates have been installed, they tend to
   be either timber or where metal they are generally of a simple and unfussy design.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6010735


6. The new boundary wall and gates have been built hard up against the back of the
   pavement. Therefore, there is no soft landscaping facing the public realm to soften
   or screen the boundary walling.
7. The height of the new brick piers and infill walling varies to reflect the slope of the
   land. However, the overall height of the piers is about 2.0 metres or so.
8. The boundary wall and brick piers have been constructed from a mix of red and
   yellow facing bricks thereby making the new wall and piers visually very prominent
   in the street scene.
9. The vertical railings between the piers are painted dark grey. However, four bright
   gold colour finished ornate decorative panels have been set into the railings.
   Further, each vertical rod has been embellished with an ornate bright gold coloured
   decorative cap. The gates, although also finished in dark grey are of a particularly
   complex and elaborate design. They have been fabricated to curve up where the
   two gates meet to a height of around 2.4 metres or so. Like the railing the gates
   have also been greatly embellished with bright gold-coloured ornate and somewhat
   fussy details. Overall, the gates and railings like the brick work appears visually
   prominent and therefore very dominant in the context of the established street
   scene.
10. Given the lack of any soft landscaping and the prominent design of the wall
    combined with the overly elaborate and fussy design of the infill railings and gates
    the new boundary treatment appears as an incongruous and dominant form of
    development. Therefore, in the local context I consider that as built the
    development causes unacceptable harm to the overall appearance of the locality
    and the street scene. To allow the development would therefore be contrary to
    aims of Policies CS17 of the Elmbridge Core Strategy (Adopted July2011), Policy
    DM2 of the Elmbridge Local Plan-Development Management Plan (Adopted April
    2015), the Elmbridge Design Code (Adopted February 2024) and the National
    Planning Policy Framework as they relate to, amongst other things the quality of
    development, and the requirement to preserve or enhance the character of the
    area.
The health and long-term viability of the protected trees.
11. The Council’s Tree Officer considered that the information submitted with the
    application in respect of the impact of the development on the protected trees did
    not meet the requirements of British standard 5837:2012 -Trees in relation to
    Design, Demolition, and Construction.
12. At appeal the appellant has submitted a further arboricultural report prepared by
    Harper Tree Consulting dated April 2026. However, the tree consultant was not
    engaged to supervise the work and has prepared his report retrospectively based
    on limited detail as to how the work was undertaken. Further, this report has not
    been considered by the Council.
13. Given the overriding harm that I have identified in respect of the first main issue I
    will therefore not go on to consider the health and long-term viability of the
    protected trees further in the light of this new evidence.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision 6010735


Other Matters
14. The appellant argues that the wall, railings and gates as built contributes positively
    towards security and defensible space. I accept that the appellant’s concerns in
    respect of security are legitimate. However, the issue of security could be
    addressed by alternative designs more appropriate to the context and setting of the
    appeal site. I therefore give this consideration limited weight in the planning
    balance.
15. The local planning authority have raised no objections in respect of harm to
    residential living conditions. Surrey Highways have indicated that they would not
    wish to object to the proposal. I have also had regard to the balance of support in
    favour of the development from third parties. However, these are neutral factors in
    my considerations and, as such, I have given these matters very little weight in my
    decision.
16. I note from the appellant’s evidence that, unlike those found in the immediate area
    surrounding the site there are examples of more elaborate and therefore prominent
    access gates and brick piers elsewhere in the Borough. Whatever the background
    to those cases, the existence of similar entrance gates elsewhere in the Borough is
    not an appropriate justification for permitting another here, in the context of St
    Mary’s Road.
Conclusions
17. For the reasons given above and having regard to all other matters raised, I
    conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.



Philip Willmer
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
