 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 25 August 2026
 by Philip Willmer BSc Dip Arch RIBA
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 24 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010614
 82 Island Wall, Whitstable, Kent, CT5 1EL.
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Gary Bartlett against the decision of Canterbury City Council.
 •   The application Ref is CA/25/01821.
 •   The development proposed is proposed outbuilding.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for proposed outbuilding
   at 82 Island Wall, Whitstable, Kent, CT5 1EL in accordance with the terms of the
   application, Ref CA/25/01821, subject to the conditions set at the end of the
   decision letter.
Procedural Matters
2. The scheme design, reducing the overall footprint and internal layout, was
   amended during the consultation period for the planning application. My
   consideration of this appeal and determination will therefore be made based on the
   amended drawings numbered 01, 02A and 03A and not the original application
   drawings.
3. It has been drawn to my attention that 86 Island Wall is listed Grade II. In
   accordance therefore with Section 66 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
   Conservation Areas) Act 1990, I shall, along with my duties under Section 72 of the
   Act to pay special attention to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the
   character or appearance of the conservation area, have special regard to the
   desirability of preserving the building or its setting or any features of special
   architectural or historic interest which it possesses.
Main Issue
4. I consider the main issues to be the effect of the proposal on the special
   architectural and historic interest of 86 Island Wall listed Grade II, its setting and
   whether the works would serve to preserve or enhance the character or
   appearance of the Whitstable Town Conservation Area.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6010614


Reasons
5. The appeal site is an area of garden within the residential curtilage of 82 Island
   Wall (No 82). However, it is situated towards the rear of the adjoining property No
   84 and adjacent to common boundary to No 86, listed Grade II. It faces towards
   the tennis courts located behind the sea wall. As I saw the garden also has an
   access from a narrow path from Marine Gap.
6. The appeal site lies within the Whitstable Town Conservation Area, falls within
   Flood Zone 2 and an Area of Archaeological Potential. This is a busy high-density
   area with limited parking.
7. The appellant proposes a single storey outbuilding for use as a garden room and
   personal gym with shower room. The building would have a shallow pitched
   shingle clad roof and timber clad walls and would be built close to the garden
   boundaries to No’s 84 and 86 Island Wall.
8. The proposed outbuilding would to some extent reduce the overall garden area.
   However, due to the proposed footprint of the outbuilding in relation to the overall
   garden area retained, its three-dimensional form, limited height, fenestration pattern
   and choice of materials I consider that this modest outbuilding would be
   proportionate to the host property, appear subordinate to it and the surrounding
   buildings, and would cause harm to the setting of No 86 listed Grade II.
9. Further, in the context of the high-density urban grain of development in this part of
   the Conservation Area this modest building would not appear as an unusual nor
   alien form of development here.
10. For the above reasons the outbuilding would not result in harm to the setting of No
    86 listed Grade II. Further, while I do not believe that it would enhance the
    appearance of the conservation area, it would have a neutral impact upon it. I
    therefore concluded on the main issue that the proposed outbuilding would
    preserve both the setting of the listed building and the character and appearance of
    the Conservation Area.
11. The proposal therefore accords with the aims of Sections 66 and 72 of the Planning
    (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 as well as the objectives of
    Policy DBE3 and Policy HE6 of the Canterbury District Local Plan (Adopted July
    2017) as they relate to, along with other things the quality of development, the
    preservation of the setting of listed building and the preservation or enhancement of
    the character or appearance of conservation areas.
Conditions
12. I have considered the conditions suggested by the Council. In the interests of
    precision and enforceability, I have amended the Council’s suggested wording
    where appropriate.
13. In the interests of certainty, I shall impose a condition requiring the development to
    be undertaken in accordance with the approved plans.
14. In order to protect the living conditions of the occupiers of neighbouring properties
    and to prevent the formation of a substandard dwelling without adequate
    independent living space, amenities, access and carparking I will condition the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision 6010614


     occupation of the outbuilding to purposes incidental to the enjoyment of the
     residential use of the host property.
15. I shall condition on site construction working hours and require a Construction
    Environmental Management Plan to be submitted to and approved by the Council
    to protect the residential amenity of neighbouring occupiers and highway safety.
16. To reduce the impact of flooding on the proposed development and future
    occupants I will require the development to be carried out in accordance with the
    mitigation measures set out in the Flood Risk Assessments dated 7 October 2025
    and 20 Mach 2026.
Conclusions
17. For the reasons given above and having regard to all other matters raised, I
    conclude that the appeal should be allowed.



Philip Willmer
INSPECTOR


     1)     The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
            date of this decision.
     2)     The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
            the following approved plans, drawings: Numbered 01, 02A and 03A.
     3)     The outbuilding hereby permitted shall not be used other than for purposes
            incidental to the dwelling known as 82 Island Wall, Whitstable, Kent, CT5
            1EL and shall not be used at any time for overnight accommodation.
     4)     No development shall take place, including site clearance, until a
            Construction Environmental Management Plan has been submitted to, and
            approved in writing by the local planning authority. The plan shall provide for:
            the parking of vehicles of site operatives and visitors; loading and unloading
            of plant and materials, and construction working hours. The approved
            Construction Environmental Management Plan shall be adhered to
            throughout the construction period for the development.
     5)     The development shall be carried out in accordance with the mitigation
            measures detailed in the submitted Flood Risk Assessment dated 7 October
            2025 and 20 March 2026:
            a. Floor levels within the proposed building will be set no lower than existing
            floor levels
            b. Flood proofing of the proposed development will be incorporated where
            appropriate
            c. Surface water outlets will be connected to the existing surface water
            network on site




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
