Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 August 2026
by L Gardner MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 09 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010391
285 High Road Leyton, Leyton, Waltham Forest E10 5QN
     •     The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as
           amended) against a refusal to grant planning permission.
     •     The appeal is made by Z Gulrez against the Council of the London Borough of Waltham Forest.
     •     The application Ref is 252938.
     •     The development proposed is construction of single storey side and rear extensions to the
           ground floor commercial unit together with a new glazed shopfront, side access doors,
           boundary treatment and provision of bin storage.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    Ordinarily the description of development is taken from the application form.
      However, in this case, the description used in the banner header above is taken
      from the Council’s decision notice given that it represents a more accurate
      description of the development as shown on the proposed plans (specifically
      referencing the proposed alterations to the shop front). I note that the appellant
      has referred to the Council’s description within their statement.
3.    One of the Council’s reasons for refusal refers to inconsistencies of submitted
      plans, the associated officer report clarifying that these related in part to
      contradictions between the elevations and floor plans. The plans which have been
      submitted to accompany the appeal have rectified these inconsistencies, a point
      which the Council has acknowledged within their statement.
4.    Whilst an appeal process is not the correct avenue to evolve a scheme, the plans
      before me now depict an accurate representation of the proposed development, in
      line with the description of development. The plans have therefore not amended
      the scheme upon which the Council made its decision, and I am satisfied that they
      can be considered through the appeal process.
5.    The appeal site is situated within the Leyton Town Centre Conservation Area (CA)
      wherein I have a statutory duty under Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed
      Building and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act) to pay special attention to the
      desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of the area.
6.    During the course of the appeal a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
      Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. The main parties were provided
      with an opportunity to comment. I have had regard to the 2026 version of the
      Framework in my decision.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010391


Main Issues
7.    The main issues are:
        •    the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the host
             building and the surrounding area, and whether it preserves or enhances the
             character or appearance of the Leyton Town Centre CA; and,
        •    whether the proposal makes adequate provision towards biodiversity.
Reasons
Character and appearance
8.    The Leyton Town Centre CA is relatively constrained in its extent, primarily
      focused on either side of High Road Leyton, cumulating in the Coronation
      Gardens, which have a peaceful, verdant character.
9.    Buildings within the CA along High Road Leyton vary in their scale and form, the
      appeal site forming part of a parade of three storey buildings comprised of ground
      floor commercial units with residential accommodation above. The front building
      line within the parade is relatively consistent, which creates an overall well defined
      and coherent frontage. To the rear of the parade, rear service yards are visible
      from the side street and comprise single storey rear extensions, modest
      outbuildings, and ancillary structures that reflect the historic commercial uses.
10. The appeal site occupies a prominently located corner plot at the junction of High
    Road Leyton and Dunedin Road. Corner buildings play an important role in the
    CA, acting as visual anchors that frame views and reinforce the rhythm of the
    street. Insofar as is relevant to the appeal before me, the significance of the CA is
    derived in part from the legibility of the historic plot boundaries which create an
    architectural coherence, which is in part experienced through the rhythm of the
    shop frontages serving the ground floor commercial units.
11. The proposed extensions to the building would occupy a vast proportion of the site
    area. Despite the single storey height and the presence of existing rear projections
    elsewhere, the rear extension as proposed on a corner plot would dominate the
    host building and disrupt the legibility of other ancillary buildings within the rear
    service yards. Consequently, rather than appearing subordinate, it would read as
    an incongruous addition to the building and the overall site context.
12. Due to the significant size of the rear extension, the visual relief of building form
    between the rear of the appeal building and the nearest dwelling along Dunedin
    Road would be notably diminished. Given the location of the appeal site at a
    corner plot, this loss in built form openness would be more acutely experienced.
13. Whilst the proposed side extension would mirror the front building line along High
    Road Leyton, it would project single storey built form beyond the established three
    storey side elevation. In doing so, it would disrupt the existing coherent pattern of
    built form experienced, weakening the legibility of the historic grain of the area.
14. The proposed side extension would also alter the existing shop front at the appeal
    site, expanding the areas of glazing to both the front and side elevations. Policy 45
    of the Waltham Forest Local Plan Part 1 (2024) (the Local Plan) relates to
    shopfronts and signage, requiring new shop fronts to, amongst other matters, be of


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6010391


      a design which is related to the scale, proportion and appearance of the host
      building.
15. Despite the ability to seek precise details of the shop front by condition, the
    additional areas of glazing depicted on the proposed plans would respond poorly
    to the existing shop front, creating an overall imbalance. This would further disrupt
    the overall legibility of the appeal site within the wider area.
16. Based on the above, I find that the proposal would have a harmful effect on the
    character and appearance of the host building and the surrounding area, and
    would fail to preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the Leyton Town
    Centre CA.
17. Policy HE4 of the Framework describes heritage assets as an irreplaceable
    resource, that should be conserved in a manner appropriate to their significance.
    Policy HE6 of the Framework, states that, when considering the potential effect of
    a development proposal on the significance of a designated heritage asset,
    substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation. Policy HE9 of the
    Framework relates specifically to conservation areas, requiring development
    proposals within conservation areas to, amongst other matters, consider the area’s
    special architectural or historic interest in the design of development.
18. Taking all of the above into account, I find the harm to the CA to be at the lower
    end of less than substantial, but nevertheless of considerable importance and
    weight. Policy HE6(4) of the Framework is clear that, where a development
    proposal would harm the significance of a designated heritage asset, the effect on
    the asset and its significance should be weighed against any public benefits
    resulting from the proposal.
19. The proposal would lead to the creation of additional commercial space, which
    could then actively contribute towards economic investment and employment.
    These are economic benefits which could be considered public. Given the extent
    of the development, the public benefits associated would be modest, but I have
    assigned them moderate positive weight. However, they are not sufficient to
    outweigh the harm to the significance of the CA, to the conservation of which the
    Framework requires that substantial weight be given.
20. As well as failing to satisfy the requirements of the Act and national decision-
    making policies within the Framework, in relation to this main issue, the proposal
    would be contrary to Policies D4 and HC1 of the London Plan (2021) (the LP), and
    Policies 45, 53 and 72 of the Local Plan. These policies seek collectively to deliver
    good design, including in Conservation Areas where Policy 72 of the Local Plan
    specifically requires all proposals to pay special attention to the desirability of
    preserving and enhancing the character or appearance of the area.
Biodiversity
21. The Council has confirmed that the proposal would be exempt from mandatory
    Biodiversity Net Gain. Nevertheless, Policy G6 of the LP and Policy 79 of the Local
    Plan set out an expectation for proposals to maximise opportunities to create new,
    or make improvements to existing natural environments, nature conservation
    areas, habitats or biodiversity features.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010391


22. Although the appeal site is within an urban area, this does not preclude the
    inclusion of biodiversity and green spaces, as evidenced by the proximity to the
    Coronation Gardens and numerous rear gardens serving residential dwellings.
23. The proposed built form would occupy most of the site area leaving little space for
    additional areas of soft landscaping. Nevertheless, both of the main parties have
    referred to other alternative means of securing biodiversity and landscaping gains
    within urban areas, such as green roofs.
24. I am not persuaded that the inclusion of landscaping or biodiversity enhancements
    would materially alter the proposal to a degree that it would be beyond the scope
    of agreement through a suitably worded condition if I were otherwise minded to
    allow the appeal.
25. I therefore find that, subject to such a condition, the proposal could make adequate
    provision for biodiversity through soft landscaping or urban greening. I have
    therefore identified no specific conflict with Policy G6 of the LP or Policy 79 of the
    Local Plan.
Other Matters
26. I note that during the consultation period of the application, concerns were raised
    from the highways department regarding the development of land within public
    use. The Council did not resist the application on this basis, finding that the matter
    could be dealt with through an informative note to the applicant. Based on the
    evidence before me, I see no reason to take a different judgement on this matter.
27. The Council has raised no issues regarding the principle of the development or the
    effect on neighbouring living conditions. Nevertheless, this does not overcome the
    need to assess the proposal against other material considerations. A lack of
    objection in relation to these matters therefore does not alter my overall findings
    above.
28. My attention has been drawn to the planning history affecting the appeal site,
    including a planning permission1 which I understand to have approved the erection
    of a ground floor rear extension. However, I have no further details of this approval
    and therefore cannot be satisfied that it was so directly comparable to the appeal
    proposal that it would lead me to alter my overall conclusions. Equally, reference
    to other approvals for commercial development in the locality does not alter my
    judgement, based on the very limited details provided.
Planning Balance
29. Policy S4 of the Framework outlines that development proposals within
    settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework.
30. The Framework is clear that, in applying Policy S4, the circumstances in which the
    benefits of approving development are likely to be substantially outweighed by
    adverse effects include, but are not restricted to, situations where there is a failure
    to comply with one of the national decision-making policies which state that
    development proposals should be refused in specific circumstances.

1
    Reference 080261 (2008/1010)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010391


31. As above, I have identified that the proposal would have economic benefits
    through the creation of additional commercial space. In the context of Policy
    E2(1)a of the Framework which seeks to support business growth, I have given
    these benefits substantial weight in the overall planning balance.
32. On the other hand, I have identified that the proposal would have a harmful effect
    on the character and appearance of the area. In this respect, the proposal would
    be at odds with Policy DP3(1) of the Framework which requires development
    proposals to respond to their context, so that they integrate with and enhance their
    surroundings, including through the use of materials and architectural features.
    Policy DP3(3) of the Framework is clear that development proposals should be
    refused if, without clear justification, they conflict with paragraph 1 of the policy.
33. I find that, in the application of Policy S4 of the Framework, the benefits of
    approving the development would be substantially outweighed by the adverse
    effects, arising in part from the failure to comply with Policies DP3(1), HE4, HE6
    and HE9 of the Framework.
Conclusion
34. I have concluded that the proposal would conflict with the development plan as a
    whole and there are no other material considerations, including the provisions of
    the Framework, which outweigh this finding. Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.

L Gardner
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
