Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 September 2026
by Richard Snow BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010437
Unit 116, The Burrows, East Goscote, Leicestershire LE7 3XD
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a grant of planning permission subject to conditions.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Don Strang on behalf of Simtec Material Testing against the decision of
     Charnwood Borough Council.
•    The application Ref P/25/1892/2 was approved on 14 March 2026 and planning permission was
     granted subject to conditions.
•    The development permitted is the retention of ventilation system and 3 no. A/C units in side and rear
     elevation of building.
•    The condition in dispute is No3 which states that: Within one moth of the date of this permission, a
     noise assessment study the the standard of BS 4142, including proposals for mitigation and a
     timetable for their implementation, shall be submitted to the Local Planning Authority for approval.
     The noise mitigation measures identified shall be installed in accordance with the approved
     assessment and maintained on a permanent basis thereafter. (sic)
•    The reason given for the condition is: To ensure a satisfactory level of amenity for surrounding
     neighbours in accordance with Charnwood Local Plan Policy DS4.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and the planning permission Ref P/25/1892/2 for the
       retention of ventilation system and 3 no. A/C units in side and rear elevation of
       building at Unit 116, The Burrows, East Goscote, Leicestershire LE7 3XD granted
       on 14 March 2026 by Charnwood Borough Council, is varied by deleting condition
       3 and substituting it with the following condition:
         “3. Unless within three months of the date of this decision the ventilation system
         is enclosed with the external acoustic surround shown on the approved plans,
         and in full accordance with those details, use of the ventilation system shall
         cease.
         Upon installation, the approved acoustic surround shall thereafter be retained.
         In the event of a legal challenge to this decision, or to a decision made pursuant
         to the procedure set out in this condition, the operation of the time limit specified
         in this condition will be suspended until that legal right has been finally
         determined”.
Preliminary Matter
2.     The updated National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published
       on 17 August 2026 and is a material consideration in the determination of the
       appeal. Given that the tests in respect of planning conditions remain materially
       consistent with the 2024 Framework, the cases of the parties have not been
       prejudiced by being unable to comment on the revisions.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010437


Background and Main Issue
3.     Planning permission was granted retrospectively to retain an external ventilation
       system and 3no. air conditioning units attached to the rear and side elevations of
       the appeal premises. The permission included a condition (3) requiring that within
       one month of the decision, a noise assessment be undertaken and submitted to
       the council for approval. The condition requires that the assessment identify
       mitigation measures and a timetable for their implementation, and the subsequent
       installation of such measures in accordance with the approved scheme and
       thereafter, be maintained in perpetuity.
4.     The council has not submitted an appeal statement so I have relied on the content
       of the original delegated report and the decision notice relating to planning
       permission ref P/25/1892/2, which indicate that the condition is necessary to
       ensure a satisfactory level of amenity for surrounding neighbours in accordance
       with Policy DS4 of the Charnwood Local Plan (2021-37) (the CLP). The appellant
       advances that the condition is unreasonable and unnecessary as the acoustic
       surround approved by the planning permission will mitigate the noise generated to
       an acceptable degree and that the condition should be deleted. I noted at my site
       visit that whilst the base of the unit has been enclosed in boxing, the acoustic
       surround shown shrouding the vertical duct on the approved plans had not yet
       been installed.
5.     Taking the above into account, the main issue for the appeal is whether the
       condition is reasonable and necessary in the interests of protecting the living
       conditions of nearby residents.
Reasons
6.     The appeal premises consist of an industrial building used for the testing of
       materials. It is located within an industrial estate comprising similar units to the
       west of the village of East Goscote. The nearest residential properties are located
       approximately 70 - 90m to the east beyond intervening industrial units and a road.
       The appellant confirms that the ventilation unit was installed in June 2023 at the
       request of the Health & Safety Executive.
7.     The evidence suggests that the submission of the retrospective planning
       application in 2025 followed complaints from residents that noise generated by the
       fan at the bottom of the vent was audible at residential properties and was causing
       annoyance to occupiers. The application proposed the shrouding of the ventilation
       unit with an acoustic surround and details of this mitigation were provided on the
       submitted plans. The council’s Environmental Health Officer advised that the
       acoustic surround was likely to reduce noise emissions to some degree and raised
       no objections to the application.
8.     Policy DS4 of the CLP requires, amongst other things, development to protect the
       amenity of people who live or work nearby. The council’s delegated report states
       that it is considered that the steps, which I have taken to mean the installation of
       the proposed acoustic surround, will improve noise levels to an acceptable level.
       Despite this, it states that a condition will be imposed to ‘control this and ensure
       residential amenity is not significantly affected’. The planning permission did not
       however include a condition requiring the acoustic surround to be installed within
       any given timeframe.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010437


9.     I accept that it is reasonable, given the requirements of Policy DS4, to seek to
       protect the living conditions of local residents from a noise generating
       development. I have some sympathy for the council in that their request for a noise
       assessment prior to the determination of the application was declined by the
       appellant. Whilst it was argued that the proposed acoustic surround would
       adequately mitigate the noise generated, the council had no evidence to
       demonstrate that this would indeed be the case. In these circumstances, and given
       that the evidence, including my own observations on site, suggests that the noise
       generated is audible at the nearest residential properties, I understand the
       reasoning for the imposition of condition 3 in seeking to protect the living
       conditions of residents and find therefore, that the condition meets the test of
       necessity.
10. The disputed condition required the submission of a noise assessment within one
    month of the decision on the planning application. Within this month, the appellant
    would have had to procure an appropriate acoustic consultant, the assessment
    would need to have been undertaken, mitigation measures would have had to
    have be identified, and the study then submitted to the council. I find that this time
    period to comply was unreasonably short in these circumstances. Additionally, the
    requirement to identify and then install mitigation measures was not contingent on
    the findings of the required noise assessment, and there was no certainty that the
    assessment would have found need for additional mitigation once the proposed
    acoustic surround had been installed. I therefore also find this requirement
    unreasonable.
11. Of greatest significance, however, is that the condition did not include any
    sanction, such as the cessation of the use of the ventilation system, or its removal
    from the building, should a study not be submitted to the council within that one-
    month period, and/or the required mitigation measures not be implemented. As a
    result, it is unclear how the requirements of this condition could be enforced.
12. Whilst the condition may have been necessary in the interests of protecting the
    living conditions of nearby residents, the one-month period to submit the study has
    passed without it having been submitted. The timescale for compliance, and the
    requirement to provide additional mitigation irrespective of the findings of the
    assessment are unreasonable. Furthermore, given the retrospective nature of the
    planning permission, a sanction for not complying with the condition was essential,
    and without it, the condition is unenforceable. I therefore find that the condition is
    neither reasonable nor enforceable. Accordingly, it does not meet the tests for
    planning conditions set out in Policy DM6 of the National Planning Policy
    Framework. The condition should therefore be deleted.
13. However, I am mindful that the application proposed the provision of an external
    acoustic surround which, at the time of my visit, had not been fully installed. Given
    the reasonable expectation of all parties that the approved surround would assist
    in mitigating the noise generated, and my findings in respect of the need to protect
    the living conditions of nearby residents, I have included a condition securing the
    provision of the approved acoustic surround in the interests of protecting the living
    conditions of those residents.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010437


Conclusion
14. For the reasons above, the appeal is allowed and condition 3 of planning
    permission ref P/25/1892/2 granted on 14 March 2026 is deleted and replaced with
    the condition set out in my formal decision above.



Richard Snow
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
