Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by S McIntyre BSc (Hons), CEng, MICE, MCIHT
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010909
58 Podsmead Rd, Gloucester, Gloucestershire GL1 5PA
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Luke Parsons of Forest Youth Services against the decision of Gloucester
    City Council.
•   The application Ref is 25/00992/COU.
•   The development proposed is change of use from a home for supported living to a residential
    children’s home.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for change of use from a
   home for supported living to a residential children’s home at 58 Podsmead Rd,
   Gloucester, Gloucestershire GL1 5PA in accordance with the terms of the
   application, Ref 25/00992/COU, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2. For brevity and clarity, the description of development in the heading above has
   been amended from that provided in the planning application form.
3. The Council, within its Statement of Case, introduced revised information relating to
   capacity and demand for children’s home accommodation in Gloucestershire, to
   that presented in the officer’s report. In response the appellant has made reference
   to recent residential placement searches. The appeal has been determined on the
   basis of the details available when the planning application was determined. To do
   otherwise would prejudice parties who have not been consulted on the additional
   information.
4. A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
   17 August 2026, and the appellant and Council were invited to consider whether
   the revised Framework had relevance to their case. I have considered submissions
   received from both parties on this matter.
Main Issue
5. The main issue is whether there is a need for the proposed children’s home in this
   location.
Reasons
6. The proposal is for the change of use of the property from a home for supported
   living, for up to five 16 to 18year-olds, to a residential children’s home that would
   accommodate four 8 to18 year-olds.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010909


7. The proposed development would be specialist accommodation. Criteria 1 of Policy
   A5 of the Gloucester City Council Local Plan (2023) (the Local Plan) states that
   specialist housing developments will be permitted where they are supported by
   evidence of the demonstrable need for this form of housing within Gloucester City.
   Criteria 3i of Policy SD11 of the Gloucester, Cheltenham and Tewkesbury Joint
   Core Strategy (2017) (the Core Strategy) further states that provision of specialist
   accommodation, including accommodation for older people, will be supported
   where there is evidence of a need for this type of accommodation, and where the
   housing/bed spaces will contribute to meeting the needs of the local community.
8. While accepting the above policies relating to specialist accommodation are
   relevant, the appellant considers that the lack of specific reference to children’s
   residential care in the policies or supporting text is such that the requirement of
   meeting the needs of the local community in Policy SD11 should not be applied
   mechanically and should acknowledge that children’s placements are
   commissioned across wider geographical areas. However, there is nothing set out
   in the policies to support this assertion. In my view, a fair reading of policies A5 and
   SD11 leads me to conclude that the policies require evidence of need for children’s
   homes arising from the local community.
9. I take the reference to “relevant commissioners” within paragraph 4.1.35 of the
   explanatory text of Policy A5 of the Local Plan as relating to the commissioner
   relevant to that particular service within the local authority. It does not follow that a
   reasonable interpretation of the text would include commissioners working outside
   of the local authority area. I am not persuaded by the appellants arguments that
   this text indicates that outside authority commissioners are relevant to compliance
   with this policy.
10. Notwithstanding that Policy H01-1(c) of the Framework, relating to plan making and
    assessing the need for homes, states that spatial development strategies should be
    based on a number of factors, including an understanding of any accommodation
    needs that cannot be met within neighbouring areas, Policy H01 2(f) states that at
    the most appropriate level, evidence of need for looked after children can be found
    in the relevant local authority’s Children’s Social Care Sufficiency Strategy. This
    does not indicate that sufficiency strategies from outside the authority are relevant
    to establishing need.
11. The information submitted by the appellant with the planning application does not
    demonstrate that the proposed bed spaces would meet the needs of the local
    community. Rather, it demonstrates a wider need and notes in its planning
    statement that it is anticipated that all future placements will be commissioned by
    out-of-area authorities. Further, the evidence presented by the appellant indicates
    an interest from other authorities largely on the basis that the home would be closer
    than some other placements, rather than a specific need in Gloucester City. The
    appellant has indicated that the accommodation could, in the future, operate with a
    smaller number of children, receiving more intensive support to potentially provide
    accommodation identified by Gloucestershire’s Commissioner as an area of need.
    However, this potential flexible future use does not demonstrate it would fully meet
    a local need. Given that local need has not been demonstrated, the proposal would
    be in conflict with policy A5 of the Local Plan and policy SD11 of the Core Strategy.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010909


Other Considerations
12. It is not disputed by the Council that there is a requirement for some children to be
    placed beyond the borders of the local authority area. The Council has indicated
    that it currently has an oversupply of spaces compared with placements in the
    county, and therefore sufficient capacity to accommodate an appropriate level of
    cross-border placements. However, it is not clear how many beds are currently
    occupied by children placed from outside the authority and how many empty beds
    are currently available for children from beyond the authority.
13. Approximately 18 months prior to the decision to which this appeal relates, the
    Council’s stated position, in response to planning application 24/00404/COU for a
    3-4 bed children’s home, was that of the 81 commissioned placements in children’s
    homes, 70% were located outside the county, that national statistical projection
    studies indicate a further 25% increase in Children in Care numbers by 2032 and
    that it was not anticipated that the current need would decrease, rather there would
    be an increasing need. The subsequent change in position in relation to the appeal
    proposal demonstrates that requirements can change significantly in a short period
    of time. It is therefore possible that demand could increase in a relatively short
    period.
14. It is not in dispute that for many children in care, proximity to family and other
    support networks is helpful to their welfare. The appellant has demonstrated
    demand for beds in children’s homes arising from beyond the local community. The
    evidence indicates that South Gloucestershire Council, Cardiff Council and
    Swindon Borough Council have expressed an interest in using the proposed facility
    as it would be closer to family support groups than some current placements. South
    Gloucestershire Council noted that it has a significant need for homes in the area
    with many of its young people placed at considerable distances and that it is
    actively seeking to connect with providers in the surrounding region to address the
    gap. Other authorities including Bristol and Bath & North East Somerset, have
    expressed a more general interest in the proposal. The proposal would therefore
    benefit children who would otherwise need to be cared for further from their family
    or other support networks.
15. I note the Council’s view that where need within the community has not been
    demonstrated, that Policy HO7 of the Framework indicates that this should be
    considered as a substantial negative against the development. This is not explicitly
    stated in the Framework, and the proposal would nevertheless provide a form of
    residential accommodation. It is necessary to consider the harm that would arise
    from the proposal in the absence of need within the community.
16. The Council has identified that accommodating children from outside the local
    authority area has an impact on services including health, education and the police.
    The level of harm has not been quantified. However, the proposed development
    would not result in more people living at the property than do so currently. Also,
    while it is envisaged, certainly initially, that all children accommodated at the
    proposed development would be from outside the authority, the current use has
    typically accommodated 50% of residents who were from outside the authority.
    Therefore, net impacts on these services as a consequence of this proposal are
    likely to be limited.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010909


Other Matters
17. Reference was made by both main parties to the existing lawful use of the appeal
    property. It is not for me, under a Section 78 appeal, to determine the lawfulness of
    the existing use.
18. Concern was raised by an interested party that the proposal would result in
    increased activity including additional vehicle movements, parking, noise and
    general activity. There is nothing before me to indicate that there would be a
    harmful increase in parking, noise or general activity. Provision of secure, covered
    cycle parking would encourage non-car modes of travel, and such provision could
    reasonably be secured as a condition of the permission. I note that the highway
    authority raised no concerns regarding traffic and parking and that Worcestershire
    Regulatory Services raised no concerns regarding noise. There is no substantive
    evidence before me which would lead me to alternative conclusions on these
    matters.
19. I have also had regard to the Public Sector Equality Duty (PSED) contained in
    section 149 of the Equality Act 2010, which requires me to consider the need to
    eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and foster
    good relations between people who share a protected characteristic and people
    who do not share it. Protected characteristics include a person’s age which would
    be applicable to children, along potentially with the protected characteristic of
    disability. I have little substantive evidence before me that the proposal would
    discriminate against persons with these protected characteristics or the other aims
    of the PSED stated above.
20. I have also been referred to Article 8, 1 of the Human Rights Act 1998 which sets
    out amongst other things, the right to respect for a private and family life. While is it
    is accepted that there are benefits in looked after children being located close to
    their family support unit, it is also accepted that at times there is a need for children
    to be located more distant for safeguarding reasons. I have found that the proposal
    would be able to accommodate children who would otherwise be located further
    from their family support and also children who would benefit from being located
    outside their current local authority. The availability of the accommodation would
    not relieve a placing authority of its responsibilities with regard to a child’s welfare,
    but it would provide an option for consideration. I am satisfied that having had
    regard to Article 8 of the Human Rights Act 1998, that it would be proportionate in
    the circumstances to allow the appeal.
Planning Balance
21. Policy S3 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development and for development within settlements, Policy S4 of the Framework
    should be applied. Policy S4 of the Framework states that development proposals
    within settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against the
    national decision- making policies in the Framework.
22. The proposal would benefit children who may otherwise need to be cared for
    further from their family and other support groups and I afford this benefit significant
    weight.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010909


23. Having regard to the small scale of the proposal and the existing use, the harm
    arising from any additional pressure on police, health and education services would
    be limited and I afford it limited weight. The lack of identified harm to other matters
    including highway safety, living conditions for occupants of neighbouring properties
    and character and appearance of the area weighs neutrally in my consideration of
    this appeal.
24. On balance I consider the benefit of the proposal would outweigh the harms
    identified and the conflict with the development plan when read as a whole. It would
    also be compliant with Policy S4 of the Framework as the benefits identified would
    not be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against the
    decision-making policies of the Framework. Therefore, permission should be
    forthcoming.
Conditions
25. I have had regard to the list of suggested conditions provided by the Council and
    have considered these in light of the Framework and the Planning Practice
    Guidance, and I have amended the conditions as necessary.
26. Conditions 1 and 2 relating to the commencement date and plans are required in
    the interests of certainty. I have removed the “tailpiece” from the Council’s
    suggested condition relating to the approved plans to avoid uncertainty of what has
    been permitted or the potential for changes occurring without appropriate
    consultation.
27. Pre-commencement conditions 3 and 4 relating to cycle parking and bin storage
    are necessary to encourage sustainable travel and in the interests of residential
    and visual amenity. The appellant has agreed to the wording of these conditions.
28. Conditions 5 and 6 relating to the number and age of children and the minimum
    level of staff supervision are necessary to ensure an appropriate level of care is
    provided to the intended occupiers within the stated age range.
29. I have not included the condition suggested by the Council regarding referral of
    children as I do not consider it necessary to make the development acceptable,
    noting that it is unlikely to accommodate children from within the city and county in
    the short term but would address a wider demand.
Conclusion
30. The proposed development would conflict with the development plan when read as
    a whole, but material considerations indicate that a decision should be made other
    than in accordance with it. The appeal should therefore be allowed.



S McIntyre
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010909


Schedule of Conditions


    1. The development hereby permitted shall be begun before the expiration of three
       years from the date of this permission.

    2. The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
       following approved documents:
         TQRQM25321202354678 Site Location Plan; Proposed Use First Floor;
         Proposed Use Ground Floor’; ‘Proposed Use Second Floor’; and
         TQRQM25315155453931 58 Podsmead Road Site Plan.
    3. The use hereby permitted shall not commence until secure, accessible and
       sheltered cycle storage has been provided in accordance with details which shall
       first be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority.
       Once installed, the cycle storage shall be retained for the lifetime of the
       development.

    4. The use hereby permitted shall not commence until adequate and appropriately
       located bin storage arrangements have been provided in accordance with details
       which shall first be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
       authority. Once installed, the bin storage shall be retained for the lifetime of the
       development.

    5. The use hereby permitted shall not accommodate any more than four children
       and young people aged 8-18 at any one time.

    6. At least 1 supervising staff member shall be on-site at all times when children
       are on site.
.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
