Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026 by E Street BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010890
1A Darwin Drive, Southall, Ealing UB1 3JY
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Ogbonna-Krotter against the decision of the Council of the London
    Borough of Ealing.
•   The application Ref is 261148FUL.
•   The development proposed is the construction of a single storey side/rear extension following the
    demolition of an existing garden shed.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the construction of a
   single storey side/rear extension following demolition of existing garden shed at 1A
   Darwin Drive, Southall, Ealing UB1 3JY in accordance with the terms of the
   application, Ref 261148FUL, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: B-01 H, A-01 H, A-02 H, A-03 H, A-04 H, A-05
              H, A-06 H.
Appeal Procedure and Preliminary Matters
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal scheme. The description of development on the application
   form for which differs from the decision notice. However, the former sufficiently
   describes the development and has been reflected above.
3. Having reviewed the most recent changes to the National Planning Policy
   Framework, I am satisfied that they do not affect the substance of the main issue in
   the appeal or the outcome thereof. Since they would not therefore be prejudiced, I
   have proceeded without further consultation with the main parties.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the
   area.
Reasons for the Recommendation
5. The appeal site is an end of terrace building which consists of two flats. The subject
   of the appeal is the ground floor flat which has been granted planning permission

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010890


     for works that are the same as the proposals here, save for the length of the rear
     projection. It is extant. The site is located on a corner plot with a large rear and side
     garden with an open aspect on both roads. The wider dwellings are relatively
     unaltered; any instance of extension is modest against the original buildings.
6. The rear would be deeper than generally experienced by the surrounding dwellings
   given their modesty or lack of an extension at all. However, as the previous scheme
   granted 3.5m, there is an additional 1.5m to be assessed in terms of an additional
   effect. In this instance, whilst it would be visibly larger, it would not be seen as
   substantially so given the overall design would be as was previously approved and
   the spaciousness of the wider curtilage. Moreover, whilst it would be visible from
   many vantage points, it would be subordinate against the building and would not
   represent an over dominant addition nor detract from the wider street scene. Its
   effect would be diluted to some extent by the height of the side boundary treatment
   and tree cover to the end of the rear garden.
7. Flat roofed additions are not uncommon to the area; some gardens retain their
   original flat roofed out house style outbuilding. Whilst there is no comparable
   development to the appeal proposals, this is not required given the lack of harm
   found in the first instance.
8. The Ealing Design Guidance (EDG) requires a justification for extensions which are
   to exceed 3.5m. The EDG is only guidance. As has been identified above, whilst
   the proposal would be larger it would not translate to harm to the character and
   appearance of the area. Notwithstanding that the building does not have permitted
   development rights; the appellant has submitted the scheme for planning
   permission, and it falls to be assessed against the development plan.
9. With these matters in mind, the proposal would not result in harm to the character
   and appearance of the area. It would therefore comply with Policies D3 and D4 of
   the London Plan 2021, Policies 7.4 and 7B of the Ealing Development
   Management Development Plan Document 2013, Policy DAA of the Ealing Draft
   Local Plan and the general aims of the EDG which amongst other things, seek to
   ensure that developments are of a high-quality design and standard.
Other Matter
10. The appellant submitted a daylight and sunlight assessment which confirmed a lack
    of an adverse effect. The Council has not debated its findings nor were
    neighbouring living conditions a reason planning permission was refused in the first
    instance. I have no reason to disagree with their conclusions given the modest
    increase in depth of the proposals against an extant scheme.
Conditions
11. The standard time limit condition and reference to the approved plans are
    necessary for enforcement purposes. As the latter show the proposed materials, it
    is not necessary to impose a separate condition. The Council has requested a
    condition that the roof shall not be used as an external amenity space. However,
    this condition would not be necessary as the creation of a balcony or raised
    platform would require a separate planning permission.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010890


Conclusion and Recommendation
12. For the reasons given above, the appeal proposal would comply with the
    development plan. I therefore recommend it be allowed.

E Street
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
13. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed, and planning permission is granted, subject to the
    conditions set out above.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
