Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 13 August 2026
by C Butcher BSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21st September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010649
Ashton Farm, Road Passing Through Ashton, Wedmore, Somerset, BS28 4QE
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the
     Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•    The appeal is made by Mr Daniel Reed (The Gainsborough Group) against the decision of Somerset
     Council.
•    The application Ref is 15/25/00014.
•    The development proposed is Application to determine if prior approval is required for a proposed:
     Change of Use of Agricultural Buildings to 7No. Dwellinghouses (Use Class C3) and associated
     building operations.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2.     An application for an award of costs was made by Mr Daniel Reed (The
       Gainsborough Group) against Somerset Council. This application will be the
       subject of a separate decision.
Main Issues
3.     The main issues are: the effect of the proposed development on the living
       conditions of future occupiers, with particular regard to noise, odour and
       disturbance; and (ii) whether the proposed demolition work would be reasonably
       necessary.
Reasons
Living Conditions
4.     Paragraph Q2(1)(b) of Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the General Permitted
       Development Order (the GPDO), sets out that the developer must apply to the
       Local Planning Authority for a determination as to whether prior approval will be
       required in relation to the noise impacts of development.
5.     In this instance, the proposed development would involve the conversion of two
       barns which currently form part of a nucleus of agricultural buildings around a
       courtyard area. Given the proximity of the barns to other agricultural buildings in
       the wider landholding, there is potential for future occupiers of the proposed
       dwellings to be negatively affected by noise emanating from the use of the
       remaining barns or units.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010649


6.       I note that the appellant has provided a noise review as part of their appeal
         material (Rappor Engineering and Environmental Consultants, May 2026). The
         review sets out that a signed unilateral undertaking (the UU) has been provided
         which requires the building identified on the plans as ‘barn 3’ to either be
         demolished or for its agricultural use to be permanently ceased. I am therefore
         satisfied that any concerns about the proximity of barn 3 to the barns that are
         proposed for conversion can be fully mitigated, either by implementing the UU or
         by imposing a suitably worded condition.
7.       However, as noted, there are several other agricultural buildings within the wider
         landholding that are also in fairly close proximity to the appeal site. The noise
         review notes that these barns are currently used for the storage of bedding
         materials. Furthermore, it states that a telehandler is utilised to move these
         materials two to three times a week. The indicative level of noise emanating from
         the telehandler has then been assessed. Importantly, the review sets out that
         mitigation could be provided to reduce the impact of this intermittent noise source,
         including by providing screening.
8.       I have no reason to disagree with the position that has been set out in relation to
         the current use of the buildings, or the likely noise from the telehandler. However,
         the review is light on detail and does not provide an assessment as to whether the
         current use does require mitigation, or the likely effects of the mitigation
         suggested. There is therefore a significant lack of certainty in terms of how that
         existing use would affect future occupiers.
9.       Moreover, while I note the appellant’s comments that the buildings are no longer
         capable of holding livestock, there appears to be no certainty that they would only
         ever be used for the storage of bedding materials as opposed to other agricultural
         related uses. Indeed, it is instructive that the noise review concludes that the
         potential intensification of the adjacent use could also be mitigated to achieve
         acceptable noise levels for future occupiers. Again, there is no detail in terms of
         the level of noise arising from an intensification of the use of those remaining
         buildings, whether any mitigation is required, or how effective any such mitigation
         would be.
10. The creation of adequate living conditions is of fundamental importance. It
    therefore seems clear to me that a much more comprehensive noise impact
    assessment would be required to provide the necessary certainty that the living
    conditions of future occupiers would be acceptable. I note that the Council’s
    environmental health officer has suggested that this matter could be dealt with via
    condition. I also acknowledge that such an approach may have been utilised as
    part of other appeals where this was considered appropriate1.
11. However, I am not satisfied that this course of action would be appropriate in this
    instance on the basis that the decision maker must have necessary certainty that
    important matters such as these would be acceptable, or could be made
    acceptable through mitigation, prior to an award of prior approval. Based on the
    rather limited information before me, I simply do not have that level of certainty in
    this instance. As a result, the proposal would not be acceptable with regards to
    noise, contrary to the requirements of condition Q.2.(1)(b).


1
    Including appeal ref: APP/M2840/W/25/3367852


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           2
Appeal Decision 6010649


12. The Council’s third reason for refusal sets out that the proposal would also fail
    against paragraph Q2(1)(e) of the GPDO on the basis that the proposed location
    of the dwellings would be undesirable as a result of odour and general agricultural
    activity. In terms of agricultural activity, it seems to me that this matter overlaps
    with the issue of noise and so I do not explore that further here. With regards to
    odour from animals, such issues are hard to quantify, and given the layout of the
    buildings in this instance, I am not convinced that this matter would lead to harm.
    This issue therefore does not impact upon my overall decision.
Necessary Demolition
13. Paragraph Q1(j)(ii) of the GPDO enables partial demolition of a barn to the extent
    reasonably necessary to carry out the required building operations. What might
    constitute ‘reasonably necessary’ demolition is not defined. It is therefore clear that
    an element of planning judgement is required.
14. As part of their appeal submission, the appellant has provided a legal opinion
    (RWK Goodman, November 2025). The legal opinion notes that it is not the case
    that operations need to be absolutely necessary, rather it is a question of whether
    the course chosen is one that a reasonable person would choose. I can see no
    reason to disagree with that position.
15. In this instance, the proposal includes the partial demolition of barn 2. I
    acknowledge the Council’s concerns that the purpose of this demolition work is to
    ensure that the remaining barn space meets the size threshold as set out in
    paragraph Q1 of the GPDO. However, within their appeal statement, the appellant
    has argued that the purpose of the demolition work is to facilitate the formation of
    appropriate walls and elevations and a functional residential layout. In addition, the
    works would also enable the provision of garden space for each plot.
16. From the evidence before me, it is not clear to me why the existing rear elevation
    of barn 2 would not form an appropriate external wall. However, having had careful
    regard to the proposed layout of the development, it seems to me that the
    demolition works would enable the formation of a suitable internal layout, as well
    as the provision of rear garden space. Indeed, I am satisfied that, as a result, the
    proposed demolition works would be a course of action chosen by a reasonable
    person. Consequently, I find that the works are reasonably necessary and that the
    proposal therefore conforms with paragraph Q1(j)(ii) of the GPDO.
17. While not explicitly mentioned within the Council’s reasons for refusal, I note that
    they have raised some concerns that the proposed demolition would effectively
    result in a partial rebuild of the building, rather than a conversion. However, it is
    clear that the whole of barn 1 would be retained, as well as the majority of barn 2.
    Moreover, the appellant’s structural survey2 sets out that no structural intervention
    or reinforcement would be required as part of the works, and that the operations
    can be supported by the existing structure. Based on my observations during my
    site visit, I do not disagree with that conclusion. I can also see no reason to
    consider that the proposed demolition work would affect the structural integrity of
    barn 2. I am therefore satisfied that the proposal would be a conversion rather than
    a partial rebuild.



2
    Splinter Structures Ltd, October 2025


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
Appeal Decision 6010649


Conclusion
18. I have found that the proposal would not be acceptable with regards to noise, and
    that consequently the proposal would not meet condition Q.2.(1)(b). Prior approval
    should not therefore be given. For these reasons, and having regard to all other
    matters raised, the appeal is dismissed.



C Butcher
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
