 Appeal Decisions
 Site visit made on 3 August 2026
 by Les Greenwood MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 25 August 2026


 Appeal A: Ref 6010814
 Footpath outside 171-173 High Street, Beckenham BR3 1AH
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne for BT Group PLC against the decision of the Council of the
      London Borough of Bromley.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00382/FPA.
 •    The development proposed is the installation of 1No BT Street Hub unit and associated
      advertisement panels on either side of the unit.

 Appeal B: Ref 6010816
 Footpath outside 171-173 High Street, Beckenham BR3 1AH
 •    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
      Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
      consent.
 •    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne for BT Group PLC against the decision of the Council of the
      London Borough of Bromley.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00456/ADV.
 •    The advertisement proposed is 2 digital 75 inch LCD display screens, one on each side of the Street
      Hub unit.

Decisions
Appeal A: Ref 6010814
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the installation of
   1No BT Street Hub unit and associated advertisement panels on either side of the
   unit at the footpath outside 171-173 High Street, Beckenham BR3 1AH in
   accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 26/00382/FPA, subject to the
   conditions set out in the attached Schedule.
Appeal B: Ref 6010816
2. The appeal is allowed and express consent is granted for the display of the 2 digital
   75 inch LCD display screens, one on each side of the Street Hub unit at the footpath
   outside 171-173 High Street, Beckenham BR3 1AH in accordance with the terms of the
   application, Ref 26/00456/ADV. The consent is for 5 years from the date of this
   decision and is subject to the 5 standard conditions set out in Schedule 2 of the
   2007 Regulations and the additional conditions set out in the attached Schedule.
Preliminary matters
3. Although not specified in the description of the proposed development or shown on
   the submitted plans, the proposals are put forward as a replacement for a nearby

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
    Appeal Decisions 6010814 and 6010816


       phone kiosk, in front of 179 High Street. That kiosk is outside of the application site
       but its removal could potentially be required by a Grampian style (negatively
       worded) planning condition, so I take it into account in considering these appeals.
4. A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
   published on 17 August 2026. Having regard to the changes in the Framework and
   the comparatively minor scale and nature of these appeal proposals, I consider that
   further consultation on this matter is not necessary.
Main Issue
5. For planning applications and appeals (Appeal A), decisions must be made in
   accordance with the development plan unless material considerations indicate
   otherwise1. Advertisement proposals (Appeal B) are, in contrast, subject to control
   in the interests of amenity and public safety only, taking into account material
   provisions of the development plan and any other relevant factors2. For both
   appeals, special attention must be paid to the desirability of preserving or
   enhancing the character or appearance of conservation areas. For Appeal A only,
   special attention must also be paid to the desirability of preserving the settings of
   listed buildings3.
6. With these various requirements in mind, the main issue for both appeals is
   whether the proposals would preserve or enhance the character or appearance of
   the Beckenham Town Centre Conservation Area, including in respect of visual
   amenity.
Reasons
Character, appearance and amenity
7. The appeal site is part of the pedestrian pavement on a bustling section of
   Beckenham’s central shopping area, within the conservation area. This part of the
   High Street appears to include a range of buildings mainly dating from the late 19th
   and early 20th centuries, with a mix of modern and more traditional shop fronts.
   There are listed buildings nearby at St Edmonds Church, around the corner on
   Village Way, and 157 High Street. Some of the street furniture in the area around
   the appeal site looks to have been updated in recent years, including seating and
   tree planting.
8. The proposals are for the installation of a new street hub unit, approximately 3m
   high by 1.2m wide by 0.35m deep, to provide communications services and carry
   2 illuminated digital advertising screens. This would be sited near to the kerb, next
   to a bench and within a line of other street furniture. Due to its positioning,
   perpendicular to the street, and its inclusion of illuminated digital signs it would be a
   prominent feature in the local street scene. It would, however, sit within a busy town
   centre with other illuminated signs and street lighting, in a relatively uncluttered
   situation where it would fit in reasonably well with other street furniture.
9. The existing kiosk to be removed is, on the other hand, a notably poor quality
   structure with a dated appearance, set within the same run of pavement and
   carrying an advertisement. Its replacement with a slimmer, more modern structure

1
     Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004
2
     Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007, Regulation 3
3
     Sections 66 and 72 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              2
 Appeal Decisions 6010814 and 6010816


     with cleaner lines would be a design upgrade and a reduction in visual clutter. The
     overall proposals would therefore be in keeping with the commercial street scene in
     this part of the conservation area and with the Council’s evident aim to improve
     street furniture in the area. The proposals would not affect the settings of the listed
     buildings, which are set well away from the appeal site.
10. I conclude that, subject to the removal of the existing kiosk, the proposals would
    enhance the character, appearance and amenity of the conservation area and this
    part of the High Street. They accord with policies D8 and HC1 of the London Plan
    2021 and Policies 37, 41 and 102 of the Bromley Local Plan 2019,which expect
    developments in and advertisements to contribute positively to the street scene and
    conserve the significance of heritage assets, with street furniture complementing
    the use and function of public spaces. The proposals also generally accord with
    Framework policy S4’s support in principle for development within settlements.
Other matters
11. Local occupiers are concerned that the Street Hub unit would become an obstacle
    to pedestrians. I find however that the unit would be well positioned to avoid
    causing an obstruction. Removal of the existing kiosk, in contrast, should improve
    the flow of pedestrians at the busy intersection with a footway leading to a town
    centre supermarket.
12. The appellant cites a large number of other decisions nationally where planning
    permissions and advertisement consents have been granted for similar units.
    Those decisions are all based on the specific circumstances of each case. I have
    assessed these proposals on their own merits, in light of local circumstances.
Conditions
13. For Appeal A, I impose a condition specifying the relevant plans to provide
    certainty. Conditions requiring the use of external materials as proposed and the
    removal of the existing kiosk are necessary to preserve the character and
    appearance of the conservation area. Removal of the existing kiosk can be
    required by a Grampian-style condition because there appears to be a reasonable
    prospect that the appellant can secure this removal. The trigger point for the
    removal is set at an early stage of the installation process, as suggested by the
    Council, to ensure that the 2 structures do not ever co-exist. The approval and
    operation of an amended Anti-Social Behaviour Management Plan is also needed,
    in the interest of public safety and security.
14. For Appeal B, a condition requiring removal of the existing kiosk is also necessary
    to preserve the character and appearance of the conservation area. A set of
    conditions controlling the illumination and images are needed, to preserve the
    conservation area and to minimise any impacts on highway safety due to potential
    distractions to drivers on this busy stretch of road.
Conclusion
15. For the reasons set out above, and having regard to all other matters raised, I
    conclude that the appeals should succeed.
Les Greenwood
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
 Appeal Decisions 6010814 and 6010816


SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS
Appeal A - Ref 6010814
1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the date
    of this decision.
2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
    following approved plans: CYN-133-002, CYN-133-004 and STH-001.
3) The street hub unit hereby permitted shall not be installed other than in accordance
    with the details of materials set out in the submitted Street Hub Product Statement
    v2.1 (February 2025).
4) Above ground works for the installation of the street hub unit hereby permitted shall
    not begin until the existing BT kiosk outside 179 High Street Beckenham has been
    completely removed and the public pavement made good to match the surrounding
    pavement.
5) Above ground works for the installation of the street hub unit hereby permitted shall
    not begin until an updated Anti-Social Behaviour Management Plan including an
    integrated CCTV camera has been submitted to and approved in writing by the
    Local Planning Authority. The unit shall thereafter be installed and operated in full
    accordance with the approved Anti-Social Behaviour Management Plan.
Appeal B – Ref 6010816
1) The advertisements hereby approved shall not be displayed until the existing BT
    kiosk outside 179 High Street Beckenham has been completely removed and the
    public pavement made good to match the surrounding pavement.
2) The intensity of the illumination of the 2 digital display screens shall not exceed 600
    candelas per square metre (cd/m2) between dusk and dawn in line with the
    maximum permitted recommended luminance as set out by The Institute of Lighting
    Professionals’ Professional Lighting Guide 05: The Brightness of Illuminated
    Advertisements.
3) The digital display screens shall not display any moving or apparently moving
    images (including animation, flashing, scrolling 3 dimensional, intermittent or video
    elements).
4) The minimum display time for each piece of content on the digital display screens
    shall be 10 seconds. The changeover between pieces of content on the digital
    display screens shall take place over a period no greater than one second. The
    complete screens shall change with no visual effects (including swiping or other
    animated transition methods) between displays.
5) The digital displays shall include a mechanism to freeze the image in the event of a
    malfunction and that mechanism shall be maintained operational.
6) No content on the digital display screens shall resemble traffic signs, as defined in
    section 64 of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        4
