    Appeal Decision
    Site visit made on 27 August 2026
    by Les Greenwood MRTPI
    an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
    Decision date: 18 September 2026


    Appeal Ref: 6010552
    5 St Marys Road, Liverpool L19 2NJ
    •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
         against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    •    The appeal is made by Tahir Khan for Task Butler Ltd against the decision of Liverpool City Council.
    •    The application Ref is 25F/1821.
    •    The development proposed is an extension and a change of use of the upper floors from
         2 apartments to a 7 bed house in multiple occupation (HMO).

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary matters
2. Although the proposal is described as being the change of use of the upper floors
   from 2 apartments to an HMO, the appellant’s statement confirms that the upper
   floors have been vacant for over 20 years. It appears that an earlier planning
   permission to convert this part of the building to 2 flats has not been implemented.
3. The proposal was originally submitted as being for an 8 bedroom HMO, but was
   reduced to 7 bedrooms during the course of the planning application. I consider the
   proposal on that basis.
4. Further amended drawings were submitted with the appeal1. These would add
   2 first floor bedroom windows to the side elevation, correcting a discrepancy in the
   previous plans, and also propose the demolition of part of an existing flat roofed
   rear extension to create an external yard. These changes respond to reasons for
   refusal stated in the Council’s decision notice. The correction to the elevation
   drawing to show the windows is a minor matter which should be uncontentious. The
   windows were already shown on the previous floor plans and would not overlook
   neighbours.
5. The creation of the external yard is a more substantive change, however, raising
   planning issues that were not considered as part of the application - including in
   relation to the quantity and quality of the space, its potential shared use by the
   shop, its security and whether there would be safe access to the yard for HMO
   occupants. The Council and others have not had a chance to comment on this
   change. I therefore find that consideration of the amended plans as part of the

1       The Council decided the application on the basis of proposed floor plans drawing D04 Rev D and
        proposed elevations drawing D05 Rev B. Amended drawings D04 Rev E and D05 Rev C were
        submitted with the appeal.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6010552


     appeal would be procedurally unfair. I therefore assess the appeal on the basis of
     the plans considered by the Council.
6. A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
   published on 17 August 2026. The main parties have had a chance to comment on
   the implications of the new Framework for this appeal.
Main Issue
7. The main issue is whether acceptable living conditions would be provided for future
   occupiers of the proposed HMO.
Reasons
8. 5 St Marys Road is an end of terrace 2 storey building in the commercial centre of
   Garston, with a shop on the ground floor, a vacant first floor and some limited (also
   vacant) space under the roof. The proposal is to add a first floor rear extension,
   inserting various dormers, rooflights, windows and doors and converting the upper
   floors to provide 7 bedrooms, 2 shower rooms, a kitchen/dining room and a living
   room. Entrances plus storage areas for bikes and bins would be provided on the
   ground floor. The shop would be retained on the rest of the ground floor.
9. The Council’s main concern is that the scheme would fail to provide adequate
   internal and external living space. Liverpool Local Plan 2013-2033 (LLP) policy SP2
   promotes the residential use of upper floors in town centres. LLP policy H10
   confirms that HMOs are an important source of affordable accommodation for
   younger people and single person households with supported living needs. The
   principle of HMO use of this vacant space is therefore supported. Policy H10 does
   also, however, require the satisfactory configuration of internal space, taking into
   account minimum room sizes, and also requires safe and secure external space
   with access to yards and/or gardens.
10. Framework policy HO9(c) similarly promotes specialist accommodation such as
    HMOs, but makes it clear that these should provide adequate living and storage
    space and sufficient shared cooking, laundry and amenity areas. Framework policy
    L2 supports the effective use of land where, amongst other things accommodation
    would provide acceptable living standards for residents in terms of access to
    daylight, sunlight, privacy and external amenity space.
11. LLP policy H10 and the Council’s Supplementary Planning Guidance Note 7
    Conversion of buildings into flats and bedsits (SPG7) set out room size
    requirements. The submitted section drawing appears to show that the first floor
    ceiling and second floor levels would be lowered to secure (just) enough headroom
    for the proposed bedrooms and communal living spaces on the second floor,
    assuming that the section accurately depicts the thickness of roof required for
    insulation. The resulting configuration, although it appears to be in line with
    minimum standards, would be cramped and awkward for occupation by 7 people,
    even assuming no double occupancy of the bedrooms and that all bedrooms would
    have windows. The standard of internal accommodation would therefore be
    relatively poor.
12. This lack of quality internal space would be exacerbated by the lack of any external
    space, as required by policy H10. The appellant has not drawn my attention to any
    nearby park or other good quality and accessible public open space which would


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
 Appeal Decision 6010552


     mitigate this deficiency. I recognise that this point was not raised by the Council
     until the end of the application process, but it is a matter raised in both the LLP and
     the Framework.
13. I conclude that, taking all these points together, the proposal would fail to provide
    acceptable living conditions for future occupiers of the proposed HMO. It thus
    conflicts with LLP policy H10 and the Framework, which aim to secure a good
    standard of amenity for future occupants.
14. As noted above, there is an extant planning permission to convert the upper floors
    of the building into 2 flats, with no external space. This is in line with the general
    support for the residential use of upper floors in Town Centres. The proposed
    7 bedroom HMO would be a significantly more intense use of this space, however,
    so I do not find this fall-back position to be a significant factor in favour of the
    appeal proposal.
15. I find that the proposal conflicts with the development plan, taken as a whole, and
    with the Framework. For the reasons set out above, and having regard to all other
    matters raised, I conclude that the appeal should not succeed.
Les Greenwood
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      3
