Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 9 July 2026
by R Standfield BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010305
Ground Floor Flat, 10 West Street, Weston-Super-Mare, North Somerset BS23 1JT
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr S Alexander against the decision of North Somerset Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/P/2572/FUL.
•    The development proposed is change of use of ground floor retail unit to be combined with upper
     floor dwelling to form one single dwellinghouse.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The National Planning Policy Framework (the NPPF) was updated on 17 August
       2026. Both of the main parties to this appeal have had the opportunity to comment
       in light of the revised document and such comments as were submitted have been
       taken into account accordingly. The NPPF has status as a material consideration
       of critical importance and makes clear that plan-making policies should not be
       used when making decisions on development proposals.
3.     The appellant has referenced draft policies and mapping contained within the
       emerging Local Plan (Reg 19 document). Policy DM4 of the NPPF advises that, in
       addition to other criteria, relevant policies in emerging development plans may be
       given weight according to the stage of preparation of the emerging plan, where the
       more advanced the preparation, the greater weight to be given. A Regulation 19
       Plan has been produced by the Council for the purposes of public consultation and
       may be subject to a number of changes through the consultation and subsequent
       examination processes. I have not been provided with the draft policies and do not
       know what the final policies will be, therefore the weight to be afforded is limited.
4.     The Council has acknowledged that the matter of living conditions, specifically
       relating to noise and disturbance, could be dealt with by way of planning
       conditions. Given that there is an existing dwelling within the appeal site, I have no
       reason to disagree with this approach and have therefore set out the main issues
       accordingly.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010305


Main Issues
5.     The main issues are:
     •     whether the proposed development would be appropriately located, having
           particular regard to the viability and vitality of the town centre; and
     •     the effect of the proposed development upon the character and appearance of
           the property with particular regard to whether the development would preserve
           or enhance the character or appearance of the Great Weston Conservation
           Area (GWCA).
Reasons
Location
6.     West Street currently demonstrates a strong commercial presence. At the time of
       my site visit on a weekday lunchtime, only the appeal site was vacant and there
       was a good level of footfall. The appeal site comprises a ground floor retail unit,
       most recently occupied by a tattoo studio. It sits within a terrace of similar
       properties hosting small scale commercial services including hairdressers /
       barbers and catering / food uses to the ground floor premises. The upper floors are
       residential and the street is characterised by its mixed use and commercial nature
       consistent with the position adjacent and complimentary to the Primary Shopping
       Area (PSA) of the town centre. It does not therefore comprise a residential style
       street.
7.     Policy DM60 of the Development Management Policies, Sites and Policies Plan
       Part 1 (2016) (the Sites and Policies Plan) acknowledges town centres can provide
       a community focus. There is no reason this could not include residential uses.
       However, proposals must still comply with the requirements of the policy. Given
       the location of West Street immediately adjacent to the PSA, and its high levels of
       occupancy and footfall, it clearly makes a positive contribution to the role and
       function and so vitality and viability of the centre.
8.     The appellant informs me that the tattoo studio had recently closed at the time of
       the planning application submission (December 2025). Whilst no marketing of the
       premises has been provided, I have also not been provided with any policy
       requirement in this respect. There is no evidence before me to suggest that West
       Street suffers from a detrimentally low footfall, nor that potential occupiers would
       prefer the designated PSA. The failure of the two previous businesses occupying
       the premises is stated as a lack of trade, however this could result from a number
       of factors. The Council’s delegated report notes retrospective permission for the
       tattoo studio was granted circa 2016 which suggests an approximate 10-year
       tenancy.
9.     My attention has also been drawn to the Council’s Town Centre Topic Paper
       (2025) and its vacancy rates for both the PSA and the town centre as a whole. The
       appellant advises me that this document concludes above average vacancy rates
       with a specific oversupply of Class E commercial units which has resulted in
       emerging Local Plan policies to redesignate frontages and remove the marketing
       requirement for change of use proposals outside of the PSA. These draft policies
       remain to be tested through the Local Plan process. I am not convinced that the
       broad Topic Paper conclusions as presented are sufficiently precise in relation to


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010305


       individual circumstances as to be determinative in this instance, or that the appeal
       site is not a viable proposition as commercial premises under Use Classes A or E.
10. Supporting comments from the Town Council and an interested party note the high
    level of vacant units within the town centre and the need to provide additional
    accommodation. Whilst the enlarged dwelling would contribute to a diversity of
    dwelling sizes, the potential for additional occupants resulting from the new double
    bedroom would enable only minor additional footfall within the town centre. Further
    to this, given that there would be no net gain in dwellings, the principal impact
    would be the loss of the retail premises in a location wholly appropriate for such
    continued use, contrary to the policy requirements to increase employment
    opportunities, enhance the quality of town centre uses, increase activity and
    footfall and not adversely impact the role and function of the town centre.
11. For the above reasons, the proposed development fails to adequately demonstrate
    there would be a lack of harm to the commercial interests of West Street. It
    therefore fails to meet the requirements of Policy DM60 of the Sites and Policies
    Plan which requires the vibrancy and vitality of the town centre to be maintained
    and enhanced.
12. The Sites and Policies Plan Policy DM63 applies solely to sites positioned within
    the PSA. Whilst the policy was referenced in the Council’s decision notice, it is not
    of direct relevance to this site.
Character and Appearance
13. The appeal site is located within the GWCA where Section 72(1) of the Planning
    (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 requires special attention to
    be paid to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance
    of a conservation area. The Council’s adopted Shopfront Design Guide
    Supplementary Planning Document (2019) (SPD) contains advice on the
    conversion of Use Class A properties to residential. While the proposal before me
    involves a sui generis use, the principles which the SPD contains are relevant to
    the appeal. Both main parties have made reference to it and I have therefore
    considered it accordingly.
14. The GWCAs character and appearance, and thus special interest and significance,
    are mainly derived from its historic interest in evidencing the development of
    Weston-Super-Mare, reflecting the different periods of development and land use
    in the settlement and its architectural interest from the patterns of layout, alignment
    of buildings and consistency of materials used.
15. The Conservation Area Appraisal and Management Plan (CAAMP) places the site
    within the Town Centre Character Area – High Street. This part of the GWCA is
    defined by its key role as a historic commercial thoroughfare (dating from circa
    1840), supported by adjacent secondary streets, and maintains this role,
    representing the most well used part of the town centre. Built form is characterised
    by three‑storey Victorian and Edwardian architecture, supplemented by 20th
    century commercial development, with continuous ground floor retail use and
    upper floor accommodation. West Street is consistent with this in both character
    and appearance.
16. The appeal site is one of three early Victorian terraced properties with a parapet
    roof, strong horizontal detailing and subtle but nonetheless present vertical

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010305


       detailing. It currently features a modern shopfront with minimal design details and
       extensive roller shuttering. This is in common with many of the other shopfronts
       along West Street. The consistency of the appeal site in terms of reflecting the
       character, layout, and architectural rhythm forms a positive contribution to the
       significance of the GWCA.
17. The appeal proposes the removal of the shopfront and its replacement with a
    rendered elevation with a brick plinth featuring a domestic scale window and front
    door. The positioning of the door and window would not be related to the vertical
    detailing of the building. The proportions of the window would not be well related to
    the proportions of either of the upper windows. The door would be of a wholly
    modern appearance. While the brick plinth would provide horizontal detailing, the
    use of a different material would not be characteristic of the area. While further
    horizontal detailing is shown at what is the fascia level of the adjoining unit, it is not
    clear how this articulation would be provided. Consequently, the proposal would
    appear disjointed and poorly related to the upper floor of the building. This would
    not be addressed by the use of render to match the existing appearance.
    Alongside the proposed loss of the retail unit, the proposal would have a harmful
    effect upon the character and appearance of both the property and the terrace.
18. Whilst the supporting information requirements should remain at a minimum, this
    needs to be assessed on a case-by-case matter. In this instance, the significance
    of the GWCA relates largely to the strong retail / commercial presence within the
    ground floor units of West Street, directly linked to High Street. The mixed-use
    nature of the street is clearly defined between ground and upper floors rather than
    between address points. The loss of the retail unit, in principle, therefore,
    undermines the significance of the GWCA in this location.
19. NPPF Policy HE5(2) requires me to assess the potential effects of development
    proposals on the significance of heritage assets. For the reasons given above, I
    find the proposal would harm the significance of the GWCA as a whole, albeit that
    this would be at the low end of the scale.
20. Nevertheless, Policy HE6 of the NPPF states that substantial weight should be
    given to the conservation of a designated heritage asset and that any harm to, or
    loss of, the significance of such an asset requires clear and convincing justification
    along with an assessment of the harm weighed against any public benefits
    resulting from the proposal.
21. There would be economic benefits during both the construction and occupation
    stages of the development. The removal of the extensive roller shuttering
    represents a benefit to the wider public in relation to economic and social
    objectives. The proposed development would enable a safer primary access to the
    property from the front elevation on West Street, rather than via a right of way off
    Wadham Street. It would also provide for a 4 bedroomed dwelling, thereby
    contributing to an increased mix of housing provision in the area and a minor
    potential increase in footfall to the town centre. Improved thermal performance of
    the enlarged dwelling is stated by the appellant however no details of how this
    would be achieved have been provided. Given the small scale of the proposed
    development, these benefits would be limited.
22. The condition of the shopfront is not determinative since this could be replaced or
    refreshed in conjunction with the occupation of the retail unit. The neighbouring


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010305


       Wadham Street is further removed from the commercial spine of High Street with
       no direct connection and therefore the increased proportion of solely residential
       uses is not determinative in this case.
23. It has been suggested that amendments to the front elevation could be secured by
    condition. Given the importance of appearance within the designated GWCA, the
    matter is not suitable to be addressed wholly via planning condition.
24. Overall therefore, I am not persuaded that the public benefits would be of sufficient
    magnitude to outweigh the harm to the significance of the heritage asset, and the
    considerable importance this carries. Therefore, the harm that would be caused to
    the significance of the GWCA lacks clear and convincing justification. The public
    benefits, taken as a whole, would not outweigh the substantial weight that the
    conservation of designated heritage assets carries.
25. The proposed development would be contrary to Policies CS5 and CS12 of the
    North Somerset Core Strategy (2017) (Core Strategy) and Policies DM3 and
    DM32 of the Sites and Policies Plan. Taken together, these policies require that
    new development protects, and where possible enhances, the historic
    environment, with reference to settings, design quality and distinctiveness.
26. It would also fail to meet the requirements of section 72 (1) of the Planning (Listed
    Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 and Chapter 20 of the NPPF, which
    collectively require development to conserve heritage assets in a manner
    appropriate to their significance.
Other Matters
27. The appellant has made reference to the potential for development to be carried
    out under permitted development rights as a possible fallback position. The courts
    have held that where there is a “real prospect” of a fallback development being
    implemented, this comprises a material consideration1. The appellant has
    referenced Class MA of the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted
    Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended), Schedule 2, Part 1 and stated
    that under this Class, the retail space could be converted to residential with no
    change to the frontage (therefore no enhancement of the Conservation Area), and
    no thermal or acoustic upgrading.
28. Such changes of use require the Prior Approval of the Council. Whilst the
    appellant suggests that compliance with the Prior Approval criteria could be
    achieved, including a favourable assessment of the change of use on the
    character of the GWCA, this has not been secured and there is therefore no more
    than a theoretical possibility that development might take place. In addition, there
    is no means of assessing whether such development would be equally or more
    harmful than the proposed development. Accordingly, the potential fallback
    position is afforded limited weight as a material consideration.
29. Whilst the risk of flooding could be a deterrent to potential commercial occupiers,
    this constraint applies across a significant area of the town centre and the
    conversion of the property from a less vulnerable use to a more vulnerable use2
    does not justify the proposal. Flood mitigation measures as recommended in the

1
  Mansell v Tonbridge and Malling BC & others [2017] EWCA Civ 1314; Schneck v Secretary of State for Levelling Up, Housing and
Communities [2022] EWHC 3335
2
  Table 2, Annex F, National Planning Policy Framework 2026


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               5
Appeal Decision 6010305


       submitted Flood Risk Assessment could be employed to support an ongoing retail
       / commercial use at this location and this matter is therefore neutral in my
       assessment.
30. There is reference to the absence of constructive engagement between the
    Council and the agent before the planning application was decided. However, this
    is not an issue that I can address as part of this planning appeal.
Planning Balance
31. The proposed development could provide acceptable living conditions subject to
    planning conditions securing a noise assessment and the employment of any
    agreed mitigating measures however, it fails to show that the proposal would
    comply with policies seeking to ensure the vibrancy and vitality of the town centre
    and the development would fail to preserve or enhance the character or
    appearance of the GWCA. The proposal therefore conflicts with the development
    plan, taken as a whole.
32. Policy S4 of the NPPF sets out that development proposals within settlements
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in the NPPF.
33. Policy TC2 of the NPPF states that substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits of supporting the overall vitality and viability of town centres, including
    where this can be achieved through the diversification of uses, intensification and
    provision of residential accommodation. Whilst there would be no net gain of
    dwellings in this case, the quality of the existing dwelling would be improved by a
    safer access, larger accommodation with potential for minor additional footfall, and
    acoustic mitigation measures as required in line with NPPF Policy P3. As such, the
    benefits to the vitality and viability of the town centre would be limited. The removal
    of the roller shutter would be of benefit. Policy L2 of the NPPF also requires
    substantial weight to be given to making better use of vacant and underutilised
    buildings although the premises have only been vacant for a short period of time
    and there is no evidence to demonstrate the property would not be attractive to the
    commercial market.
34. The proposed development would conflict with other policies of the NPPF, in that
    the replacement elevation would not be of suitably high quality in line with Policy
    DP3.1 which requires proposals to respond to their context so that they integrate
    with and enhance their surroundings. Policy DP3.3 requires substantial weight to
    be given to compliance with relevant development plan policies in relation to
    design quality and proposals should be refused where they lack clear justification
    for non-compliance in this respect. The conflict with the SPD in this respect carries
    weight. Further to this, Policy HE4 requires heritage assets to be conserved
    according to their significance, with substantial weight to be given to the
    conservation of the asset, Policy HE5 clarifies that it is the effect upon the heritage
    asset’s significance rather than the scale of the development which should be
    considered and HE9 specifically requires consideration of an area’s special historic
    interest in the design of the development within conservation areas. The absence
    of reference to the historical significance of the building and its role in the town
    centre falls contrary to these policies.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6010305


35. Taken together, I find the benefits of the proposal would be substantially
    outweighed by its adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies of the NPPF. As such, Policy S4 of the NPPF does not point to
    permission being granted in this instance and accordingly, the proposal would not
    benefit from the presumption in favour of sustainable development set out in Policy
    S3.
Conclusion
36. As such, the proposed development conflicts with the development plan and the
    material considerations, including the NPPF, do not indicate that the appeal should
    be decided other than in accordance with it. As such, the appeal is dismissed.

R Standfield
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
