Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 20 August 2026
by S Leonard BA (Hons) BTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 11 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010619
86 Alexandra Road, Poole BH14 9EW
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr M. Saxon against the decision of Bournemouth Christchurch and Poole
     Council.
•    The application Ref is P/25/03787/FUL.
•    The development proposed is sever land and erect 1 No. 3 bedroom house with parking
.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     Following the submission of this appeal, a revised version of the National Planning
       Policy Framework (the Framework), was published on 17 August 2026. This
       replaces the 2024 Framework. Like the 2024 version, in respect of the substance
       of the matters before me, the revised version seeks to achieve well-designed
       places, protect occupier and neighbour living conditions, and conserve and
       enhance the historic and natural environments. Moreover, before reaching my
       decision, I gave the main parties the opportunity to comment on the 2026
       Framework, which I have taken into account in this decision.
3.     Since the refusal of planning permission, the appellant has submitted a completed
       unilateral undertaking (UU) Section 106 planning obligation to address the
       Council’s 5th and 6th reasons for refusal. This is a matter to which I later return.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are:
       •    The effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area;
       •    The effect of the proposal on the setting and significance of the locally listed
            Alexandra Park;
       •    The effect of the proposal on the living conditions of the future occupiers of the
            appeal scheme, having particular regard to outlook, privacy and
            daylight/sunlight effects;
       •    The effect of the proposal on the living conditions of the occupiers of No.86
            Alexandra Road, having particular regard to outlook and privacy effects; and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010619


       •    Whether the proposal provides adequate mitigation for the Dorset Heathlands
            Special Protection Area (SPA) and Ramsar site and Dorset Heath Special
            Area of Conservation (SAC) and the Poole Harbour SPA and Site of Special
            Scientific Interest (SSSI) and Ramsar Site.
Reasons
Character and appearance
5.     The appeal site is located within an established residential area. It lies on the
       south side of Alexandra Road. The street is mainly made up of traditionally
       designed, detached, two-storey dwellings with facing brick and/or rendered walls
       under part hipped, part pitched tiled roofs.
6.     Most of the houses date back to the early 20th century and incorporate attractive
       architectural features characteristic of this era. These include gabled front facing
       projections, double-storey bays, window and door headers and window cills,
       vertical sash windows, decorative brick bands and quoins, timber barge boards
       and tile edging, finials and brick chimneys to roofs. A number of properties include
       references to the Arts and Crafts style. More recently built houses also tend to be
       two-storey and traditionally designed including features which reference the
       architecture of the older housing.
7.     Houses are mainly street-facing. On the north side of the road they are regularly
       spaced, set within plots of a similar width, and have a regular front building line
       which is set behind short front gardens with low front boundary walls. Their rear
       gardens back onto the rear gardens of similarly laid out dwellings on the road
       behind. This pattern and layout of development also prevail along the western end
       of the southern side of Alexandra Road.
8.     In contrast, the appeal site sits within a stretch of the south side of the road
       between Loch Road and Madeira Road, where houses back onto the locally listed
       Alexandra Park. Two of the park’s main pedestrian entrances lie within this part of
       the road, including one which is sited between Nos. 86A and 88, close to the
       appeal site.
9.     There is a semi-circular enclave of detached dwellings situated between the two
       Alexandra Road park access points which include the appeal site. To the east side
       of the eastern-most entrance there is a 3-storey block of flats at Edward Court and
       then a 2-storey care home at Alexandra House. West of the western-most
       entrance is a row of street-facing detached period houses, with more recent 3-
       storey flats behind them which are accessed from Langdon Road and also back
       onto the park.
10. Accordingly, there is a greater variety of plot sizes and building types and a more
    informal layout of dwellings within this part of the street, including two dwellings
    that are set back behind the front line of houses in a back land position. As such,
    there is a more organic arrangement of built development, and mature trees
    comprise a significant part of the prevailing townscape. Street-facing dwellings in
    this part of the road have frontages which tend to be more enclosed by mature
    hedging and trees than on the opposite side of the road. The end of rear gardens
    include mature trees and soft landscaping which defines their setting next to the
    edge of the park, whose boundaries are characterised by the presence of mature
    trees which form a key part of the parkland.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010619


11. The appeal site is occupied by a large two-storey pitched roof Arts and Crafts style
    dwelling which fronts onto Alexandra Road with its rear garden backing onto the
    park. The garden was originally larger with its entire eastern side boundary
    abutting the edge of the park. However. permission was recently granted1 to sever
    part of the garden and build a new detached two storey dwelling to the side of the
    host property.
12. I saw during my site visit that this dwelling, known as No.86A, has now been
    completed. It faces the street, forming an extension to the existing row of road-
    facing houses to the west. It has a traditional two storey pitched roof design, and
    its height, roof form, brick and rendered walls, bay windows and other elements of
    architectural detailing are in keeping with the aforesaid prevailing townscape.
13. Whilst the new house is sited close to the park boundary, there is a treed area
    within the park between the entrance footpath and the side boundary of that
    property which has enabled a spacious and verdant setting to the new dwelling to
    be maintained. Also, approved new boundary hedging to the side of the house
    would further soften the visual impact of the new built development.
14. Accordingly, the presence of this dwelling does not appear out of character within
    the environs of this park entrance, which is surrounded on both sides by
    traditionally designed dwellings, including 3-storey flats to the east side, which are
    set within a treed and soft landscaped environment. As such, the existing built
    development does not appear visually prominent in views from the park and it
    assimilates into the prevailing townscape, much of which dates back to the
    creation of the park.
15. The footpath entrance to the park branches off, so that there is a narrowing of the
    parkland landscaped area where it abuts the appeal site boundary, and the
    footpath runs much closer to the rear boundary of the appeal site and the
    neighbouring houses to the west, than to the side of No.86A. As such, there is a
    notably narrower area of parkland planting between the footpath and the appeal
    site.
16. The above, together with a lack of mature trees and soft landscaping within the
    rear garden of the appeal site, and some gapping within the parkland trees in front
    of the site, mean that the site can be clearly seen from within the park.
17. The new dwelling would be sited close to the rear site boundary, with the full width
    of its south-east elevation running parallel to the boundary. In the absence of any
    proposed ground level changes at the rear of the appeal site, the new building
    would be sited in an elevated position in relation to the adjacent parkland due to
    the existing differences in ground levels between the two areas of land. As such,
    the proposal would be highly visible in views from the adjacent footpath and in
    wider views from the park to the southeast and south of the appeal site.
18. I acknowledge the appellant’s intention that the proposed sedum roof and timber
    cladding walling reflect the sylvan setting of the site. However, the contemporary
    flat-roofed design of the building and its grey brick and black timber boarding walls
    and large areas of floor-to-ceiling glazing would be wholly out of keeping with the
    prevailing traditionally designed dwellings which characterise the area. As a result,


1
    LPA Ref APP/23/01413/F


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010619


        the new building would stand out as a stark and incongruous addition to this edge
        of parkland environment.
19. Notwithstanding its flat-roofed design, and the higher ground level of the existing
    dwellings behind it, the new building would result in some partial obscuring of
    existing views of the host property and the adjacent dwelling at No.84. These are
    attractive Arts and Crafts style dwellings which make a positive contribution to the
    existing backdrop to this part of the park. As such, the proposal would have a
    negative impact upon the setting of the park.
20. Also, the new dwelling would be seen to sit awkwardly in relation to the frontage
    houses whose rear elevations form the background to the appeal scheme. This is
    due to its angled positioning in relation to the straight line of those properties,
    combined with its proximity to the site boundaries of an irregularly shaped
    triangular plot. In combination, these factors would serve to compound the
    discordant nature of the appeal scheme within the surrounding built development.
21. I acknowledge that the Council has raised no objection on tree-related grounds
    and there is no evidence before me that any protected trees have been felled to
    accommodate the proposal. However, placing a dwelling in the location proposed
    would undermine the treed backdrop which forms a key positive defining
    characteristic of the setting of the park.
22. Moreover, the proposed proximity of the new dwelling to the rear site boundary,
    together with the positioning of most of its principal windows on its rear elevation,
    mean that it would not be reasonable or practical to require new mature planting
    along the rear boundary. Whilst this could potentially soften the visual impact of
    the new building in wider views, it would materially impact upon the outlook from
    the large full-height rear elevation windows.
23. Notwithstanding that the proposed build-to-plot ratio of the appeal scheme would
    be comparable to that which prevails within this part of the road, the proposed
    layout of the appeal scheme would be at odds with the more spacious prevailing
    layout of built development. The proximity of the new building to three of the site
    boundaries would comprise an unduly cramped form of development within this
    generally more spacious and verdant part of the parkland setting.
24. There are two other existing dwellings west of the appeal site which are in a
    set-back position behind the road-facing houses. However, they are positioned
    much further away from their rear garden boundaries, and they are also largely
    screened in wider views by intervening trees and mature landscaping. Moreover,
    their appearance and design reflect that which prevails elsewhere in the locality,
    so that their design is more contemporaneous with the Edwardian park. As such,
    they form an integral part of the prevailing edge-of-park townscape and are not
    directly comparable to the appeal scheme.
25. There is an extant lawful development certificate2 for a proposed home office and
    games room building to be sited in the same part of the appeal site as the appeal
    scheme. I have no reason to doubt that, should the appeal be dismissed, the
    appellant intends to implement this permission in the interests of improving
    occupier living conditions and adding value to the appeal site. As such, the


2
    LPA Ref APP/23/01033/K


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010619


       permission comprises a fallback position to which I attribute weight in the
       determination of this appeal.
26. Whilst the approved scheme includes some contemporary elements of design, it
    would have a traditional pitched roof form. Moreover, a comparison between the
    approved and proposed schemes3 confirms that the two-storey appeal scheme
    would be notably higher than the approved building. It would also present a wider
    and more bulky building fronting onto the park. With its low height, shallow pitched
    roof form and overall design which reflects its proposed outbuilding use, the
    approved scheme would be clearly perceived as being a subsidiary outbuilding
    within the grounds of the host property and as such, would not compete visually
    with it. Accordingly, the weight I attach to the extant permission is limited due to
    the significant differences between it and the appeal scheme.
27. The appellant has also drawn my attention to a subsequent planning application in
    respect of a proposed single storey dwelling on the appeal site4. An inspection of
    the Council’s planning register confirms that this application was refused on 10
    July 2026 for similar reasons to those of the current appeal scheme. As such, this
    decision does not affect my determination of the current appeal.
28. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude that the appeal scheme would
    materially harm the character and appearance of the area. As such, it would not
    accord with Policies PP27 and PP28 of the Poole Local Plan (2018) (the Local
    Plan). These policies, amongst other things, seek to ensure that new development,
    including residential plot severance, comprises good design which preserves or
    enhances the area’s residential character, including having regard to, inter alia,
    layout and siting, height and scale, bulk and massing, including that of the roof,
    materials and detailing, landscaping and visual impact.

Non-designated heritage asset
29. Alexandra Park has been locally listed by the Council due to its important
    landscape features and for its “Historic Interest (Social Interest), Architectural
    Interest and Special Landscape Quality”5. It comprises public open space which is
    surrounded by built residential development. The information before me is that it
    dates back to the Edwardian era. As such it is reasonable to assume that it would
    have been planned as a public recreational area in association with the
    development of the housing which surrounds it.
30. I saw during my visit that the park comprises a spacious, undulating open area of
    public recreational, grassland. It is traversed by a network of footpaths, which run
    alongside the park perimeter as well as crossing through its centre. Mature trees
    are a prevalent feature throughout the park. This includes around its boundaries,
    where trees provide a landscaped buffer to the surrounding housing. Public
    amenities are limited and include a café, toilets and a children’s play area.
    Accordingly, the park has a pleasant spacious and undeveloped character. At the
    time of my site visit, it appeared to be well-used by local residents, including by
    dog walkers traversing the footpaths.



3
  As shown on the appellant’s submitted drawing Ref 9746/301 A
4
  LPA Ref P/26/02085/FUL
5
  Borough of Poole Heritage Assets Supplementary Planning Document (April 2013)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              5
Appeal Decision 6010619


31. The appeal scheme would provide an additional residential dwelling within the
    context of the existing built residential development which surrounds the park and
    it would have no impact upon the continued use of the park as a public recreation
    area. Moreover, there is no evidence before me that the proposal would directly
    harm any existing trees or landscaping within the park or on its immediate
    boundaries. Accordingly, in these respects, the significance of the non-designated
    heritage asset would not be harmed.
32. However, the park setting also comprises an integral part of the heritage asset’s
    significance. The above harm that I have found to the character and appearance of
    the area mainly stems from the introduction of a contemporary building close to the
    park boundary where it would be clearly visible in views from within the park and
    from where it would be viewed as a stark and incongruous addition to the verdant
    and spacious arrangement of traditionally designed housing in this part of the park
    surrounds. It would have a detrimental impact upon an area which currently makes
    a positive contribution to the setting of this non-designated heritage asset and is
    strongly reflective of the design and layout of residential development which the
    park was originally intended to serve.
33. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude that the proposal would materially
    harm the setting and significance of the locally listed Alexandra Park. The proposal
    would therefore be contrary to the aims of Local Plan Policy PP30 in so much as
    this policy, amongst other things, requires new development to preserve or
    enhance the historic significance of heritage assets and their settings, in a manner
    that is proportionate with their significance.
34. Having regard to Policy HE7 of the Framework, I find that this harm does not
    amount to ‘substantial harm to, or the total loss of, the significance of a non-
    designated asset’. Accordingly, Policy HE7:2 applies and states that where a
    development proposal would harm the significance of a non-designated heritage
    asset, this should be weighed against the benefits of the proposal and a balanced
    judgement made, having regard to the scale of any harm or loss and the
    significance of the non-designated heritage asset. This harm will be considered
    later in the Planning Balance section of this decision. As such, it is a matter to
    which I later return.
Living conditions of the new dwelling occupiers – outlook, privacy and sunlight/daylight
35. It is apparent from the proposed building siting and design that the appellant has
    considered the relationship between the proposed dwelling and the existing
    houses having regard to providing satisfactory living conditions for the occupiers of
    both. However, I am not satisfied, based on the information before me and my site
    visit that this would be achieved. This is because of the proposed juxtaposition of
    the new building in relation to its neighbours and the falling ground levels towards
    the rear of the appeal site.
36. Nos. 84, 86 and 86a Alexandra Road comprise two-storey family sized houses
    with large windows on their rear elevations at ground and first floor levels. They
    are sited at a notably higher ground level than the land upon which the new
    dwelling would be sited, and the current outlook from their rear elevation windows
    and gardens, and in the case of No.86, rear deck and proposed rear garden area,
    are towards the rear-most part of the appeal site and the park beyond.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6010619


37. The proposed proximity of the appeal scheme to these properties and their
    resulting rear boundaries following the proposed plot severance would be such,
    that should the ground level upon which the new dwelling would be sited not
    change, much of the proposed private outdoor living space for the new dwelling
    and its northwest facing windows would experience a cramped and oppressive
    outlook due to the combined effects of being sited close to the new plot boundaries
    with the existing properties and the elevated positions of the existing neighbouring
    buildings and their rear gardens in relation to the appeal scheme.
38. Moreover, in the absence of detailed cross-section drawings showing the existing
    and proposed land levels of the new plot and the finished floor levels of the new
    dwelling, in relation to the 3 closest neighbouring dwellings and their gardens,
    together with information in respect of the resulting lines of sight from the existing
    properties to the new dwelling and its garden, I cannot be certain that there would
    be no harmful overlooking from the gardens or rear windows and decking of the
    existing properties towards the new dwelling and its outdoor amenity space and
    main entrance.
39. The submitted ‘indicative’ site section drawing6 provides insufficient information in
    this respect, and no account appears to have been taken of the existing large area
    of raised decking along the back of No.86 which leads directly off an open plan
    kitchen/diner area, and as such would therefore reasonably be expected to be
    well-used by the occupiers for outdoor socialising and recreation.
40. I have noted the Council’s concerns about the impact of the surrounding trees on
    the outlook from the new dwelling and the amount of light experienced within the
    dwelling and its outdoor amenity areas. I have had regard to the appellant’s
    submitted Daylight Study7, the large size of glazed components of all the windows
    on the southeast facing elevation, the juxtaposition and size of the neighbouring
    trees and the spacing in between them, and the tree removal that appears to have
    already occurred in the rear garden of No.86. Taking all of these factors into
    account, I am not persuaded that material harm to the living conditions of the
    future occupants of the proposal would arise in respect of outlook and daylight
    sunlight effects.
Living conditions of No.86 occupiers – outlook and privacy
41. The new dwelling would be sited close to the rear garden of No.86 and that garden
    would be considerably reduced in size from that which currently exists, resulting in
    a more compact outdoor amenity space for the residents of No.86 and a more
    restricted outlook than existing.
42. In the absence of the aforesaid cross-section drawings indicating the existing and
    proposed ground levels and finished floor level of the new dwelling in relation to
    those of No.86, I cannot be certain, based upon the information before me, that the
    proposal would not materially harm the outlook for residents of the host property,
    particularly from the rear-most part of the garden.
43. With regard to the Council’s concerns about loss of privacy to the occupiers of the
    host property, I am satisfied that the proposed design and positioning of the upper
    floor fenestration on the northwest and northeast elevations of the new dwelling

6
    9746/303 A
7
    HDS Greentech Ltd Ref 21665R03b dated 24 April 2026


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              7
Appeal Decision 6010619


       would be such that materially harmful overlooking of No.86 could be avoided. This
       could, if necessary, be achieved through a condition requiring the landing and
       bathroom windows to be appropriately obscure glazed and/or fixed to avoid any
       overlooking.
44. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude that the proposal would have a
    materially harmful impact upon the living conditions of the future occupiers of the
    new dwelling having regard to outlook and privacy effects and upon the occupiers
    of No.86 having regard to outlook effects. The proposal would therefore be
    contrary to Local Plan Policy PP27, in so much as this policy, amongst other
    things, seeks to ensure that new developments do not result in a harmful impact
    upon living conditions for both local residents and future occupiers, having regard
    to, inter alia, privacy and whether the development is overbearing or oppressive.
45. I also conclude that the proposal would not materially harm the living conditions of
    the future occupiers of the new dwelling having regard to daylight and sunlight
    effects nor the living conditions of the occupiers of No.86 having regard to privacy
    effects. As such, in these respects, the proposal would accord with Local Plan
    Policies PP27 and PP37 in so much as these policies, amongst other things, seek
    to ensure that new developments do not harm the living conditions of local
    residents having regard to, amongst other things, privacy effects and that new
    developments are designed to use passive design features to minimise the need
    for artificial light.
Dorset Heathlands and Poole Harbour SPAs
46. The appeal site lies within 5km of the internationally protected Dorset Heathland
    SSSI, which is also part of the designated Dorset Heathlands SPA and Ramsar
    Site, and the Dorset Heaths SAC. It is also within close proximity to Poole
    Harbour, which is a SPA, SSSI and Ramsar Site.
47. The Dorset Heathlands are an extensive network of lowland heath recognised for
    their importance for nature conservation. Poole Harbour is a natural harbour which
    is inhabited by important bird species. As such, both Dorset Heathlands and Poole
    Harbour are recognised by the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations
    2017 as areas of international importance.
48. The Council’s fifth and sixth reasons for refusal relate to the effect of the
    development upon the integrity of these SPA, SSSI, Ramsar and SAC sites, as a
    result of increased recreational activity associated with the proposed additional
    dwelling.
49. The council has confirmed that this matter has now been satisfactorily addressed
    through the appellant’s subsequent submission of a completed S106 planning
    obligation Unilateral Undertaking (UU) dated 24 August 2026. This would secure
    contributions towards Strategic Access Management and Monitoring (SAMM) in
    accordance with the Council’s adopted Dorset Heathlands Framework 2020-2025
    SPD (April 2020) and Poole Harbour Recreation 2019-2024 SPD (April 2020),
    which have been endorsed by Natural England.
50. Were I minded allowing the appeal, as the competent authority I would have been
    obliged to consider this issue. However, given my conclusion on the first 3 main
    issues, it is not necessary for me to carry out an Appropriate Assessment as
    required under The Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6010619


       amended) (the Habitats Regulations) or to consider this matter further, since it
       would not alter the outcome of this appeal. This is therefore a neutral matter in the
       appeal.
Planning Balance
51. The site lies within a settlement and, as such, Policy S4:1 of the Framework states
    that the development should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in this Framework.
52. The Council has confirmed that it cannot demonstrate a 5-year supply of
    deliverable housing sites as required by the Framework. The information before
    me it that its housing land supply figure is 2.55 years, which includes a 20% buffer.
53. The proposal would make a small contribution towards addressing the Council’s
    housing supply deficit and as a 3-bedroomed self-build dwelling, it would make a
    positive contribution to the provision of housing to meet the needs of different
    groups. It would also support the effective and efficient use of land. Moreover,
    there would also be short term economic benefits as a result of the construction of
    the new dwelling, and longer term economic and social benefits as a result of its
    future occupation.
54. The aforesaid benefits weigh in favour of the development, and, having regard to
    Framework Policy L2 (1) (d), I afford them substantial weight as the proposal
    comprises an additional unit within a residential curtilage. I have also had regard to
    the extent of the housing shortfall.
55. However, the harms I have identified in respect of the impact on the character and
    appearance of the area, the setting of the non-designated heritage asset of
    Alexandra Park, and the living conditions of future occupiers of the appeal scheme
    and the occupiers of the host property would, cumulatively, be substantial. As
    such, the Framework objectives of achieving well-designed places and conserving
    and enhancing the historic environment would not be achieved.
56. Accordingly, having given careful consideration of the balance of factors, I
    consider that, when assessed against the policies in the Framework taken as a
    whole, the adverse impacts would significantly and demonstrably outweigh the
    benefits, and the proposal would not be a sustainable form of development. The
    conflict with the development plan is not outweighed by other considerations
    including the Framework.
57. The Council has not identified any harm in respect of other issues, including
    highway safety and parking, impact on trees, energy efficient design, biodiversity
    net gain, the living conditions of the occupiers of Nos. 84 and 86A, flood risk and
    drainage. However, as these are requirements of planning policy and legislation, in
    terms of the planning balance, the absence of identified harm in respect of these
    matters is a neutral factor that weighs neither for nor against the development.
58. Moreover, notwithstanding the above, Framework Policy S4 also sets out some
    specific circumstances in which the benefits of approving development are likely to
    be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects. Of relevance to the appeal
    scheme, these include where there is a substantial adverse impact in relation to
    the application of Framework policies in relation to development within residential


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6010619


       curtilages (Policy L2:(1)(d)) and where there is failure to comply with one of the
       national decision-making policies which state that development proposals should
       be refused in specific circumstances.
59. The appeal scheme fails to comply with Policy L2:(1)(d)(ii), having regard to the
    substantive harm I have identified to the living conditions of future residents and
    neighbours. Moreover, the harms I have identified to the character and
    appearance of the area and the setting of the non-designated heritage asset mean
    that the proposal conflicts with Framework Policies DP3:(1) and DP3:(3). These
    conflicts also mean that the benefits of the appeal scheme are outweighed by the
    adverse effects.
Conclusion
60. For the reasons given above, I therefore conclude that the appeal should be
    dismissed.

S Leonard
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
