Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 27 July 2026
by P Eggleton BSc(Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010107
4 Lloyd Road, Dagenham, Essex RM9 6HB
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Godwin Imatitikua against the decision of the London Borough of Barking
    and Dagenham Council.
•   The application reference is 26/00018/FULL.
•   The development proposed is a change of use from a dwelling to a house in multiple occupation
    within Use Class C4.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issues
2. The main issues are the effect on housing mix within the borough; the effect on the
   living conditions of future residents; and the effect on parking stress within the area.
Procedural matters
3. The council has a borough-wide Article 4 direction that removes permitted
   development rights for changes of use from a dwellinghouse in Use Class C3 to a
   Use Class C4 small house in multiple occupation (HMO).
4. The description of development within the application form provides an explanation
   as to why the application was submitted rather than a description of development.
   The council described the proposal as ‘Change of use of the dwelling to a C4
   HMO’. The appellant’s Appeal Statement repeats the council’s description and
   advises that for the purposes of the appeal, the development constitutes a proposal
   for a Use Class C4 HMO. I have unabbreviated the description in the header for
   clarity. I have also included the updated postcode.
5. Whilst the appellant suggests that the particular living arrangements sought would
   not necessarily fall with Use Class C4, I have considered the proposal as described
   in the appeal statement. This decision does not represent a determination as to the
   lawfulness of the current or proposed uses nor is it determinative with regard to the
   need for a HMO licence.
Reasons
Loss of a dwellinghouse
6. The London Borough of Barking and Dagenham Local Plan 2024 (BDLP) includes
   Policy DMH5 which specifically relates to HMO. It sets out that new HMO will only

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision: 6010107


     be supported where certain requirements are met, including that it would not result
     in the loss of housing capable of accommodating families with children. The appeal
     property has three bedrooms and a garden and would be suited to a small family
     with children. The third bedroom is small but would be suitable for a young child.
     With regard to the principle of a change of use, there is conflict with Policy DMH5.
Quality of the accommodation
7. The size of the dwelling overall has been raised as a concern. The gross internal
   area is reported as 66.3m2. London Plan 2021 (LP) Policy D6 does not provide a
   minimum floor space for a proposed three bed, 3-person dwelling but the property
   falls well short of a three bed, 4-person dwelling (84m2). The living room and
   kitchen are however well proportioned and the accommodation overall,
   notwithstanding the smallest bedroom, would not be unacceptably small for three
   adults. This is reflected in only a minor shortfall compared to the two bed, 3-person
   figure in LP Policy D6.
8. The main concern relates to the quality of the third bedroom, which is 5.88m2. The
   appellant suggests that it exceeds the statutory minimum and is only marginally
   below the threshold used in the Council’s own HMO Standards. I have assumed
   that the statutory minimum referred to, relates to the Licensing of Houses in
   Multiple Occupation (Mandatory Conditions of Licences) (England) Regulations
   2018. The 4.64m2 figure is the mandatory national minimum sleeping room size for
   a person under 10 years old in a HMO. The 6.51m2 figure relates to the minimum
   for a person over 10 years old.
9. Whilst the third bedroom would be suitable for a child under 10 years old, it would
   not be suitable for an adult. It falls well below the standard set out in LP Policy D6,
   which requires that a single bedroom be at least 7.5m 2 in area. The LP figures
   apply to all tenures and all residential accommodation that is self-contained. Whilst
   not directed at HMO, BDLP Policy DMH5 makes reference to the LP figures when
   considering HMO. Policy DMH5 also refers to the East London HMO Guidance
   which requires a single bedroom to be 8.5m2. The size of the third bedroom would
   represent poor quality accommodation for an adult and would conflict with the
   development plan.
Parking
10. The council has raised concerns with regard to parking. The property has a parking
    space and is within a controlled parking zone. It is located close to good public
    transport options and within walking distance of a range of facilities and services.
    The council are seeking information as to how the parking space would be
    managed with multiple tenants. Given its location, residents would be able to use
    modes of travel other than private cars. Due to its size, the demand for parking
    would not be likely to be significantly different to a family dwelling. As a car free
    development would satisfy the development plan policies; and as the location gains
    support from LP Policy T1, I am not persuaded that the concern with regard to how
    any additional demand for parking could be accommodated, is justified.
Other matters
11. The appellant identifies that there would be no changes to the property so it would
    remain available for family use and could be returned to such a use at any time. It
    is suggested that the use proposed could be considered temporary. It is also

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
Appeal Decision: 6010107


     suggested that a condition restricting the number of occupants or requiring the
     property to remain capable of reverting to a Class C3 use would address the
     concerns raised.
12. LP Policy H9 advises that the role of HMO should be taken into account in meeting
    local and strategic housing needs. The appellant sets out that the proposal meets
    local housing needs, particularly for single people and those requiring lower cost
    accommodation.
13. The appellant suggests that as the dwelling is below the size standards for a family
    dwelling, the weight that should be attached to its loss should be reduced.
    However, I have already found that the house is suitable for a family.
14. My understanding is that the appellant and a family member live in the property and
    rent a room to a paying lodger. If this was unable to continue, this would result in a
    less efficient use of a property that lies in a sustainable location. This provides
    weight in its favour but has to be considered alongside the concern that the third
    bedroom would be inadequate for an adult.
Conclusions
15. The proposal is seeking the use of the three bedrooms for a HMO. Whilst a three
    person HMO using only two bedrooms would satisfy space standards, this is not
    what is sought as three bedrooms are shown on the plans. Whilst the appellant has
    suggested the use of conditions, a condition to prevent the use of the third bedroom
    has not been suggested and is unlikely to meet the appellant’s needs. It would not
    therefore be reasonable to impose such a condition. A temporary use has also not
    been sought. The proposal would result in unacceptable living conditions for the
    person within the third bedroom.
16. Even if it was reasonable to restrict the use to two bedrooms and three persons,
    the benefits of a three-person HMO would need to be considered against the harm
    from the loss of a family dwelling. Whilst no specific evidence has been provided as
    to the scale of each need, the development plan is clear that family dwellings
    should not be lost to HMO, and it is also clear that family sized dwellings are a
    priority. In these circumstances, although the use would not result in any significant
    changes to the property or the character of the wider area and would make an
    efficient use of the property, the harm from the loss of this family dwelling would
    outweigh the benefits of the proposal. I therefore dismiss the appeal.

Peter Eggleton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
