Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 September 2026
by R Gee BA (Hons) Dip TP PGCert UD MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010342
The Firs Country Park, West End Road, Boston PE21 7LL
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Alistair Arundell against the decision of Boston Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is B/25/0346.
•    The development proposed is Change of Use of Existing Workshop to Holiday Let Accommodation
     and Associated External Alterations.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for Change of Use of
       Existing Workshop to Holiday Let Accommodation and Associated External
       Alterations at The Firs Country Park, Boston PE21 7LL in accordance with the
       terms of the application, Ref B/25/0346, and the plans submitted with it, subject to
       conditions in the attached schedule.
Applications for costs
2.     An application for costs was made by Alistar Arundell against Boston Borough
       Council. This application is the subject of a separate Decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     On 17 August 2026 a new Framework was published. As this could affect the
       issues and matters in this case, the Council and the appellant were invited to make
       further comments. My decision reflects the latest version of the Framework, and
       the responses received on it.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is whether the site would be an appropriate location for the
       proposed use having regard to the living conditions of the occupants of nearby
       residential properties in respect of noise and disturbance, and to privacy.
Reasons
5.     The proposal comprises the change of use of an existing single storey brick
       building. It has a hipped ridged roof together with a flat roofed addition extending
       to the boundary with the southern neighbour. It fronts West End Road and would
       be accessed via the existing vehicular access that serves the existing lodges at
       The Firs Country Park.
6.     The Council is concerned that the proposal would result in unacceptable levels of
       noise and disturbance to the occupiers of the neighbouring properties, and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010342


         therefore contends that the proposal represents an incompatible land use. These
         concerns are echoed by a number of residents.
7.       Policy 9 of the South East Lincolnshire Local Plan 2019 (LP) states that outside
         settlements, small-scale development to support the visitor economy will be
         supported provided that proposals: do not conflict with neighbouring land uses; are
         in keeping with the character of the locality; and demonstrate a functional link with
         an existing rural attraction or farm enterprise.
8.       The holiday accommodation would have the facilities required for day-to-day
         private existence. Whilst the Appellant does not seek permanent residential
         occupation, the purpose of holiday accommodation is for residential use which can
         be limited by planning condition.
9.       The proposal is supported by a Noise Impact Statement1 and the scheme includes
         the provision of acoustic attenuation barriers including a 3.3m brick wall between
         the lawn and the neighbouring property with a canopy, and an acoustic fence
         proposed between the parking area and the lawn. The proposed wall and canopy
         would provide solid screening between the lawn and neighbouring dwelling which
         the Appellant submits will maximise privacy and minimise noise impacts when
         residents use the garden. The proposed acoustic fencing would also mitigate noise
         from the parking of vehicles.
10. Given the modest scale of the accommodation, which would be capable of
    accommodating only a very limited number of guests, I have no substantive
    evidence that the proposed use would give rise to noise and disturbance beyond
    that typically associated with a dwellinghouse.
11. The appeal site is adjacent to a cluster of existing residential properties. Laburnum
    House is located directly adjacent to the site’s southern boundary and comprises a
    two-storey detached dwelling that has a rear projection that runs parallel to the site
    boundary where first-floor windows face directly onto the site. It is understood that
    these windows serve a bedroom.
12. Whilst it would be possible for users of the holiday let’s outdoor amenity space to
    look towards these windows, I do not consider this would result in a material loss
    of privacy. Given the oblique angle between the amenity area and the
    neighbouring windows, opportunities for direct overlooking would be limited and
    not materially harmful to the living conditions of existing neighbouring occupiers.
13. The proposed amenity area would be more readily overlooked by occupiers of the
    neighbouring property. Whilst there would be some overlooking of the amenity
    area, the accommodation would be occupied on a short-term basis and the degree
    of harm arising would be less pronounced than if the property were occupied as a
    permanent residence.
14. I am satisfied that given the small scale of the accommodation that it would not
    generate a significant increase in vehicular movements to or from the site, or in the
    levels of vehicle or pedestrian activity within the site. Furthermore, parking would
    be adjacent to the existing driveway, not adjacent to the neighbouring property.
15. It is understood that the building has an established lawful use as a workshop
    which would be reasonably expected to generate a degree of noise and pedestrian
1
    Parker Acoustics Ltd 5 August 2025


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010342


        and vehicular activity. Although the proposed outdoor amenity space would be
        situated in close proximity to the neighbouring dwelling, I am not persuaded that
        the use of it would result in material harm to living conditions, particularly having
        regard to the fallback position.
16. Whilst it is claimed that noise-related complaints have arisen in connection with the
    wider development at The Firs Country Park, I have been provided with no
    substantive evidence concerning the nature of those complaints or the outcome of
    any subsequent investigation. In any event, the complaints relate to a different
    form of development, involving a larger scale of activity and a different location
    from the appeal proposal before me. As such, I afford this evidence limited weight
    in my assessment of the effect of the development on the living conditions of
    neighbouring occupiers.
17. The Council identifies conflict with criterion 2 of Policy 2 of the LP, which relates to
    the quality of design and orientation. However, the proposal would involve only
    minimal external alterations, and I find that it would not harm the design or
    appearance of the host property. Furthermore, for the reasons set out above, I
    have concluded that the proposal would not result in any adverse effects on the
    living conditions of neighbouring occupiers or future residents of the
    accommodation such that it would be an incompatible use. Consequently, I find no
    conflict with this policy.
18. For the reasons stated, I conclude that the proposed development would be an
    appropriate location and would not have a materially harmful impact on the living
    conditions of the occupants of nearby residential properties with regard to noise
    and disturbance, or to privacy. The proposal would therefore accord with Policies
    2, 3 and 9 of the LP insofar as they refer to the relationship between new and
    existing development, and the consideration of residential amenity as part of
    securing high-quality design. Nor do I find conflict with the Framework insofar of its
    objective of protecting living conditions
Other Matters
19. The proposed development would provide for a holiday-let, which would increase
    the availability, and choice, of holiday accommodation in the area. Furthermore, its
    construction and use would contribute to the local tourism industry and the local
    economy which is supported by the Framework.
20. My attention has been drawn to a dismissed appeal at the site2. Whilst other
    decisions can be a material planning consideration the evidence indicates that this
    related to a varying of condition in respect of an acoustic boundary deemed
    necessary as appropriate noise mitigation for the proposed siting of up to 15
    holiday lodges. The type of application and quantum of development is
    substantially different to the proposal before me and therefore not directly
    comparable. In any event, I have determined the appeal on its own merits.
Conditions
21. The Council and the appellant have suggested a number of conditions which I
    have considered taking account of advice in the Framework and the Planning


2
    APPIZ2505/W/25/3373902


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010342


         Practice Guidance (PPG). As a result, I have amended some of them for
         consistency, enforceability, clarity and reasonableness.
22. The statutory time period is required in the interests of certainty, as is a list of
    plans. A condition is necessary to control the use of the accommodation,
    specifying its use as holiday accommodation, including the keeping of a register of
    occupants and the duration of their stay, is reasonable and necessary in the
    interests of clarity.
23. The evidence indicates that the appeal site lies within Flood Zone 3. The proposal
    is accompanied by a Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) , that identifies the site as
    having a future hazard classification of ‘Danger to All’ and ‘Danger to Most’. The
    site could experience flood depths of 0.5 – 1.6m arising from a breach in the
    defences during a flood that has a 0.1% chance of occurring in any one year up to
    2115. The FRA explains that the opportunity to raise the workshop’s finished floor
    level is very limited and it instead confirms that the holiday let accommodation will
    not be occupied during the winter months, when the risk of tidal flooding is highest.
    The Environment Agency consider that this is an acceptable measure to manage
    the risk of flooding to the holiday let. The FRA also includes a number of flood
    resilience construction measures. I have therefore conditions requiring compliance
    with the FRA and restrict the period of occupation throughout the year on the
    basis that it is reasonable and necessary having regard to flood risk and the local
    and national flood risk policies.
24. The Council proposes a condition requiring the development to operate in
    accordance with the Flood Warning and Evacuation Plan approved under planning
    permission B/24/0173. However, I have not been provided with a copy of that
    document and, in any event, it was approved pursuant to a separate planning
    permission. In these circumstances, I cannot be satisfied as to its content,
    effectiveness or enforceability in relation to the appeal proposal. Nevertheless,
    having regard to the flood risk considerations identified above, I am satisfied that a
    condition requiring the submission, approval and implementation of a site-specific
    Flood Warning and Evacuation Plan is necessary to ensure the safety of
    occupants for the lifetime of the development. Accordingly, I shall impose such a
    condition.
25. The plans and submissions refer to a canopy and acoustic barriers. However,
    precise details of the visual appearance of these are not included. Accordingly, in
    the interests of certainty having regard to character and appearance and living
    conditions I shall impose a condition that requires precise details to be submitted
    to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority and implemented and
    retained as such.
26. My attention has been drawn to a Resort Occupancy Terms relating to the
    approved lodges3. The Council suggests a condition referring to this document
    secured by a different permission, and the Appellant has indicated a willingness to
    accept such a condition. However, I have not been provided with a copy of this
    document, and I cannot be satisfied as to its content, effectiveness or
    enforceability in relation to the appeal proposal. Nevertheless, having regard to the
    small scale of the holiday accommodation and its very limited occupancy, I am not
    persuaded that a noise management plan, or similar, is necessary to make the

3
    condition 16 of Planning Permission B/24/0173


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            4
Appeal Decision 6010342


       development acceptable in planning terms. Consequently, such a condition would
       fail the necessity test for planning conditions. Moreover, any unreasonable noise
       nuisance arising from the use of the premises could be investigated under
       separate environmental protection legislation.
27. The application plans show the retention of a chimney stack. In the interests of
    protecting living conditions of existing neighbouring residential occupiers the
    Council suggests a comment that prevent the use of it in connection with a wood
    burning stove, or similar. Whilst the Appellant has indicated a willingness such a
    condition, I do not consider such a condition to be reasonable or necessary. There
    is no evidence before me that the use of a fire or stove would result in
    unacceptable harm to neighbouring occupiers and, should any smoke or nuisance
    issues arise, they could be addressed through other regulatory regimes.
    Accordingly, having regard to the tests for planning conditions, I find that such a
    condition would be neither necessary nor reasonable.
Conclusion
28. For the reasons given above, the scheme would comply with the development plan
    when considered as a whole and other material considerations do not indicate that
    a decision should be made other than in accordance with the development plan.
    Accordingly, and taking all other matters into account, I conclude that, subject to
    the specified conditions, the appeal should be allowed.
29. For the reasons given, and having regard to all other matters raised, the appeal is
    allowed.

R Gee
INSPECTOR


                                           Schedule of Conditions
    1. The development hereby permitted must be begun no later than the expiration of
       three years beginning with the date of this permission.

    2. The development hereby permitted shall only be undertaken in accordance with
       the following approved plans: Location Plan, Proposed Block Plan, 24/AA/03B
       Proposed Layout & Elevations and 24/AA/04B Proposed Layout & Elevations.

    3. The accommodation hereby permitted shall be used for holiday accommodation
       only and shall not be occupied as a person's sole or main place of residence.
       The owners/operators shall maintain an up-to-date register of the names of all
       occupiers of the accommodation, together with their main home addresses and
       the dates of their arrival and departure. The register shall be made available for
       inspection by the local planning authority on request.

    4. The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with Flood
       Resilience Construction measures detailed on p.16-17 of the Flood Risk
       Assessment (FRA) dated February 2025 version 1 completed by RM Associates.
       The mitigation measures shall be fully implemented prior to occupation.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         5
Appeal Decision 6010342


    5. The holiday let accommodation shall not be occupied between 1 November (or
       the following Sunday, if half terms extends into November) in any one year and
       14 March in the succeeding year.

    6. Prior to the first use of the holiday accommodation hereby permitted, a Flood
       Warning and Evacuation Plan shall be submitted to and approved in writing by
       the Local Planning Authority. The approved Plan shall include measures for the
       receipt of flood warnings, arrangements for the safe evacuation of occupants in
       the event of a flood, and details of the means by which occupants shall be made
       aware of such procedures. The development shall thereafter be operated in
       accordance with the approved Plan.

    7. Prior to installation precise details of the canopy and acoustic screens shall be
       submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
       agreed details shall be implemented in full prior to the use hereby approved first
       being brought into use and shall be retained as such in perpetuity.

                                           ***End of Schedule***




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        6
