Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 17 August 2026 by S Manson DipTP MRTPI
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 15 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010024
15 Warwick Road, Kirklees, Batley WF17 6BU
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Fathima Arafath against the decision of Kirklees Metropolitan Council.
•   The application Ref is 2026/62/90709/E.
•   The development proposed is described as a retrospective application for the change of use of part
    of an existing residential kitchen to allow small scale home cooking for take away and delivery.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal scheme, which seeks retrospective planning permission.
Preliminary Matters
3. A Revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
   17 August 2026. There have been some layout and subsequent paragraph
   numbering changes. I am however satisfied that, having reviewed the relevant
   changes, they do not have a material bearing on the substance of the main issues
   or indeed the arguments of the main parties thereon. Since they would not
   therefore be prejudiced, I have proceeded without further consultation.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are a) whether the appeal property is an appropriate location for a
   Hot Food Takeaway (HFT) having regard to its siting outside a defined centre and
   its proximity to a primary school; and b) the effect of the development on the living
   conditions of nearby residents with particular regards to noise, odour, waste
   storage and litter.
Reasons for the Recommendation
Appropriate Location
5. The appeal property is mid terraced and on a predominantly residential street which
   comprises similar buildings and a three-storey block of flats. Warwick Road Junior,
   Infant and Nursey School is a short walking distance away. A high number of
   vehicles were parked on the street at the time of my morning site visit.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010024


6. The appeal site lies outside a defined centre. Consequently, Policies LP13 and
   LP16 of the Kirklees Local Plan, Strategy and Policies, 2019 (LP) require the
   submission of a sequential test and supporting evidence demonstrating the
   acceptability of the location for a main town centre use. No such information has
   been provided. Whilst the appellant contends that the scale of the operation is
   limited, the use applied for and undertaken is that of a HFT, which is classed as a
   main town centre use. Neither the development plan nor the Town and Country
   (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended), distinguishes such uses by reference to
   the scale of operation.
7. Policy HC5 of the Framework clearly states, amongst other things, that proposals
   for a HFT should be refused if it is to be located within a reasonable walking
   distance of a school, which it quantifies as 400 metres. The Council's Hot Food
   Takeaway Supplementary Planning Document, 2022 (SPD) aligns with this figure.
   It is not disputed that the appeal site falls within this distance.
8. Contradictory evidence has been submitted regarding the operating hours of the
   business. In any event, the potential influence of a HFT in close proximity to a
   school is not confined to the traditional start and end of the school day. Although
   younger pupils are likely to be accompanied by adults, the school caters for
   children up to the age of 11, some of whom may travel independently. Moreover,
   there is no substantive evidence before me to demonstrate that the school does not
   operate after-school clubs, childcare provision or other activities that would result in
   pupils leaving the site beyond conventional school finishing times. Furthermore, the
   presence of signage on the front elevation advertising the business increases its
   visibility and prominence within the street scene.
9. Drawing these matters together, the development occupies an unsuitable location
   that conflicts with the Council's and Government’s approach to reducing children's
   exposure to foods contributing towards obesity such as those sold in HFTs. The
   development, therefore, conflicts with Policies LP13, LP16 and LP47 of the LP,
   guidance in the SPD, and Policy HC5 of the Framework. These, amongst other
   things, seek to ensure that HFT development is located in appropriate locations,
   having regard to the health and wellbeing of residents.
Noise, Odour, Waste Storage and Litter
10. The dense residential environment within which the appeal site finds itself means
    neighbouring occupiers are in close proximity to the operation of the appeal
    scheme. The submitted plans do not indicate the presence of any dedicated
    extraction equipment, odour control measures, acoustic mitigation, or external
    waste storage arrangements.
11. Whilst the appellant advises that the operation is small in scale, limited information
    has been provided regarding the volume of food preparation undertaken, the
    frequency of collections, deliveries, customer visits, or waste generation.
    Consequently, it has not been satisfactorily demonstrated that the use does not
    result in unacceptable levels of cooking odours, noise and disturbance, or waste-
    related impacts affecting neighbouring occupiers.
12. Furthermore, no details have been provided demonstrating how waste and litter
    associated with the use could be stored and managed without causing visual
    intrusion or nuisance. Given the location of the site and its position within a
    continuous terrace, I am not satisfied that adequate provision exists as it stands.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010024


13. Accordingly, the development fails to provide a satisfactory living environment for
    neighbouring occupiers and as such conflicts with Policies LP16, LP24 and LP52 of
    the LP and guidance in the SPD. These seek, amongst other things, to ensure
    development protects and minimises impact on residential amenity and the quality
    of life and well-being of people. The Council also cites conflict with Policy LP21 of
    the LP, which specifically relates to highways and access, and therefore has not
    been decisive in my findings.
14. With regard to Policy S4 of the Framework and the principle of development within
    settlements, the harm I have found, and the subsequent development plan conflict,
    would be obvious and enduring and I therefore ascribe it significant weight. The
    benefits of granting planning permission which would be limited mainly to small
    scale contributions to the local economy, would therefore be substantially
    outweighed by the adverse effects identified above. The lack of objection from
    neighbouring properties does not in itself render the scheme acceptable, nor
    absolve me from making an assessment as to its effects in regard to the main
    issues.
Conclusion and Recommendation
15. For the reasons given above, the appeal scheme conflicts with the development
    plan and material considerations do not indicate a decision other than in
    accordance therewith. I therefore recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

S Manson
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
16. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
