 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 26 August 2026
 by Martin Andrews MA(Planning) BSc(Econ) DipTP & DipTP(Dist) MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 1 October 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010033
 259 Wick Road, Hackney, London E9 5DG
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Barrington Brown against the decision of the Council of the London Borough
      of Hackney.
 •    The application Ref. is 2026/0268.
 •    The development proposed is the change of use of the ground floor from Class E (Barber Shop) to a
      sui generis use comprising a takeaway and delivery-only food premises (no primary cooking or
      extraction system required) operating between 10:00 and 20:00.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issues
2. The main issues are (i) the effect of the proposed change of use on child obesity
   levels and health inequalities in the area, and (ii) the effect on highway safety.
Reasons
3. On the first issue, the Officer’s Report refers to a conflict with Policy LP39 ‘Over
   Concentration of Uses’ of the Hackney Local Plan 2033, adopted July 2020 (‘the
   Local Plan’), which precludes hot food takeaways within 400 metres of a primary
   school, secondary school, or community college. This restriction is consistent with
   section D of Policy E9 of the London Plan 2021, whilst Local Plan Policy LP39 also
   seeks to restrict such uses within ‘designated centres’ listed under Policy LP32.
   These policies must be considered in the context of the obesity statistics and their
   relationship with health inequalities provided by Hackney Public Health.
4. In this instance the appeal premises are located approximately 315m from Ickburgh
   School and therefore within the designated exclusion zone and outside any of the
   named centres where the use would be considered acceptable. Furthermore, the
   site is also within 400 metres of community facilities used by young people at
   ‘Young Hackney Eastway’ and Gascoyne 2 Community Hall. In assessing these
   considerations, I have noted the concerns of some local residents which are
   supportive of the Council’s position on the necessity for an exclusion area.
5. For the appellant it is argued that the proposed use of the premises would be
   mainly in the form of deliveries at a price not normally affordable to school children,
   and together with the provision of healthier and more balanced Carribbean meals,
   there would not be the harmful effect envisaged. A Heath Impact Assessment
   (‘HIA’) has been provided with additional information in support of this narrative.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision Ref. 6010033


6. However, whilst the HIA includes some points in favour of the appellant’s case,
   overall I am not persuaded that it negates the Council’s and my own main concern;
   namely that if permission were to be granted for a sui generis use it would not be
   possible to control by condition or any other means the proportion of walk-in orders,
   including from children, compared with deliveries. Similarly, there could be little if
   any regulation of the type or content of the food sold.
7. On this issue I conclude on balance that the appeal scheme would be likely to have
   a potentially harmful effect on child obesity levels and health inequalities in the
   Borough and thereby be in harmful conflict with Local Plan Policy LP39; London
   Plan Policy E9 and with Government policy in Policy HC5 of the recently revised
   National Planning Policy Framework August 2026 (‘the Framework’).
8. Turning to the second issue of the effect of the proposed use on highway safety,
   I saw on my visit that the appeal building is one of more than a dozen commercial
   premises in this part of Wick Road, albeit with some currently vacant. The
   pavement is narrow, and the road is busy with double red lines that indicate a ‘Red
   Route’ clearway precluding stopping, parking, or loading at any time.
9. There are very limited areas for roadside parking, and I note that residents who
   have made representations on the application refer to illegal pavement parking
   already occurring in connection with other nearby premises, and obstruction
   caused by parking in the mews to the rear. In this context I acknowledge that the
   business model is delivery focused, but it is not realistic to ignore the likelihood of
   walk-in orders with the customers parking close to the entrance.
10. I have had regard to the information in the Delivery and Servicing Management
    Plan and note that the Council has criticised the lack of information on the
    anticipated number, type, and frequency of delivery trips. In fairness I consider that
    this would be difficult if not impossible to provide with a reasonable degree of
    accuracy, as indeed is the case with the potential number of ‘walk ins’ from passing
    motorists and pedestrians.
11. Be that as it may, I am satisfied that the comings and goings from cycles,
    motorbikes and cars associated with premises on a site with a narrow pavement,
    very limited parking and fronting onto a Red Route highway would be such as to
    result in an increase in hazards and overall have an unacceptable impact on
    highway safety. On this issue, there would therefore be harmful conflict with
    Policies LP43 of the Hackney Local Plan; Policy T6 of the London Plan and
    paragraph 4 of Policy TR6 of the Framework.
Conclusion
12. For the reasons explained above and having had regard to all other matters raised,
    the appeal fails.

Martin Andrews
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
