Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 September 2026
by B. Johnson BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2nd October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010933
The Little Boatyard, Lime Street, Brightlingsea CO7 0BH
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Ms Clare Richmond against the decision of Tendring District Council.
•   The application reference is 25/01157/FUL.
•   The development proposed is originally described as “Minor changes to appearance of timber cabin
    as approved. Proposed change of use to timber cabin to include workshop/studio use”.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a timber cabin for
   Class E(G)(iii) Light Industrial (printmaking and joinery) at The Little Boatyard, Lime
   Street, Brightlingsea CO7 0BH in accordance with the terms of the application
   reference 25/01157/FUL, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2. The description of development in the banner heading above is taken from the
   planning application form. A revised description was agreed prior to the
   determination of the planning application, and the application was determined on
   that basis. I have further amended the description in my decision to remove
   wording that is not a description of development. I am satisfied that the revised
   description is accurate and I have determined the appeal on this basis.
3. I noted on my site visit that a timber cabin was in situ and matched the plans and
   elevations shown on drawing number PA – 12 with the exception of an additional
   window at the western elevation. Therefore, I have dealt with the appeal on the
   basis that planning permission is being sought for the development shown on the
   approved plans and not what has been constructed on site. Any discrepancies
   between the approved plans and the works observed on site would not be material
   to my determination of this appeal.
4. A new version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
   issued on 17 August 2026. Annex A, Paragraph 1 states that this version of the
   Framework applies to decision-making from the day of its publication, therefore
   references to the Framework in this decision are to the August 2026 version. I have
   sought the views of the main parties on the implications of the new Framework and
   had regard to comments provided.
Main Issues
5. The main issues are the effect of the proposal on:


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010933


       •   the character and appearance of the area; and
       •   highway and pedestrian safety.
Reasons
Character and appearance
6. The appeal site is located on Lime Street, an unmade private road and public
   footpath which provides access to a number of small commercial plots as well as
   access to the rear gardens and garages of dwellings on Tower Street. The road
   varies in width along its length and is lined with extensive vegetation particularly
   along its eastern side. The road has a varied character; at the northern end it is
   more enclosed as a result of the surrounding vegetation and commercial/residential
   development but progressively develops a more open character further south
   where wider landscape views become more appreciable. The appeal site is located
   within one of the aforementioned commercial plots. The site is in Use Class B8
   storage use and features extensive dense vegetation including along most of the
   site boundary.
7. The appeal site lies outside but close to the Brightlingsea settlement boundary. The
   Tendring District Local Plan 2013-2033 and Beyond Section 2 (adopted January
   2022) (LP2) Policy SPL 2 states that, outside of Settlement Development
   Boundaries, proposals will be considered in relation to the pattern and scales of
   growth promoted through the Settlement Hierarchy and any other relevant policies
   in the plan. The proposal is located within the Coastal Protection Belt identified by
   LP2 Policy PPL 2, within which the open character of the undeveloped coastline will
   be protected and any development in that area should have a compelling functional
   or operational requirement to be located there. Where development meets this
   requirement, Policy PPL 2 states that its design should respond appropriately to the
   landscape and historic character of its context.
8. Policy PPL 3 states that planning permission will be refused for any proposed
   development which would cause overriding harm to the character or appearance of
   the rural landscape. The Tendring District Local Plan 2013-2033 and Beyond
   Section 1 (adopted January 2021) (LP1) Policy SP 7 and LP2 Policy SPL 3, taken
   together, require all new development to respond positively to local character and
   context through, amongst other things, ensuring that new buildings are well
   designed and maintain or enhance local character and distinctiveness; and that the
   development respects or enhances local landscape character.
9. The proposal comprises a timber cabin at the north-eastern corner of the site which
   would be used for a variety of activities within Use Class E(G)(iii) including
   printmaking, framing and joinery, boat and kayak repairs, restoration and
   maintenance. I acknowledge that some of these activities, in isolation, would not
   necessarily need to be located at this site. However, the evidence provided
   demonstrates that, overall, the proposed activities would be marine-related, and
   consequently the proposal would have a direct functional relationship with the
   existing storage use that operates on the wider site because it would provide
   opportunities to undertake boat and kayak maintenance, repair and restoration on-
   site.
10. Therefore, taking into account the specific circumstances of this site, in particular its
    coastal location, its proximity to an established storage use and the nature of the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010933


       activities proposed, and in the absence of a specific definition of what is meant by
       “compelling functional or operational requirement”, I find that the proposal would
       provide a compelling functional requirement to be located within the Coastal
       Protection Belt.
11. I acknowledge the extant permission1 for a timber cabin within Use Class B8 on the
    site. Irrespective of whether this application has already been implemented, it
    would remain capable of being implemented and as such it would constitute a
    genuine fallback position. While a B8 use would accord with the storage use in
    operation across the wider site, there is no convincing evidence to demonstrate that
    it would result in a less intensive use of the site compared to Use Class E(G)(iii),
    nor have I been provided with evidence of any restrictions on the extant B8
    permission that would require marine-related storage uses to be retained (for
    example, through conditions to restrict specific types of B8 use or to restrict other
    aspects of the operation of the B8 use). Therefore, the fallback position would only
    have very limited weight insofar as it relates to the use of the site.
12. With regard to the character and appearance of the area, the site is enclosed by
    dense vegetation, which, together with the gates (when closed), would preclude
    views from the surrounding area. The timber cabin is single storey and sited to
    avoid being intrusive in terms of the wider site and surrounding area. It is
    appropriately designed for light industrial uses in terms of its form and appearance.
    While the building does include decking, fenestration and a glazed door, these
    would not, in principle, be unusual features of a light industrial use within this site
    context. In these respects, it also accords with the design and appearance of other
    commercial structures along the eastern side of Lime Street that I observed on my
    site visit.
13. The proposal would be visible from Lime Street while the gates are open, although
    views of it would be obscured by and would coalesce with other structures, and in
    any event would be fleeting while walking past the site. Any views would also be
    read against the backdrop of dense vegetation which would be a predominant
    factor in how the fleeting view is appreciated.
14. The fallback position noted above would also be relevant with regard to character
    and appearance. The proposed cabin would be sited similarly to the fallback
    scheme and would utilise similar external materials. While it would include
    additional fenestration and a timber deck, it would also have a smaller footprint,
    lower height and a flat roof. I consider that the fallback position would be noticeably
    more harmful to the character and appearance of the area due to these differences,
    particularly as the pitched roof would likely be more prominent from views on Lime
    Street. Therefore, the fallback position would have moderate weight in my decision
    insofar as it relates to character and appearance.
15. My attention has been drawn to a previous appeal at the site2 which concerned the
    erection of a residential dwelling. I have not been provided with any plans or
    information regarding the extent of built form proposed, meaning I am not able to
    establish whether the Inspector’s conclusions regarding the effect of the proposal
    on the character and appearance of the area are readily transferable to the current
    appeal proposal. As a result of this and given that the proposal involved the change

1
    Planning application reference: 24/00316/FUL
2
    Appeal Ref: APP/P1560/W/22/3306289

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      3
Appeal Decision 6010933


      to a residential use which was considered to lack a compelling functional or
      operational need to be located at the site, the previous appeal would only have very
      limited weight in my decision. My attention has also been drawn to an appeal3
      elsewhere on Lime Street which concerned the demolition of garages and the
      erection of 3 residential dwellings. For the same reasons noted above, this appeal
      would also only have very limited weight in my decision.
16. In conclusion, the proposal has a compelling functional requirement to be located
    within the Coastal Protection Belt and would not harm the character and
    appearance of the area. It would therefore be in accordance with Policy SP 7 of
    LP1 and Policies PPL 2, PPL 3 and SPL 3 of LP2.
17. The proposal would also accord with Policies DP3(1) and DP3(2) of the
    Framework, which, amongst other things, state that development proposals should
    respond to their context so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings,
    and create visually attractive, distinctive and characterful development to establish
    or maintain a strong sense of place and pride, including through the use of a
    coherent palette of materials, design features and planting.
Highway and pedestrian safety
18. While Lime Street is a private unmade road, I observed on my site visit that it was
    in reasonable condition and would allow for safe navigation of vehicles and
    pedestrians. The nature of the road means that vehicles would be likely to travel at
    low speeds and while it is single vehicle width at points, there are sufficient places
    for vehicles to pass pedestrians and other vehicles safely, particularly towards the
    northern end where the appeal site would likely be accessed from. There are
    several access points along Lime Street which would also help to avoid vehicle
    conflict by providing opportunities to exit onto Tower Street in forward gear and
    therefore negating the need for vehicles to undertake potentially hazardous
    manoeuvres to exit the road.
19. There is no substantive evidence that the proposal would lead to a material
    intensification of use compared to the existing B8 use, for example as a result of
    increased frequency of trips or through use of larger vehicles. Even if there was an
    increase in vehicle movements as a result of the proposal, the nature of Lime
    Street as described above means that it could accommodate some additional
    movements without causing adverse impacts.
20. The proposed light industrial use would be unlikely to lead to significant amounts of
    trips by heavy vehicles which would limit concerns regarding potential degradation
    of the road surface on Lime Street and means that the absence of a mechanism to
    secure mitigation or improvements to the road would not weigh against the
    proposal. Conditions can also be imposed to restrict the use to Use Class E(G)(iii)
    and restrict public access to the site, which would serve to reduce additional trips to
    the site. The site is accessible by sustainable modes of transport and therefore is
    not entirely reliant on private vehicles, which would also help to reduce potential
    highway impacts and limit conflict with pedestrians.
21. In conclusion, the proposal would not cause harm to highway and pedestrian safety
    and would therefore be in accordance with LP2 Policies CP 1 and SPL 3. These
    policies, taken together, seek to prevent unacceptable impacts on highway safety

3
    Appeal Ref: APP/P1560/W/22/3312243

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010933


     by, amongst other things, ensuring access to the site is practicable and that the
     highway network will be able to safely accommodate the additional traffic the
     proposal will generate and not lead to severe traffic impact.
22. It would also accord with Policies TR3 and TR4 of the Framework, which, taken
    together, seek to prevent adverse impacts on highway safety and minimise the
    scope for conflict between pedestrians, cyclists and vehicles.
Other Matters
23. Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
    (the Act) requires special attention to be paid to the desirability of preserving or
    enhancing the character or appearance of a conservation area (CA). This is
    reflected in Policy PPL 8 of LP2 which states that new development within a
    designated CA will only be permitted where it has regard to the desirability of
    preserving or enhancing the special character and appearance of the area. Policies
    HE4 and HE5 of the Framework together seek to conserve heritage assets (which
    includes CAs) in a manner appropriate to their significance and, amongst other
    things, state that assessments of the potential effects of development proposals on
    the significance of heritage assets (including through effects on their setting) should
    identify whether proposals would be likely to have a positive effect, no effect, or
    result in harm or cause the total loss of the significance of the asset.
24. The appeal site lies close to the Brightlingsea CA. The Brightlingsea Conservation
    Area Character Appraisal and Management Plan (November 2023) provides
    information relating to the special interest of the CA, which is relevant to any
    assessment of the potential effects on its significance. Due to the intervening built
    form and vegetation and the single storey nature of the proposal, it would not be
    visible in any views to and from the CA. Taking these factors into account, I
    consider that the proposal would have no effect on the significance of the CA and
    would therefore preserve its character and appearance in accordance with the Act,
    LP2 Policy PPL 8 and Policies HE4 and HE5 of the Framework.
25. The Council and an interested party have raised concern that allowing the appeal
    could set a precedent for other light industrial uses in the area. Each proposal must
    be judged on its own merits based on the specific details of each case and taking
    into account individual and cumulative impacts. The proposal has set out site
    specific evidence that would distinguish the appeal proposal from other
    development that could come forward and means that allowing the appeal would
    not provide a general precedent for other light industrial development in the area.
    Similarly, allowing the appeal would have no determinative effect on any future
    applications to change the use of the timber cabin to residential use. Such a
    change would require planning permission and would be assessed on its own
    merits.
26. It is suggested that a covenant applies to the site that would restrict operations at
    certain times of the year. However, I have not been provided with substantive
    details of this restriction, and in any event, this would be a separate legal matter
    rather than a determinative factor in my decision.
27. Objections to the application raised concerns in relation to emergency service
    access, increases in noise and disturbance, and issues with litter and anti-social
    behaviour in the area. There is no evidence before me that the proposal would
    affect future access by the emergency services. Notwithstanding this, Lime Street

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010933


     has multiple access points that would allow for continued access by emergency
     service vehicles. With regard to noise and disturbance, the proposal comprises a
     light industrial use that can, in principle, be carried out in a residential area. The
     cabin would be sufficiently separated from nearby residential properties which
     would limit the potential for noise and disturbance impacts. Planning conditions can
     also be imposed to ensure that the operation of the use is limited during times of
     the day when residential occupiers are likely to be more susceptible to noise and
     disturbance impacts. With regard to litter and anti-social behaviour in the area,
     there is no convincing evidence that the proposal would cause or exacerbate these
     issues, either directly or indirectly.
28. I am not presented with substantive evidence to demonstrate that the proposal
    would cause harm to biodiversity. The vegetation surrounding the site would be
    unaffected by the proposal, and in any event, there is a fallback position that would
    permit the construction of a timber cabin that would have the same effect as the
    proposal. There is also no substantive evidence to demonstrate that the site is at
    risk of flooding, or that it would exacerbate flood risk elsewhere.
29. Comments from an interested party refer to a petition signed by around 220
    residents opposing industrial uses in this location. However, I have not been
    provided with a copy of this petition and other comments suggest that the petition
    relates to a proposal elsewhere on Lime Street. Therefore, it would not be relevant
    to my determination of this appeal.
30. The proposal would provide a complementary function that would assist with the
    efficient operation of an existing business. This accords with Policy E2 of the
    Framework which states that substantial weight should be given to economic
    benefits of proposals for commercial development which allow businesses to
    invest, expand and/or adapt. The principle of the proposed development is
    supported by Policy L2(1)(b) of the Framework which states that substantial weight
    should be given to the benefits where a development proposal would make better
    use of underutilised land.
Conditions
31. I have considered the Council’s suggested conditions in relation to the Framework
    and the Planning Practice Guidance. As the development has already been
    implemented by virtue of the erection of a timber cabin having already been carried
    out, the standard commencement condition is not necessary. However, it is
    necessary to impose a condition that requires the development to accord with the
    approved plans to provide certainty. I have amended the Council’s suggested
    condition to remove tailpiece wording and reference to a phasing plan, to ensure it
    is reasonable and necessary.
32. It is necessary to restrict the use of the cabin to limit other uses which have not
    been demonstrated to have a compelling functional or operational requirement to
    be located at the site, including other uses within Use Class E. The Council’s
    suggested condition combined restrictions to the Use Classes Order and General
    Permitted Development Order into 1 condition, but I have split this into 2 separate
    conditions for the purposes of precision and enforceability. The Council’s
    suggested condition also seeks to limit development within Use Class E(G)(iii) to
    printmaking, joinery and boat repairs/boat storage. However, such restrictions
    would not be necessary given my conclusions regarding the compelling functional


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6010933


     requirement of the overall E(G)(iii) use. Furthermore, the Council’s suggested
     wording lacks precision and would not be enforceable. Policy DM6(2)(c) of the
     Framework states that conditions should not be used to restrict national permitted
     development rights unless there is clear justification to do so, which has been
     provided in this case by virtue of the lack of a compelling functional or operational
     requirement for uses other than Use Class E(G)(iii).
33. A condition to restrict the hours of operation and deliveries is necessary to ensure
    that harm to the living conditions of nearby residential occupiers is adequately
    mitigated, taking into account potential individual and cumulative impacts. A
    condition limiting access by members of the public is necessary in the interests of
    highway and pedestrian safety and to ensure that harm to the living conditions of
    nearby residential occupiers is adequately mitigated. However, a condition to
    restrict the use of power tools would not be necessary or reasonable.
34. It has not been demonstrated why a condition requiring the submission of a
    scheme for the provision and implementation of water, energy and resource
    efficiency measures would be necessary, therefore I have not imposed this
    condition.
35. The appellant has identified the potential for a temporary permission to address
    concerns relating to the operation of the use and traffic movements, although this
    condition was not part of the Council’s suggested conditions. For the avoidance of
    doubt, a temporary permission would not be necessary in this case given that I
    have found no harm in relation to these issues.
Conclusion
36. The proposal would be in accordance with the development plan as a whole.
    Material considerations do not indicate a decision should be taken other than in
    accordance with the development plan. I therefore conclude the appeal should be
    allowed, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.



B. Johnson
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
     Appeal Decision 6010933


     Schedule of 5 conditions
1)     The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
       following approved plans:
       •    Drawing number: PA – 10 – Plan & Elevations as built, dated September 2025
       •    Drawing number: PA-11-A – Site & Location Plans, dated September 2025
            (amended 02.10.25)
       •    Drawing number: PA – 12 – Plan & Elevations Proposed
2)     Notwithstanding the provisions of the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted
       Development) (England) Order 2015 (or any order revoking and re-enacting that
       Order with or without modification), no development permitted by virtue of Part 3 of
       Schedule 2 to the Order shall be undertaken.
3)     The premises shall be used for Use Class E(G)(iii) and for no other purpose
       (including any other purpose in Class E of the Schedule to the Town and Country
       Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended) or in any provision equivalent to
       that Class in any statutory instrument revoking and re-enacting that Order with or
       without modification).
4)     The use hereby permitted shall only take place between the hours of 08:00 to 18:00
       on Mondays to Saturdays, and not at any time on Sundays or on Bank or Public
       Holidays. Deliveries shall be taken at or despatched from the site only between these
       approved hours.
5)     The use hereby permitted shall at no time be open to the public for visitors or sales of
       goods or services.


End of schedule




     https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
