Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 September 2026
by F Harrison BA(Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010211
22 Ecclesburn Street, Richmond Hill, Leeds LS9 9DB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Ewa Sroka against the decision of Leeds City Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00971/FU.
•    The development proposed is the change of use from a dwelling to short-term let accommodation.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The description of development is taken from the application form, omitting
       wording that is not an act of development. The change of use has already taken
       place, however for clarity, I have determined the appeal on the development as
       shown on the plans. Since the appeal was submitted a new version of the National
       Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) came into effect, but there are no
       material changes in policy emphasis relevant to the substance of the appeal.
Main Issue
3.     The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of neighbouring
       occupiers, with regard to noise and disturbance.
Reasons
4.     The appeal site accommodates a mid-terrace property with four bedrooms and a
       modest yard to the rear. It is located within a dense residential area which I
       observed to have relatively tranquil qualities. The proximity of dwellings
       surrounding the appeal site in combination with the generally low level of
       background noise creates a sensitive relationship.
5.     As a matter of fact and degree, the more transient nature of occupancy associated
       with short term let accommodation would be different to the settled pattern of
       occupancy at a dwellinghouse. The change of use would result in a frequent
       turnover of guests and several cleaning and maintenance visits. In comparison to
       a single household, the movements to and from the property would be less
       consistent, particularly given the broad period for arrivals set out in the
       management plan and that different guests could arrive at various times.
       Consequently, the consistently short periods of residency, together with the
       frequency of the associated comings and goings would be more marked and



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010211


       disruptive than that which could be reasonably be expected to be associated with
       a single household.
6.     In the specific circumstances of this case, given the high turnover of guests and
       the transient character of the movements associated with a short term let,
       monitoring the number of guests would be challenging. As such a condition to
       restrict occupation to six guests would not be reasonably capable of being
       complied with and enforced and would fail to meet the tests set out in Framework
       Policy DM6. For the same reasons, even if the property has typically been let to
       young professionals rather than being used for leisure stays, a condition to restrict
       the use of the property to young professionals would not be reasonable.
7.     There would be nothing to prevent the accommodation being used for leisure
       stays, which may typically generate greater levels of activity and result in
       movements at unsociable hours when neighbouring residents fairly have
       expectations of a reasonable level of peace and quiet. Additionally, because of the
       modest size of the outdoor space which limits the number of guests who can use it
       at any one time, it could be used reasonably frequently through the day/evening by
       different guests. The noise and disturbance arising from the outdoor space in this
       way would be detrimental to the neighbouring occupiers because of the terraced
       nature of the appeal property, the position of the windows and the proximity of the
       outdoor spaces.
8.     Overall, the increased level of activity and different pattern of use within a relatively
       tranquil residential street would be readily noticeable and would have a detrimental
       effect on the living conditions of nearby residents. The effects of the proposal
       would be most keenly felt by the nearest occupiers either side of the appeal
       property and because of the dense urban area other surrounding occupiers would
       also be affected. The proposal would therefore not be appropriate for its location,
       taking into account the likely effect on living conditions which Framework Policy P3
       seeks to avoid.
9.     While not every guest will cause noise and disturbance, short term let occupants
       may be less aware of the effect of their behaviour on the living conditions of the
       neighbouring occupiers. I have carefully considered the submitted management
       plan and the appellant’s willingness to seek to ensure that neighbours are not
       inconvenienced. However, ensuring that the rules are adhered to are beyond the
       control of the appellant and are largely down to individual guests. Any response
       from the appellant would be reactive rather than preventative and so this is not a
       matter that can be addressed through the imposition of a condition to secure the
       operation of the premises in line with the management plan.
10. I therefore conclude that the proposal would have an unacceptable effect on the
    living conditions of neighbouring occupiers, with regard to noise and disturbance. It
    would be in conflict with Policy GP5 of the Leeds Unitary Development Plan
    (Review 2006) and Policy P10 of the Core Strategy (as amended by the Core
    Strategy selective Review 2019) insofar as they require proposals to avoid
    environmental intrusion, loss of amenity and provide good design that is
    appropriate to its location, contributing positively to quality of life and wellbeing.
Other Considerations
11. It is not disputed that the appeal property can easily be accessed using a variety of
    different transport modes including walking, cycling and public transport. However,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010211


       this, and any other policy compliance is a neutral factor, weighing neither for nor
       against the proposal.
Conclusion
12. My above findings bring the proposal into conflict with the development plan, read
    as a whole. There are no material considerations that indicate a decision should
    be made other than in accordance with it. Therefore, I conclude that the appeal
    should be dismissed.



F Harrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
