Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 20 July 2026
by C Cooper-Young MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010378
6 Marsh Road, Newton Abbot, Devon TQ12 2AR
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Bob Doubleday against the decision of Teignbridge District Council.
•    The application reference is 25/01810/FUL.
•    The development is a veranda and associated works.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     I have taken the description of development above from the Council’s decision
       notice as this more accurately describes the development.
3.     At my site visit it was clear that the veranda, patio doors and Juliet balcony and
       door have been installed. For the avoidance of doubt, I have determined the
       appeal on the basis of the submitted plans rather than what has been physically
       carried out on site.
4.     The Council have only raised substantive concern with the veranda and not the
       remainder of the proposal, and I see no reason to disagree. I have therefore
       confined my assessment to the veranda.
5.     As part of the appeal, the appellant has submitted a flood risk assessment (FRA)
       dated 11 February 2026 conducted by Flood Risk and Drainage Solution Ltd. I
       consider that the inclusion of this document would not evolve the scheme or
       amount to a fundamental change which would ultimately result in a different
       application to that which was considered by the Council. Furthermore, based on
       the evidence before me, I do not consider that accepting these documents would
       deprive those who were entitled to be consulted on the application of the
       opportunity to make any representations that they may have wanted to make on
       the application as amended, given the majority of development has already been
       undertaken. Therefore, in this instance, I am satisfied that there would be no
       substantive or procedural reason not to accept this additional evidence, and I have
       made my decision on this basis.
6.     Since the application was determined, the Teignbridge Local Plan 2020-2040 (the
       LP) has been adopted (May 2026) and now replaces the Teignbridge Local Plan
       2013-2033 (adopted 2014). The Council's reason for refusal relied upon (former)
       Policy EN4 (Flood Risk), and the then emerging Policy EN6 (Flood Risk and Water
       Quality). Both policies address the same broad policy objectives, I am satisfied

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010378


       that the interests of the main parties would not be prejudiced by my consideration
       of the appeal against the recently adopted LP Policy EN6 in reaching my decision.
7.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published in August 2026. In the interest of natural justice and to ensure neither of
       the main parties were prejudiced by this matter, I consulted both parties on the
       changes to the Framework and have received comments which I have considered
       in my determination of the appeal. Any reference to the Framework in this decision
       is to the most recent version.
Main Issue
8.     The main issue is the effect of the development on safety, access and
       maintenance of the River Lemon.
Reasons
9.     The appeal site is located on the eastern side of Marsh Road, close to Newton
       Abbot town centre, within an established mixed use area adjacent to the River
       Lemon. The property occupies a constrained riverside plot, with the rear (eastern)
       boundary directly overlooking and adjoining the River Lemon, while the River
       Teign lies approximately 460 metres to the east.
10. The site is within Flood Zone 3 and the appellant has submitted a FRA in support
    of the development, which identifies and assesses the risks arising from fluvial and
    tidal flooding associated with the River Lemon and River Teign. The submitted
    FRA confirms that the veranda structure would likely be liable to inundation during
    flood events.
11. The evidence outlines that the development constitutes minor householder
    development and is therefore not subject to the sequential test requirements of
    flood risk policy. The appellant contends that the proposal is consistent with the
    objectives of adopted LP Policy EN6, the Framework and Planning Practice
    Guidance (PPG), which require development to be safe for its lifetime and not
    increase flood risk elsewhere.
12. The appellant disputes the Environment Agency's (EA) concerns regarding access
    for maintenance and flood management, outlining that the river corridor is already
    crossed by a number of bridges and service pipes, and that the proposed veranda
    would be less intrusive than these existing structures because it does not span the
    full width of the channel. On this basis, the appellant considers that the proposal
    would not impede inspection, maintenance or future improvement works.
13. Whilst the FRA concludes that flood waters would be able to pass through the
    open veranda structure, the proposal would nevertheless introduce a permanent
    structure extending over the River Lemon that would likely become partially or
    wholly submerged during flood events.
14. Moreover, the EA objected to the application on the basis that the development is
    incompatible with maintaining the safe operation of the channel, is likely to
    increase flood risk to the property and to third parties, and outlines that the
    veranda would restrict essential maintenance and emergency access where an
    unobstructed corridor is required.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010378


15. The EA further states that a Flood Risk Activity Permit (FRAP) would not be
    granted for the proposal because of the likelihood that it would increase flood risk
    and the risk posed to an EA flood defence asset. As a statutory consultee with
    specialist expertise in flood risk matters, I afford significant weight to its findings.
    No substantive compelling evidence to the contrary has been provided to
    demonstrate that the EA's concerns are unfounded. The development would likely
    impede access to critical flood defence infrastructure and would be unlikely to
    obtain the necessary permit. These factors weigh heavily against the proposal and
    lead me to conclude that the implications for flood risk have not been fully
    considered.
16. The presence of a submerged structure in the river corridor would have the
    potential to obstruct, delay or complicate emergency access, rescue operations,
    maintenance activities and the deployment of flood response measures at
    precisely those times when unobstructed access is most critical.
17. Therefore, I am not satisfied that the proposal meets the requirements of national
    policy to ensure that development would not give rise to unacceptable
    consequences regarding safety, access and maintenance of the River Lemon
    during flood events.
18. Accordingly, the proposal would conflict with LP Policy EN6. It would also conflict
    with policy and guidance in the Framework and PPG.
Conclusion
19. For the reasons given above the appeal is dismissed.



C Cooper-Young
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
