Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 17 August 2026
by C Cooper-Young MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18TH September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010834
Land adjacent to Arcady, Winters Lane To Cheese Lane, Coryates, Dorset DT3
4HW
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Roger Taylor against the decision of Dorset Council.
•    The application reference is P/FUL/2026/01044.
•    The development proposed is erection of self-build single storey dwelling with associated parking
     and amenity space.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published in August 2026. In the interest of natural justice and to ensure neither of
       the main parties were prejudiced by this matter, I consulted both parties on the
       changes to the Framework. Any comments I have received have been considered
       in my determination of the appeal.
3.     The site is within the Dorset National Landscape. Therefore, in considering this
       appeal I have applied the duty in section 85 of the Countryside and Rights of Way
       Act 2000, as amended by section 245 of the Levelling-up and Regeneration Act
       2023, to seek to further the purpose of conserving and enhancing the natural
       beauty of the area of outstanding natural beauty.
4.     The evidence indicates that the appeal site lies within nationally and internationally
       designated ecological sites, including a Site of Special Scientific Interest, Special
       Area of Conservation and Special Protection Area. I have had regard to the
       requirements of the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as
       amended). However, having concluded that the appeal should be dismissed for
       the substantive planning reasons set out below, the outcome of any Appropriate
       Assessment could not affect the decision. Consequently, it is unnecessary for me
       to undertake an Appropriate Assessment or reach a finding on the effects of the
       proposal on the integrity of these designated habitats sites. This matter does not
       therefore form part of my determination of the appeal.
5.     A screening direction under the Town and Country Planning (Environmental
       Impact Assessment) Regulations 2017 (the EIA Regulations) has been issued in
       relation to the development subject of this appeal. This confirms that the
       development is not EIA development, and I proceed accordingly.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010834


Main Issues
6.     The main issues in this appeal are:
       •   whether the proposal would be in a suitable location for housing, having regard
           to local and national policies; and

       •   whether the proposed development is required to deliver mandatory
           biodiversity net gain (BNG).

Reasons
Location of development
7.     Coryates is a small, loose‑knit hamlet formed through organic and incremental
       development. The appeal site is approached via a narrow lane and comprised of a
       parcel of residential garden set between two dwellings.
8.     Policy INT1 of the West Dorset, Weymouth & Portland Local Plan (2015) (LP)
       states that there will be a presumption in favour of sustainable development that
       will improve the economic, social and environmental conditions in the area.
9.     The spatial strategy for residential development is set out in LP Policy SUS2. The
       policy reflects a clear and deliberate approach to directing growth towards
       sustainable locations, where residents have good access to employment, services,
       facilities and a range of transport choices. Consequently, the majority of new
       housing is expected to be accommodated within the larger settlements, while
       development in rural areas is focused on settlements with defined development
       boundaries (DDBs).
10. The appeal site lies outside any DDB and is therefore within the open countryside.
    In such locations, the policy adopts a restrictive approach, permitting only limited
    forms of development that are specifically identified as appropriate. The only
    scope for open market housing in LP Policy SUS2, is through the re-use of existing
    rural buildings.
11. Coryates has no services and facilities to support day-to-day living. Portesham is
    approximately 2.5km from the appeal site and offers a modest range of everyday
    services and facilities however, these are limited. At my site visit I noted that the
    road network is unlit, narrow and without pedestrian footways. Access to these
    facilities would involve walking along a narrow, unlit road, much of which is subject
    to the national speed limit, this would be even less likely during inclement weather
    and hours of darkness. As a result, occupiers would be heavily reliant on the
    private car to meet their day-to-day needs.
12. The appellant refers to Dorset Council's Flexible Settlements Policy Background
    Paper (2025) (the Paper). However, this document is evidence prepared to inform
    the development of future planning policy and is not in itself policy. It has not been
    examined or adopted and therefore carries very limited weight. Whilst it may
    indicate that the Council is considering alternative approaches to the distribution of
    development, it does not alter the adopted development plan or justify departing
    from the established settlement strategy.
13. Moreover, the Paper was prepared with significant reference to the 2024
    Framework rather than the current policy based version. Consequently, it attracts

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010834


         only very limited weight as an evidence document and does not alter the
         assessment of the proposal against the adopted development plan and current
         national policy.
14. The appellant has drawn my attention to a number of planning decisions1 to
    demonstrate the acceptability of the appeal proposal. Whilst I have not had sight of
    the detailed information for those decisions, the location of development for the
    Winters Lane site was found to be acceptable, given the close proximity to
    services and facilities. The East Shilvinghampton Farm decision held that the eight
    holiday cabins would have an economic benefit to the local rural economy. The
    Marnhull appeal decision outlined that villages would need to accommodate some
    growth. The benefits of that proposal included the provision of affordable housing,
    housing, financial contributions, local services and community facilities. As such,
    these are not similar in respect of the nature of the scheme or the relevant
    considerations. Each case must be considered on its merits.
15. Accordingly, I conclude that the appeal property is not in a suitable location for
    open market housing with particular regard to the local development strategy. As
    such, it is contrary to LP Policies INT1 and SUS2, the aims of which I have
    outlined above.
BNG
16. LP Policy ENV2 seeks to protect biodiversity and wildlife habitats by ensuring that
    development avoids harm to ecological interests and, where impacts cannot be
    avoided, that appropriate mitigation and compensation measures are secured.
17. Whilst changes to BNG exemptions were introduced on 6 August 2026 relating to
    sites of less than 0.2ha, Planning Practice Guidance outlines that this exemption
    applies only where the application for planning permission was made on or after 6
    August 2026.
18. At the time of the planning application subject of this appeal, it was the case that
    self/custom-build submissions for dwellings were exempt from BNG requirements.
    The application form states that the proposed dwelling would be self-build.
    However, there was no robust mechanism proposed (such as a S106 legal
    agreement) to secure it.
19. The Procedural Guide: Planning appeals – England, paragraph 18.2.2., outlines
    that for appeals by written representation the appellant must ensure that the
    Planning Inspectorate receive an executed and certified copy of the planning
    obligation at the time of making their appeal.
20. I have not been provided with a signed legal agreement. In the absence of a
    mechanism to secure the proposed biodiversity measures in perpetuity, or for an
    appropriate management period, there would be no certainty that the ecological
    enhancements relied upon would be delivered and maintained. Consequently, it
    would not be possible to conclude that the development would adequately protect
    or enhance biodiversity interests. As such the proposal would be contrary to the
    aims of Policy ENV2 of the LP.



1
    Local Planning Authority refs: WD/D/19/000464; P/FUL/2022/06003 and PINS ref: APP/D1265/W/24/3353912.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               3
Appeal Decision 6010834


Other Matters
21. The site lies within the Dorset National Landscape. The proposed dwelling would
    occupy the garden of Arcady and would be contained within the existing built
    extent of the hamlet, positioned between established dwellings. As such, it would
    be viewed in the context of the existing cluster of development rather than as an
    encroachment into the surrounding countryside. Given its contained location and
    relationship with neighbouring built form, the proposal would not materially
    diminish the natural beauty, landscape character or scenic qualities of the National
    Landscape. In this regard, I find that its effect on the National Landscape would be
    limited, and I note that my conclusion aligns with the Council's assessment.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
22. The appeal proposal would provide an additional dwelling. However, it would not
    be suitably located and would not adequately protect or enhance biodiversity
    interests. The proposal therefore conflicts with the development plan, taken as a
    whole.
23. Policy S3 of the Framework sets out that decision on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development and goes on to
    state that in all locations proposals that accord with both an up-to-date
    development plan and the decision-making policies in the Framework should be
    approved without delay.
24. For development proposals outside settlement, such as in this case, Framework
    Policy S5 stipulates that only certain forms of development should be approved,
    which are listed in 1. a. to j., unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in the Framework.
25. Both parties acknowledge that the Council cannot demonstrate a 5 year housing
    land supply (5YHLS). The Council has confirmed that it is able to demonstrate a
    housing land supply of 2.53 years.
26. With a lack of a 5YHLS and an unmet need, the most applicable criteria is sub-
    paragraph 1.j. of Framework Policy S5. This would allow development which would
    address an evidenced unmet housing need (as in this case) where the
    development is physically well-related to an existing settlement and of a scale
    which can be accommodated considering the existing or proposed availability of
    infrastructure.
27. Even though the appeal site is close to a few other houses, I have already found it
    is not well-related to an existing settlement. It therefore does not fall within
    category 1.j. of Framework Policy S5, nor from the evidence before me, would it
    accord with any of the other criteria at policy S5:1.a. to j.
28. Therefore, and on the basis that none of the circumstances in the criteria at S3:1.
    would apply, the scheme does benefit from the presumption in favour of
    sustainable development at Policy S3 of the Framework.
29. The proposal would provide one residential unit. Even as a windfall site or self-
    build dwelling, the proposal would make only a modest contribution towards
    addressing the shortfall. There would be some limited social and economic


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010834


       benefits arising from the construction phase and future occupiers would bring a
       small amount of trade and benefit to facilities and services to the wider area.
30. LP Policy SUS2 is broadly consistent with the strategic aims of the Framework
    which seek to direct housing towards sustainable locations and maintain a plan-led
    approach to growth, to which I attach substantial weight. Whilst there are benefits
    that weigh in favour of the proposal, they do not, alone or cumulatively, amount to
    exceptional circumstances to warrant a departure from the development plan.
31. Taken together, the very limited benefits of the proposal would be substantially
    outweighed by its adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies of the Framework. As such, Policy S5 of the Framework does not
    point to permission being granted in this instance.
32. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
33. For the reasons given above the appeal is dismissed.



C Cooper-Young
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
