Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 August 2026 by Ellie Nutman BA (Hons)
Decision by F Harrison BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010898
Broad Oak, Healthland School, Sandy Lane, Accrington, Lancashire BB5 2AN
• The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
  against a refusal to grant planning permission.
• The appeal is made by Mrs Fozia Naz against the decision of Hyndburn Borough Council.
• The application Ref is 11/25/0139.
• The development proposed is side single storey extension, internal works, addition of a new stone
  portico, insulation of new doors and new opening created in garden wall with new stairs.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. Since the appeal was submitted the Council has adopted the Hyndburn 2040: Local
   Plan (Strategic Policies and Site Allocations) (2026) (LP). As such, it forms part of
   the development plan for the area and the appeal has been determined on this
   basis, taking into account comments received from the main parties on the relevant
   policies. In addition, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. Insofar as they are relevant to the
   case, the changes do not have a material bearing on the substance of the main
   issue or indeed the arguments of the main parties thereon.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the
   area, including the host dwelling, which is a non-designated heritage asset (NDHA).
Reasons for the Recommendation
5. The appeal site accommodates a large detached former school building set within
   extensive grounds, accessed via a long private driveway and bounded by mature
   landscaping and stone walls. It is not disputed that the appeal site is a NDHA of
   local interest and merit. Insofar as is relevant to this scheme, the special interest of
   the appeal property is derived from its aesthetic and historic values. The property is
   designed in the Jacobean style, with a grand façade featuring elaborate bay
   windows, vertically aligned openings, and carved rectangular stone panels and a
   formal terraced garden with steps leading to the wider grounds.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010898


6. The proposal would introduce a large, boxy glazed extension to the host dwelling
   with glass link said to define the modern from the original. Although purposefully
   contemporary and simple in design and involving limited alterations to the original
   fabric of the property, the proposal’s scale, form and forward projection of the main
   elevation would compete with and diminish the prominence of the principal façade
   and its distinctive Jacobean composition. Even though the proposal would be
   subordinate in height to the bay windows and the appeal property, the siting of an
   extension of this design on a building of this age and style would undermine the
   historic appeal property and detract from the building's architectural interest and
   features that contribute to its significance. Furthermore, the uncharacteristic
   materiality would exacerbate the proposal’s incongruity, and the minimal use of
   natural stone walls would not mitigate the effects of the proposal.
1. Whilst visibility of the proposal from the public realm would be limited owing to the
   mature landscaping and the location of the proposal in the generous plot, the
   development plan requirement for proposals to protect heritage is not limited to that
   which is visible in public views. The appellant indicates that they would consider
   alterations to the aesthetics of the extension and a reduction in size to overcome
   the Council’s concerns however no such details are before me and in any event the
   appeal process should not be used to evolve a scheme.
2. Overall, the proposed development would be harmful to the historic and
   architectural merit and thus the significance of the appeal property as a NDHA. The
   harm would be modest, mitigated by the enclosed nature of the site and limited
   public views. Nevertheless, in circumstances where a proposal would harm the
   significance of a NDHA Policy HE7 of the Framework requires the harm to be
   weighed against the benefits, making a balanced judgement having regard to the
   scale of any harm or loss and the significance of the NDHA.
3. The proposal would provide increased natural light and internal floorspace within
   the appeal property. However, these are primarily private benefits and therefore
   attract limited weight. Even if the NDHA’s significance is low as indicated in the
   appellant’s heritage statement, and taking account of the modest level of harm that
   would arise from the extension, the benefits would not outweigh the identified harm
   to a locally important building. It would therefore fail to meet the objective of the
   Framework to conserve and enhance the historic environment.
4. I therefore conclude that the proposal would have a harmful effect on the character
   and appearance of the area, including the host dwelling and its significance as a
   NDHA. It would be in conflict with Policies SP18 and SP19 of the LP and Policies
   DM22, DM26 and DM10 of the Hyndburn Development Management and
   Development Plan Document (2018) insofar as they require new development to be
   sympathetic to local character and heritage and that alterations or extensions to
   locally listed buildings achieve a high standard of design.
Other Matters
5. While the appellant has expressed frustrations with the Council’s handling of the
   application, this does not alter or outweigh my findings which are based on the
   planning merits of this case.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010898


Conclusion and Recommendation
6. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I
   recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

Ellie Nutman
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
7. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
   that basis the appeal is dismissed.

F Harrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
