Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 September 2026
by Chris Baxter BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010440
Land South West Of Chalets Percy Wood Golf Club And Country Retreat, Coast
View, Swarland, Northumberland NE65 9JW
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by William Harrison of Harrison Leisure UK Ltd against the decision of
     Northumberland County Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/04076/FUL.
•    The development proposed is described as “reconfiguration of the existing golf course, change of
     use of the 7 northernmost golf holes to accommodate up to 180 additional new static
     caravans/lodges and creation of a new leisure hub building with associated access, parking,
     drainage ponds and landscaping works”.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for reconfiguration of the
       existing golf course, change of use of the 7 northernmost golf holes to
       accommodate up to 180 additional new static caravans/lodges and creation of a
       new leisure hub building with associated access, parking, drainage ponds and
       landscaping works at Land South West Of Chalets Percy Wood Golf Club And
       Country Retreat, Coast View, Swarland, Northumberland NE65 9JW in
       accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 25/04076/FUL, and subject to
       the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.     Since the appeal was submitted a new version of the National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework) came into effect. In light of this I have sought the
       views of the main parties in writing and comments received have been taken into
       consideration when determining this appeal.
3.     Following an update on the status of the Newton on the Moor and Swarland
       Neighbourhood Plan (NP), I attach full weight to the NP policies in the
       determination of this appeal.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of
       the surrounding area and landscape.
Reasons
5.     The appeal site consists of part of a golf course which includes fairways, putting
       greens, sand traps and teeing areas which are interspersed with landscaping and
       mature trees. Surrounding the site there are the static caravans of Percy Wood
       Holiday Park to the north and west, the settlement of Swarland with predominantly

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010440


       residential properties immediately east, and then mature trees and the remaining
       golf course to the south. The landscape surrounding the appeal site is
       predominantly a rolling topography of farmland interspersed with natural features
       such as watercourses, valleys, denes and woodland areas. The site itself is
       relatively flat with it being bound on most sides by existing mature woodland areas.
6.     The proposed development would result in the loss of open space however, given
       the existing boundary tree coverage, the site is not highly visible or noticeable from
       wider views outside the site. The proposed development would be visible in
       fleeting views, when in close proximity to the site, through the existing landscaping
       and trees, with some of these views being from existing residential properties to
       the east and from existing caravans. Due to the topography of the site and
       surrounding land, as well as the existing tree coverage in the area, the proposal
       would not be readily noticeable from wider viewpoints. Given the layout of the
       existing holiday park, the positioning of the existing caravans and the location of
       the proposed development, as well as the proposal for a landscaping scheme
       which would introduce additional planting, the proposal would not be an overly
       obtrusive feature in the landscape and would be read as an extension to the
       existing rural tourism development and would not appear disproportionate or
       undermine the rural setting of the area.
7.     The scale and design of the proposed leisure facility building would not be a
       dominant feature and is well designed which would fit in with the tourism land use
       character of the immediate operations. The proposed caravans, with associated
       parking, access roads etc would blend in with the character and appearance of the
       existing caravans. The proposal inevitably would have permanence however,
       given the proposed scale, design and density, the development would not have an
       overly urbanisation effect and would not have an adverse effect on the landscape
       setting in this location.
8.     The development has been designed to incorporate a SUDs pond to the east
       which provides some separation from the proposed built form and the existing
       properties. This ensures there would be no significant erosion of the existing
       settlement pattern of the village with minimal coalescence concerns. The proposal
       includes a landscape strategy that would introduce structural planting and
       landscaping, that provide additional screening from external views and also breaks
       up the internal built form which would help in the overall development assimilate
       into the surrounding rural environment.
9.     Accordingly, the proposed development would not have a harmful effect on the
       character and appearance of the surrounding area or landscape. The proposal
       would not be contrary with Policy ECN 12 of the Northumberland Local Plan (NLP)
       and Policies 1, 2 and 5 of the NP which seeks to encourage growth of the rural
       economy, incorporate high-quality design, protect landscape setting and Local
       Green Spaces.
Other Considerations
10. I have had regard to all evidence that has been submitted including comments and
    representations from the Parish Council and residents of the local area that were
    made on the planning application and this appeal. Concerns raised include matters
    on heritage assets, highway issues, flooding and drainage, ecology and
    biodiversity, anti-social behaviour, noise, odour, light pollution, tree management,


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010440


       sustainability, human rights, neighbourhood plan and emerging plan, lack of
       infrastructure/services/facilities, discrepancies with submitted evidence, boundary
       treatment maintenance, proposed layout, loss of open space, effect on living
       conditions, economic benefits, waste, loss of golf course, community engagement,
       footpaths and planning history including previous applications and appeals.
11. Numerous reports and assessments have been submitted including tree report,
    open space needs assessment, heritage impact assessment, archaeological
    assessment, transport assessment, safety risk assessment, travel plan, ecology
    surveys, biodiversity net gain assessment, statement of community involvement,
    mineral safeguarding report, SuDS maintenance plan, economic impact report,
    and drainage report. The Council have not raised any fundamental concerns with
    the content of these documents and do not consider the matters raised above
    sufficient to warrant refusal of the proposed development.
12. I am satisfied from the substantial evidence before me, that the proposed
    development would not have an adverse effect on the surrounding environment in
    terms of its effect on ecology and biodiversity, flooding and drainage, footpaths,
    and trees. The proposed access to the development would be through the existing
    caravan park and the existing access which would provide safe egress and exit
    that would not compromise highway safety. Given the scale of the development, I
    am satisfied that the proposed traffic generation would not have an adverse effect
    on the surrounding highway network and nearby facilities such as schools. There
    would be sufficient parking proposed to accommodate the requirements of the
    proposed caravans and leisure facility. The proposal would result in the loss of part
    of the golf course including open space however, built development is not
    proposed on allocated protected open space. Lack of services including public
    transport has been raised as a concern by locals, and a submitted travel plan aims
    to address some concerns although it is not unusual for developments of this type
    to be in rural locations which are not heavily supported by local services. Whilst a
    statement of community involvement document has been submitted, I do note the
    concerns from local residents with regards to the community involvement,
    nevertheless, this matter does not alter my findings on this appeal scheme.
13. Due to the type of use that is proposed, the siting of the proposed development in
    relation to neighbouring properties and the boundary treatment, the proposed
    development would not have a harmful effect on the living conditions of occupiers
    of nearby properties in terms of privacy, noise, odour, light, waste and anti-social
    behaviour. Representations have been made to the effect that the rights of local
    residents under Article 8 as set out in the Human Rights Act 1998 would be
    violated if the appeal were allowed. I have found that local residents would not
    suffer unacceptable harm to their living conditions. The development would not
    conflict with NLP or NP policies. I am satisfied that a grant of planning permission
    would not unacceptably interfere with local residents rights to a private and family
    life and home.
14. My attention has been drawn to previous planning applications and appeals. I do
    not consider these previous developments to be directly comparable to the appeal
    scheme, particularly with regards to scale and siting of the development, and the
    effect it has on the surrounding environment.
15. I am mindful of my duty under Section 66(1) and 72(1) of the Planning (Listed
    Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 to have special regard to the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010440


       desirability of preserving listed buildings, their settings or any features of special
       architectural or historic interest, and pay special attention to the desirability of
       preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of the relevant conservation
       areas. The proposed development given, its scale, design and location would
       preserve the character, appearance and setting of nearby heritage assets and
       these assets would not be harmed.
Conditions and Planning Obligations
Planning conditions
16. In the interests of precision and clarity I have undertaken some editing and
    rationalisation where necessary of the conditions suggested and agreed between
    the appellant and the Council. I have also had regard to the tests set out in DM6 of
    the Framework.
17. Conditions relating to timeliness and identification of approved plans are
    necessary in the interests of certainty. In the interests of the character and
    appearance of the area conditions are necessary in relation to materials and
    refuse storage. To prevent undue risk to the local surrounding environment it is
    necessary to attach conditions relating to construction environmental management
    plan, construction method statement, construction traffic management plan,
    contamination, drainage and restrictions on the use of the leisure hub building,
    caravans and lodges. To safeguard the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers
    conditions are considered necessary in relation to external lighting and noise. In
    the interests of highway and pedestrian safety, conditions are necessary in relation
    to highway improvement works, delivery and servicing management strategy,
    vehicle and cycle parking and vehicular access. To encourage sustainable forms
    of development and high-quality communications conditions are imposed relating
    to broadband and sustainable construction.
18. As the landscaping strategy plan refers to an indicative planting schedule and in
    the interests of the character and appearance of the area, I have imposed
    conditions relating to the submission of a landscape scheme and implementation.
Planning obligations
19. A completed legal agreement has been submitted which details obligations for
    Biodiversity Gain Plan, coastal mitigation and habitat monitoring and maintenance
    plan. It is necessary that I consider these obligations against the three tests set out
    in Regulation 122(2) of the CIL Regulations.
20. The Council are satisfied with the baseline metric for Biodiversity Net Gain and
    that there is a viable and appropriate way of achieving net gain with no
    irreplaceable habitats forming part of the development site. The obligation in the
    agreement would secure Biodiversity Gain on the site by setting out a detailed
    schedule of works through a Habitat Management and Monitoring Plan (HMMP). A
    financial contribution would also be secured to ensure the monitoring of this
    HMMP. The proposal would contribute towards enhancement of biodiversity in the
    area and would comply with INF 6 and ENV 2 of the NLP.
21. The proposed development sits within 10 kilometres of the coast and would affect
    the coastal Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) and European sites. A Habitat
    Regulations Assessment including an Appropriate Assessment has been agreed


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010440


       by Natural England and the Council which details a contribution towards the
       Coastal Mitigation Service. This contribution is detailed in the legal agreement and
       would ensure that the proposal would not have an adverse effect on the integrity of
       the coastal SSSI and European sites. The proposal would contribute towards the
       integrity of the coastal SSSI and European sites and would comply with INF 6 and
       ENV 2 of the NLP.
Conclusion
22. The proposed development would not conflict with the development plan as a
    whole, including the NP, and there are no other considerations, including the
    provisions of the Framework, which outweighs this finding.
23. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be allowed subject
    to the appropriate conditions and the relevant terms of the submitted section 106
    legal agreement.



Chris Baxter
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010440




Schedule of Conditions


     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development shall be carried out in accordance with the following
              approved plans:
              Location Plan (Ref: 24048-AGL-XX-XX-DR-A-001-P02);
              Proposed Masterplan (Ref: 24048-AGL-XX-XX-DR-A-002-P11);
              Proposed Leisure Hub Site Plan (Ref: 24048-AGL-XX-XX-DR-A-003-P07);
              Proposed GA Ground Floor Plan (Ref: 24048-AGL-LC-00-DR-A-2050-P05);
              Proposed GA First Floor Plan (Ref: 24048-AGL-LC-01-DR-A-2051-P04);
              Proposed GA Roof Plan (Ref: 24048-AGL-LC-RP-DR-A-2052-P04);
              Proposed GA Elevations (Ref: 24048-AGL-LC-XX-DR-A-3050-P04);
              Proposed GA Elevations (Ref: 24048-AGL-LC-XX-DR-A-3051-P04);
              Indicative large unit (Ref: 24048-AGL-XX-XX-DR-A-3061-P02);
              Indicative standard unit (Ref: 24048-AGL-XX-YY-DR-A-3060-P02)
              Typical Snipe End Roof Cowl Detail (Ref: RSV-X289-01)
              First Floor Kitchen (Ref: 525-1507-3-0)
              GF Kitchen Bar (Ref: 525-1507-2-0)
              Landscape Strategy (Ref: 1567_100 Rev A)
     Pre-commencement
     3)       Before the development hereby approved is commenced, a Biodiversity
              Metric and Biodiversity Gain Plan shall be submitted to and approved in
              writing by the Local Planning Authority. Development shall be carried out in
              accordance with the approved details.
     4)       Before the development hereby approved is commenced, details of the
              materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
              approved buildings shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority. Development shall be carried out in accordance with the
              approved details.
     5)       Notwithstanding the details submitted with the application and before the
              development hereby approved is commenced above damp-proof course
              level, a scheme detailing sustainable construction including how the
              development will minimise resource use, and mitigate and be adaptable to
              climate change, shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority. Development shall be carried out in accordance with th
              approved details.
     6)       Before the development hereby approved is commenced (including
              demolition, ground works, vegetation clearance), an amended Construction
              Environmental Management Plan (CEMP) shall be submitted to and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6010440


              approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The CEMP shall include
              the following:
              i)    Risk assessment of potentially damaging construction activities;
              ii) Identification of “biodiversity protection zones”;
              iii) Practical measures (both physical measures and sensitive working
                    practices) to avoid or reduce impacts during construction;
              iv) The location and timing of sensitive works to avoid harm to biodiversity
                    features;
              v) The times during construction when specialist ecologists need to be
                    present on site to oversee works;
              vi) Responsible persons and lines of communication;
              vii) The role and responsibilities on site of an ecological clerk of works
                    (ECoW) or similarly competent person;
              viii) Use of protective fences, exclusion barriers and warning signs; and
              ix) Monitoring protocols.
              The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
              CEMP and adhered to throughout the construction period of the
              development.
     7)       Notwithstanding the details submitted with the application and before the
              development hereby approved is commenced, a Construction Method
              Statement shall be submitted to, and approved in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority. The Statement shall provide for:
              i)   details and measures for liaison with the Highway Authority and local
                   community, and procedures to deal with any complaints received;
              ii) details of temporary traffic management measures, temporary access
                   arrangements, and the routing of construction vehicles;
              iii) vehicle cleaning facilities;
              iv) the parking and management of vehicles of site operatives and visitors;
              v) storage of plant and materials used in the construction of the
                   development;
              vi) details of the size and number of HGV’s associated with the
                   construction phase of the development; and
              vii) details of the methodology to identify, and thereafter address, any
                   damage to the public highway resultant from the construction period.
              The approved Construction Method Statement shall be adhered to
              throughout the construction period for the development.
     8)       Before the development hereby approved is commenced a highway scheme
              including widening on the U3049 Leamington Lane reviewing the section of
              the U3049 Leamington Lane between existing site access junction and the
              junction with The Avenue, along with resurfacing, signage, all associated
              works and a timetable for implementation, shall be submitted to and
              approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The approved highway
              scheme shall be constructed in accordance with the approved plans and
              timetable for implementation.
     9)       Before the development hereby approved is commenced, a Construction
              Traffic Management Plan shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6010440


              Local Planning Authority. The development shall be carried out in
              accordance with the approved details.
     10)      Before the development hereby approved, including clearance works, is
              commenced, details of the disposal of surface water from the development
              through the construction phase shall be submitted to and agreed in writing by
              the Local Planning Authority. This shall include a method statement and
              supporting drawing showing how surface water will be managed during
              construction to prevent increasing flood risk offsite and prevent silt or other
              contaminants leaving the site. It should also address how sediment will be
              kept out of the proposed drainage system during construction. The
              development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details.
     11)      Before the development hereby approved, including clearance works, is
              commenced, finalised culvert details, including engineering drawings, cross
              sections and hydraulic calculations, demonstrating that they have sufficient
              capacity to convey expected flow rates, shall be submitted to and agreed in
              writing by the Local Planning Authority. The development shall be carried out
              in accordance with the approved details.
     12)      Before the development hereby approved is commenced, a scheme for the
              disposal of foul and surface water from the development shall be submitted
              to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The development
              shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details.
     13)      Before the development hereby approved is commenced a scheme of
              landscaping shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority. The scheme shall include details of all existing trees and
              hedgerows on the land, identify those to be retained and set out measures
              for their protection throughout the course of development.
     Pre-occupation
     14)      Before the development hereby approved is brought into use, details of full
              fibre broadband connections shall be submitted to and approved in writing by
              the Local Planning Authority. The approved details shall be implemented and
              made operational before the occupation of the development.
     15)      Before the development hereby approved is brought into use, a Delivery and
              Servicing Management Strategy shall be submitted to and approved in
              writing by the Local Planning Authority. The Strategy shall include:
              i)    details of the access, routes and vehicles associated with the deliveries
                    and servicing of the site;
              ii) details of the timings for deliveries and servicing of the site, including
                    restrictions on static caravan and lodge delivery/removal movements as
                    broadly set out in the submitted Construction Environmental
                    Management Plan (Traffic) reference 24-247-005.04;
              iii) details of the annual numbers of heavy goods vehicles associated with
                    the deliveries and servicing of the site;
              iv) a plan for monitoring and reviewing the effectiveness of the Delivery and
                    Servicing Management Strategy; and
              v) a scheme providing a biennial monitoring report to be submitted to the
                    Local Planning Authority.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6010440


              The approved Delivery and Servicing Management Strategy shall be adhered
              to in perpetuity.
     16)      Before the leisure building hereby approved is brought into use the car
              parking area indicated on the approved plans, including disabled and EV car
              parking spaces contained therein shall be marked out and implemented in
              accordance with the approved plans. Thereafter, the car parking area shall
              be retained in accordance with the approved plans and shall not be used for
              any purpose other than the parking of vehicles associated with the
              development.
     17)      Before the static caravans or lodges hereby approved are brought into use
              the car parking for that static caravan or lodge as indicated on the approved
              plans shall be implemented in accordance with the approved plans.
              Thereafter, the car parking shall be retained in accordance with the approved
              plans and shall not be used for any purpose other than the parking of
              vehicles associated with that static caravan or lodge.
     18)      Before the static caravans or lodges hereby approved are brought into use,
              details of cycle parking for that static caravan or lodge shall be submitted to
              and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The approved cycle
              parking shall be implemented before each static caravan or lodge is brought
              into use. Thereafter, the cycle parking shall be retained in accordance with
              the approved details and shall be kept available for the parking of cycles at
              all times.
     19)      Before the leisure building hereby approved is brought into use, the cycle
              parking shown on the approved plans shall be implemented. Thereafter, the
              cycle parking shall be retained in accordance with the approved plans and
              shall be kept available for parking of cycles at all times.
     20)      Before the development hereby approved is brought into use, a Management
              and Maintenance Plan shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the
              Local Planning Authority. This document shall include:
              i)   Plan showing where all the sustainable drainage features are located;
              ii) Maintenance regimes for each drainage asset;
              iii) Confirmation of who will be responsible for the maintenance works
                   including the adopting party's contact details; and
              iv) A maintenance schedule and log
              The management and maintenance of the drainage features shall then be
              undertaken in accordance with these approved details and for the lifetime of
              the development.
     21)      Before the development hereby approved is brought into use, a sustainable
              drainage system verification report shall be submitted to and approved in
              writing by the Local Planning Authority. The verification report shall include:
              i)    As built drawings for all drainage components - including dimensions
                    (base levels, inlet/outlet elevations, areas, depths, lengths, diameters,
                    gradients etc);
              ii) As built construction details (component drawings, materials,
                    vegetation);
              iii) Health and Safety file;


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6010440


              iv)     Photos of all drainage infrastructure, e.g. outfalls, basins, swales, flow
                      controls, permeable driveways;
              v)      Details of ownership organisation/adoption details.
              The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
              details.
     Other
     22)       Within three months of the approved Leisure Hub development being
              brought into its intended use (defined as persons using the Leisure Hub for
              Leisure purposes), a Noise Impact Assessment shall be submitted to the
              Local Planning Authority to demonstrate compliance with Condition 13.
              Should the report demonstrate that mitigation is required in order to achieve
              the noise levels specified in Condition 13 then a mitigation proposal must be
              submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. Once
              approved the mitigation proposal must be implemented in full in perpetuity.
     23)      The leisure hub building hereby approved shall at all times be used in
              connection with and ancillary to, the existing use of the site as a holiday
              park/golf club.
     24)      The accommodation hereby approved shall be occupied for holiday purposes
              only, and no unit shall be occupied as a person's sole or main place of
              residence. The operators of the site shall maintain an up-to-date register of
              all lettings that should be made available for inspection by an authorised
              officer of the Council at all reasonable times.
     25)      The colour temperature of all external lighting must be between 2700 & 4000
              Kelvin.
     26)      Any contamination that is found during the course of construction of the
              approved development that was not previously identified shall be reported
              immediately to the local planning authority. Development on the part of the
              site affected shall be suspended and a risk assessment carried out and
              submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. Where
              unacceptable risks are found remediation and verification schemes shall be
              submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. These
              approved schemes shall be carried out before the development is resumed
              or continued.
     27)      The rating level of sound emitted from any fixed plant and/or machinery
              associated with the development shall not exceed background sound levels
              by more than 5dB(A) between the hours of 0700 - 2300 (taken as a 15
              minute LA90 at the nearest sound sensitive premises) and shall not exceed
              the background sound level between 2300 - 0700 (taken as a 15 minute
              LA90 at the nearest/any sound-sensitive premises). All measurements shall
              be made in accordance with the methodology of BS4142 (2014) (Methods for
              rating and assessing industrial and commercial sound) and/or its subsequent
              amendments. Where access to the nearest sound-sensitive property is not
              possible, measurements shall be undertaken at an appropriate location and
              corrected to establish the noise levels at the nearest sound-sensitive
              property. Any deviations from the LA90 time interval stipulated above shall be
              agreed in writing with the Local Planning Authority.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      10
Appeal Decision 6010440


     28)      Means of vehicular access to the development hereby approved shall be
              from the existing access to the Percy Wood Golf and Country Park to the
              U3049 Leamington Lane only with no vehicular access permitted from the
              U3122 Coast View at any time.
     29)      The measures, commitments and actions of the approved Travel Plan shall
              be implemented in full accordance with the timescales set out in the
              approved Travel Plan.
     30)      No external refuse or refuse containers shall be stored outside of the
              approved refuse storage area except on the day of refuse collection.
     31)      All planting, seeding or turfing comprised in the approved details of
              landscaping shall be carried out in the first planting and seeding seasons
              following the occupation of the buildings or the completion of the
              development, whichever is the sooner; and any trees or plants which within a
              period of 5 years from the completion of the development die, are removed or
              become seriously damaged or diseased shall be replaced in the next planting
              season with others of similar size and species.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   11
