Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 July 2026
by Alec Hickey MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 7th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010296
Fountain Street, Outside No. 20, Manchester M2 3AW
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Telecommunications Plc against the decision of
     Manchester City Council.
•    The application Ref is 145096/FO/2026.
•    The development proposed is removal of an existing InLink Unit, and the deployment of a
     replacement Street Hub 3 unit.
Appeal Ref: 6010295
Fountain Street, Outside No. 20, Manchester M2 3AW
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Telecommunications Plc against the decision of
     Manchester City Council.
•    The application Ref is 145097/AOH/2026.
•    The advertisement proposed is Two digital 75-inch LCD display screens, one on each side of the
     Street Hub unit.

Decision
1.     Appeal A is allowed and planning permission is granted for the removal of an
       existing InLink Unit, and the deployment of a replacement Street Hub 3 unit at
       Fountain Street, Outside No. 20, Manchester M2 3AW in accordance with the
       terms of the application, Ref 145096/FO/2026, subject to the conditions set out in
       the schedule attached at the end of this decision.
2.     Appeal B is allowed and express consent is granted for the display of Two digital
       75-inch LCD display screens, one on each side of the Street Hub unit at Fountain
       Street, Outside No. 20, Manchester M2 3AW in accordance with the terms of the
       application, Ref 145097/AOH/2026. The consent is for ten years from the date of
       this decision and is subject to the five standard conditions set out in Schedule 2 of
       the 2007 Regulations and the additional conditions set out in the schedule
       attached at the end of this decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     Since the appeals were submitted, a revised National Planning Policy Framework
       (the Framework) has been published. Both main parties have had the opportunity
       to comment on it during the appeal process.
4.     In respect of Appeal A in the banner heading, I have taken the description of the
       development from the application form, whilst different to the Council’s decision
       notice, it accurately describes the development.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010296


5.     There are two appeals on this site, one against the refusal of planning permission
       and the other against the refusal of advertisement consent. They are intrinsically
       linked and raise similar issues. To avoid repetition, while considering each on its
       merits, I have dealt with both in a single decision letter.
6.     In determining Appeal A, the statutory duty set out in Section 72(1) of the Planning
       (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act) requires special
       attention to be paid to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or
       appearance of a conservation area.
7.     In respect of Appeal B, the Advertisement Regulations require that decisions are
       made only in the interest of amenity and public safety. Therefore, whilst I have
       taken account of the policies the Council refers to insofar as they may be relevant,
       these have not been decisive in my determination of this appeal.
Main Issues
8.     The main issues in respect of Appeal A are the effects of the proposed
       development on (i) the character and appearance of the area having regard to the
       Upper King Street Conservation Area (CA) and the presence of the nearby non-
       designated heritage assets and (ii) highway safety, with particular regard to
       pedestrian movement.
9.     The main issue in respect of Appeal B is the effect of the proposed advertisement
       on the visual amenity of the area.
Reasons
Character and appearance / Visual amenity
10. The site is located on a wide section of footway on Fountain Street within the CA.
    The significance of this part of the CA is largely derived from the vertical
    proportions of the buildings, along with their varying architectural styles and ages.
    This section of Fountain Street also has a more open character and a somewhat
    jagged appearance given the position of buildings. Nevertheless, the surrounding
    historic buildings combine to create a high-quality townscape.
11. The Council has also identified the proposals as affecting the settings of a number
    of non-designated heritage assets. The Primark Building, formerly Lewis’s, is on
    the opposite side of the road from the proposal site and comprises several stories.
    The building derives its significance from its Baroque styling, scale, massing, and
    detailed elevations, which result in a building that dominates this section of
    Fountain Street.
12. The Shakespeare Public House at 16 Fountain Street derives its significance from
    its historic origins, having been built in Chester before being dismantled and
    reconstructed to its present location in the 1920’s. Its distinctive timber-frame
    design and positioning mean it is a prominent feature in views towards Market
    Street.
13. The appeal site is located in front of a three-storey building with public house at
    ground level with an outdoor seating area positioned on the footway and living
    walls to the upper levels. Other elements of street furniture, many of which are
    black, include bike stands, decorative streetlamps, road traffic signs, bollards, a



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010296


        bin and service cabinets. Most of this street furniture is located along a broadly
        linear line.
14. The proposed Street Hub would directly replace an existing InLink Unit which sits
    towards the junction with Marble Street. Whilst the proposed Street Hub would be
    larger than the unit it replaces, adequate spacing between existing street furniture
    would remain, so the footway would not appear cluttered. Its height and digital
    display panels would also not be markedly different from those on the existing unit.
15. While there are no other free-standing advertisements nearby, digital signage is
    present within and above the commercial frontages. Furthermore, although the
    Street Hub's black casing would not incorporate timber, stone, or other Tudor or
    Victorian design elements, it would nevertheless assimilate visually with the
    predominately black street furniture in the vicinity, including the adjacent seating
    area.
16. Although the Street Hub would be seen in conjunction with the nearby non-
    designated heritage assets and wider buildings in the CA, including the adjacent
    brutalist building, it would occupy substantially the same position as the existing
    InLink Unit. Its modest increase in height and footprint would not obscure or
    compete with the scale, massing or detailed elevations of the Lewis building, or
    with the distinctive timber-framed appearance of the Shakespeare Public House.
    The surrounding buildings would remain the dominant features on this section of
    Fountain Street. As such, the Street Hub would therefore preserve the character
    and appearance of the CA and would not harm the significance of the nearby non-
    designated heritage assets.
17. The Council has drawn my attention to other appeal decision examples 1. However,
    nothing before me demonstrates that these are comparable in context to the
    appeal site. As such, I attribute limited weight to these examples.
18. For these reasons, I conclude that in relation to Appeal A, the proposal would not
    result in unacceptable harm to the character and appearance of the area including
    the setting of the CA and nearby non-designated heritage assets. It thereby
    accords with Policies JP-C5, JP-P1 and JP-P2 of the Places for Everyone Plan
    Joint Development Plan, Policies SP1, CC10, EN3 and DM1 of the Manchester
    Core Strategy, and saved Policies DC18 and DC22 of the Unitary Development
    Plan for the City of Manchester. Together, amongst other things, these seek to
    ensure that new development is socially inclusive, including accessibility, promotes
    quality of place, conserves heritage assets, and supports high levels of walking,
    cycling and public transport.
19. In relation to Appeal B, the proposal would not result in unacceptable harm to the
    visual amenity of the area. The policies of the development plan have been
    considered insofar as they are material and, in this respect, the scheme would not
    conflict with the development plan.
Highway safety
20. The Street Hub would be positioned in substantially the same location as the
    existing InLink unit. Its footprint would be greater than the existing unit, but not to
    an extent that would materially alter pedestrian movement along this section of

1
    Ref: APP/B4215/W/25/3369446 and Ref: APP/B4215/H/25/3369448 and APP/B4215/W/25/3369503 APP/B4215/H/25/3369504


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            3
Appeal Decision 6010296


       footway. Moreover, the proposed arrangement would remain consistent with the
       aims of the Greater Manchester Combined Authority Streets For All Design Guide.
21. At the time of my site visit, the area was moderately trafficked by pedestrians,
    although I recognise that the number of pedestrians will fluctuate throughout the
    day and during events such as Christmas markets. Nevertheless, the footway is
    sufficiently wide to allow people to pass during busier periods, including those
    using mobility aids, even when the Street Hub could be in use.
22. For the reasons above, the proposal in relation to Appeal A would not have an
    unacceptable impact on the safety of highway users. As such, the proposals would
    accord with JP-P1 and JP-P2 of Places for Everyone Plan, Policies SP1, EN3 and
    DM1 of the Manchester Core Strategy, saved Policies DC15.1, DC15.2, DC18 and
    DC22 of the Unitary Development Plan insofar as they require developments to be
    accessible, including being easy to understand and navigate whilst avoiding
    unacceptable inconvenience to local pedestrian movement.
Conditions
23. I have considered the conditions proposed by the main parties against the tests
    set out in the Framework and the advice in Planning Practice Guidance. I have
    amended and condensed these where necessary to improve precision and
    enforceability.
24. For Appeal A, in addition to the statutory time condition (1), a condition listing the
    approved drawings (2) is necessary for clarity. I have included a condition (3) that
    the Street Hub is implemented and maintained in accordance with the submitted
    Street Hubs Beyond Connection document, Street Hubs Anti-Social Behaviour
    Management Plan Version 3 and Street Hubs Noise Management Plan to ensure
    the character and appearance of the area is protected and in the interests of the
    amenities of the occupiers of nearby premises. I have not included a requirement
    for a verification report, as this is enforceable through the condition should the
    Street Hub not operate in accordance with the noise management plan.
25. For appeal B, in addition to the standard conditions as required by the regulations,
    conditions relating to illumination and images are required in order to preserve the
    residential amenity of neighbouring occupiers and in the interests of road safety.
26. Under Regulation 14(7), advertisement consent is granted for a period of 5 years
    unless otherwise specified. The appellant has sought a 10-year period. As there is
    no substantive evidence before me that the display would be unacceptable at the
    end of the shorter period, I have granted consent for the 10-year period in my
    formal decision.
27. In regard to both Appeals, I have not imposed the suggested condition relating to a
    12-month period, as given my findings above in regard to the main issues, these
    conditions are not necessary.
Conclusion
28. For the reasons outlined above, I conclude that both appeals A and B should be
    allowed.

Alec Hickey               INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010296




SCHEDULES OF CONDITIONS

Appeal A

    1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
       the date of this decision.

    2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
       drawing nos, 250044463_PLN_LOC_1.1 - Location Plan,
       25004463_PLN_SI_2.1 - Proposed Site Plan, 25004463_PLN_EL_3.1 -
       Elevation Plan and PROPOSED BT STREETHUB 3 UNIT (received 03.02.2026)

    3) The Street Hub shall be implemented, managed and maintained in line, Street
       Hubs Beyond Connection document, Street Hubs Anti-Social Behaviour
       Management Plan Version 3 and Street Hubs Noise Management Plan for the
       duration of the development

Appeal B

    1) The intensity of the illumination of the display screens shall at no time exceed
       either the maximum daytime luminance values (in cd/m2) set out within the
       Institution of Lighting Professionals - Professional Lighting Guide 05/23
       'Brightness of Illuminated Advertisements including Digital Displays', or
       2,500cd/m2, whichever value is the lower. During the hours of darkness (dusk
       to dawn), the intensity of illumination of the display screens shall not exceed
       600cd/m2.

    2) No individual advertisements displayed on the proposed advertising displays
       shall contain moving images flashing animation video or full motion images or
       images that resemble road signs or traffic signals.

         The interval between successive advertisements shall be instantaneous (no
         greater than one second), with no flashing and smooth instant change into the
         next static image and the complete display shall change; there should be no
         visual effects, including swiping or other animated transition methods between
         successive advertisements, and the display will include a mechanism to freeze
         the image in the event of a malfunction or default to a blank screen to avoid any
         flashing error message or pixilation.

         The proposed advertising display shall not change more frequently than once
         every 10 seconds.

    3) No content on the display screens shall resemble traffic signs, as defined in
       section 64 of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984.

End




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
