Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by D Harris-Watkins BA(Hons) PgD MRICS
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010301
Land To The East Of, Hockerton Road, Upton NG23 5TG
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•    The appeal is made by Isobel Key against the decision of Newark & Sherwood District Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00382/PIP.
•    The development proposed is residential development of a minimum of 1 dwelling and a maximum of
     5 dwellings.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     I have utilised the description of development as taken from the appeal form and
       decision notice, as this more clearly describes the proposal than that on the
       application form. I have however omitted reference to the type of application as
       this does not describe operational development.
3.     The proposal is for permission in principle. The Planning Practice Guidance
       advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
       housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has two
       stages: the first stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site
       is suitable in principle, and the second ‘technical details consent’ stage is when the
       detailed development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first of
       these two stages.
4.     The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
       land use and the amount of development permitted. All other matters are
       considered as part of a subsequent technical details consent application (TDC) if
       permission in principle is granted. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
5.     In determining this appeal, as the site is located within Upton Conservation Area
       (the CA) I have had special regard to section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed
       Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act). The duty under s72(1) of
       the Act applies to the exercise of any functions under the Planning Acts which
       includes permission in principle.
6.     The application was determined at the Council’s Planning Committee and was
       refused contrary to the planning officers’ recommendation. The Planning
       Committee as decision makers are not bound to accept the recommendation of
       their planning officers, nor am I. The Council’s formal decision was to refuse the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010301


       application, and I have determined the appeal on the basis of the evidence before
       me.
Main Issue
7.     The main issue is whether the site is suitable for residential development, having
       regard to its location, the proposed land use, the amount of development and
       whether it would preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the CA.
Reasons
Spatial Strategy
8.     The Council’s spatial strategy is based upon the settlement hierarchy in Spatial
       Policy 1 of the Amended Core Strategy 20191. This focuses new development on
       locations with the most accessible services and facilities. The Sub-Regional
       Centre of Newark Urban Area is at the top of the hierarchy followed by Service
       Centres and then Principal Villages. Upton falls within Other Villages which is the
       lowest tier of the hierarchy.
9.     Upton has a limited number of services including a church, public house, and
       adjacent cricket pavilion which is also a children’s nursery. There is also a bus
       service to nearby Southwell, which has a greater range of services and facilities
       within it. Nevertheless, Hockerton Road does not benefit from a footway meaning
       that pedestrians need to share the carriageway with vehicles. The lane is narrow
       with a gradient leading into the village and limited street lighting, meaning it would
       not provide suitable access for all and at all times of year and day.
10. The site is located between a bungalow and the cricket pavilion on the edge of
    Upton. The cricket pavilion is detached from the village with agricultural fields in-
    between and the appeal site is an undeveloped parcel of land. As such, though the
    site does share a boundary with an existing dwelling, in the context of Spatial
    Policy 3 of the LP and Policy DM8 of the Allocations & Development Management
    Development Plan Document 2013 (the DPD) the site is located within the open
    countryside, where development is strictly controlled in accordance with those
    policies. None of the types of development within Policy DM8 of the DPD which
    could be acceptable within the open countryside apply to the current proposal.
    Consequently, the proposal would not be in a suitable location for residential
    development.
11. The number of dwellings would fit comfortably within the site, and due to its rural
    setting, a relatively low density would be appropriate. As such I do not find any
    harm in relation to the amount of development proposed in isolation from the
    matters of location and proposed land use.
12. For the reasons above, the appeal site would not be a suitable location for
    residential development having regard to its location and the proposed land use.
    The proposal would conflict with the aims of Policy DM8 of the DPD, which seek to
    protect the open countryside and control the type of development within it.




1
 Plan Review: Review of the Newark & Sherwood Local Development Framework Core Strategy & Allocations: Amended Core
Strategy 2019


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            2
Appeal Decision 6010301


Conservation Area
13. The CA comprises the majority of Upton and the immediate surrounding fields.
    Upton is a linear settlement focused primarily around Main Street. The surrounding
    fields are predominantly rectangular with broadly parallel boundaries moving away
    from the rear of the properties facing towards Main Street. The conservation area
    appraisal2 highlights that Upton is one of the best examples in the district of a
    village surrounded by well-preserved enclosures which predate the main period of
    Parliamentary enclosure in the late 18th and 19th centuries. There are also a
    considerable number of listed and unlisted buildings of historical and architectural
    merit within it. The significance of the CA derives from the historic settlement
    pattern of the village and the historic layout of the surrounding field network and is
    of historical and architectural value.
14. The appeal site is part of an agricultural field located to the north of Upton on the
    approach to the settlement. The field including its layout and boundaries form part
    of the pre-enclosure field network from which the CA derives its significance from.
    As an undeveloped parcel of land bordered by hedgerows it also contributes
    towards the verdant character of the approach to Upton and contributes positively
    towards the character and appearance of the CA.
15. The proposal is for 1 to 5 dwellings. As the proposal is for permission in principle,
    there are a limited number of details before me restricting the assessment that can
    be made at this stage. Further details confirming the appearance, layout and
    number of dwellings would be submitted at the TDC stage. What information I do
    have before me now however are the location of the appeal site, and the principle
    that residential development would be located on what is currently an agricultural
    field.
16. The proposed development would result in the subdivision and fragmentation of
    the wider agricultural field. This would erode the legibility of the historic field
    pattern, which forms part of the significance of the CA. Furthermore, the
    introduction of residential development in this location would also create a
    peninsula of residential development into the countryside, which would be in
    contrast with the lineal form of the village.
17. The principle of residential development on the appeal site would introduce built
    form and the domestication of the approach to the village. As a result, the proposal
    would alter the undeveloped character of the appeal site. This would diminish the
    verdant character that currently defines the approach to the settlement.
18. Based on the location of the appeal site and the proposed use, I am satisfied that
    in the wording of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) the
    proposal would have less than substantial harm to the designated heritage asset.
    The harm would be in the mid-range of that category of harm, but nonetheless of
    considerable importance and weight. In accordance with the Framework, when
    less than substantial harm is found to the significance of a designated heritage
    asset it must be weighed against the public benefits of the scheme, with great
    weight given to the assets’ conservation.
19. The proposal would contribute towards housing supply, where there is currently a
    shortfall, and would result in long and short term economic and social benefits,

2
    Upton: An Appraisal of the Character and Appearance of the Conservation Area 1999


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 3
Appeal Decision 6010301


        through the construction process and through the future occupiers’ use of services
        and facilities within the area. However, even taken together these public benefits
        would not outweigh the great weight to be attached to the conservation of the
        designated heritage asset. Consequently, the proposal fails to accord with the
        historic environment protection policies of the Framework in respect of the
        designated heritage asset.
20. For the reasons above, the proposal would not preserve or enhance the character
    or appearance of the CA and would be harmful to it. The proposal would therefore
    conflict with the aims of policies DM9 of the DPD, and Core Policy 14 of the
    Amended Core Strategy 2019, which seek to protect the historic environment.
Other Matters
21. There is local support for the dwellings to be developed as either bungalows,
    affordable housing or as housing for first time buyers, however I have not been
    provided with any method of securing the proposal as such. Therefore, this carries
    little weight, and this does not outweigh the harm identified.
22. As the appeal is for permission in principle matters such as an improved footpath,
    cannot be secured at this stage. No harm has been identified in relation to the
    increase in vehicles movements associated with the development. On the basis of
    the information before me I have no reason to disagree, however the absence of
    harm is a neutral factor in the determination of the appeal.
23. Even if a large agricultural barn is to be built opposite the site, this is a materially
    different development. I have determined the appeal on its own merits.
24. I have taken into account the appeal3 raised by the appellant, however I have
    limited details of this to assess whether it is directly comparable to the appeal
    before me now. I do note however its site context is materially different in that it is
    not located within a conservation area. Therefore, it does not alter my findings, and
    I have determined the appeal on its own merits and site-specific context.
Planning Balance
25. The conflict I have identified with policies DM8 and DM9 of the DPD, and Core
    Policy 14 of the Amended Core Strategy 2019, results in a conflict with the
    development plan read as a whole.
26. There is no dispute between the parties that the Council cannot demonstrate a
    five-year housing land supply. Consequently, Framework paragraph 11d) is
    engaged. The Council have stated that the currently supply is 3.84 years, which is
    a notable shortfall of 1.16 years.
27. With reference to Paragraph 11 d)i) of the Framework, an exception to the
    presumption in favour of sustainable development is provided where policies in the
    Framework that protect assets of particular importance provide a strong reason for
    refusing the development proposed. Footnote 7 states that this includes
    designated heritage assets. I have found that the proposal would harm the
    character and appearance of the CA, providing a strong reason for refusal. The
    presumption in favour of sustainable development therefore does not apply.


3
    APP/H1840/W/23/3315676


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010301


Conclusion
28. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    For these reasons the appeal should be dismissed.

D Harris-Watkins
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
