Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by David Troy BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 01 October 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6010445
Pavement outside 498-504 Fulham Road, London SW6 5NH
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Nathan Still of In Focus Network Limited against the decision of the Council
     of the London Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham.
•    The application Ref is 2025/03052/FUL.
•    The development proposed is Installation of a multifunctional Hub unit consisting of a free-standing
     structure featuring an integrated digital advertisement display screen on one side and emergency
     functionality including the provision of a defibrillator available for public use on the other side.

Appeal B Ref: 6010443
Pavement outside 498-504 Fulham Road, London SW6 5NH
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Nathan Still of In Focus Network Limited against the decision of the Council
     of the London Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham.
•    The application Ref is 2025/03053/ADV.
•    The advertisement proposed is Display of an internally illuminated digital LED screen to one side of a
     new free-standing multifunctional Hub unit, showing static and animated displays in sequence
     comprising of commercial and community messages.

Decisions
1.     Appeals A and B are dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     Appeal A concerns the refusal of planning permission to erect a multifunctional
       communications Hub with integrated defibrillator and advertising display (Hub).
       Appeal B concerns the refusal of express consent to display advertisement on the
       Hub. I have considered each on its individual merits, however, as they raise similar
       issues I have combined both decisions into a single decision letter.
3.     With respect to Appeal B, Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements)
       (England) Regulations 2007 (the Regulations) specify that decisions must be
       based solely on considerations of amenity and public safety. Therefore, while I
       have taken the development plan policies referred to by the Council into account,
       they have not been determinative in respect of Appeal B.
4.     Since the determination of the application an updated and revised National
       Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026.
       The main parties have been consulted and provided with an opportunity to provide


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6010443 and 6010445


       comments on it in relation to these appeals. I have therefore considered the
       development against the relevant policies in the Framework.
5.     I have used the Council’s descriptions of the development in reaching my
       decisions as it more fully describes the details of the development than that given
       on the original planning application forms. The appellant’s appeal forms also
       make reference to the updated descriptions.
Main Issues
6.     The main issues in relation to Appeal A are the effect of the proposed
       development on (i) the character and appearance of the area, including the
       Walham Green Conservation Area (CA) and the setting of the adjacent Barclay
       Road CA; and (ii) highway safety.
7.     The main issue in relation to Appeal B is the effect of the proposed advertisement
       on the amenity of the area, having regard to heritage assets.
Reasons
Appeals A and B - Character and Appearance/Amenity
8.     The appeal site comprises of a footpath outside Nos. 498-504 Fulham Road, a
       modern four storey building with a medical centre at ground floor level. It is located
       on a prominent corner plot within Fulham and Fulham Broadway Town Centre and
       Walham Green CA, surrounded by a range of retail and commercial uses that
       provides a busy and vibrant commercial character to the area.
9.     The public realm in the vicinity of the appeal site is defined by the relatively wide
       and broad nature of the footway. The existing street furniture and other structures
       are well spaced, including a wayfinder sign, lamp posts and roadside metal
       railings. As such it forms a relatively uncluttered pedestrian area, with a notable
       absence of illuminated advertisements within the footway.
10. The new Hub would be positioned in a prominent location close to the edge of the
    pavement and would be clearly visible to passing pedestrians and motorists. Due
    to its height, width and overall solidity it would be the most prominent feature within
    its immediate setting. Thus, despite the busy town centre location, it would have
    an undue presence in its setting, appearing as an incongruous and
    uncharacteristic feature, which I consider would adversely harm rather than
    positively contribute to the character and appearance of the area.
11. The nearby commercial buildings display advertisement signage typical of a town
    centre location, with modestly sized fascia signage and projecting signs that are
    proportionate to the scale of the frontages. The single-sided illuminated
    advertisement display screen integrated with the Hub would be an uncharacteristic
    and prominent feature that would detract from the public realm and the character
    and appearance of the footway. The fact that the illumination levels would be
    limited at night and the frequency of image changes could be controlled by
    planning conditions would not be sufficient measures to overcome the harm I have
    found to the visual amenity of the area.
12. Given the location of the appeal site within the Walham Green CA and adjacent to
    the Barclay Road CA, special attention must be paid to considering the impact of
    the development on the significance of the designated heritage assets and to the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6010443 and 6010445


       desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of the CA and
       their setting. The historic and architectural significance of the Walham Green CA
       and adjacent Barclay Road CA with their older more traditional 19th and 20th
       Century buildings of varying styles in the surrounding streets can be readily
       appreciated within the immediate vicinity of the site.
13. I consider that the proposed Hub and advertisement, by virtue of their siting and
    design, would have a negative material impact on how the Walham Green CA is
    viewed and appreciated and as such would fail to preserve or enhance the
    Walham Green CA. The proposed Hub would be located a short distance from the
    adjacent Barclay Road CA and would be separated by the number of intervening
    buildings/structures and the wide and busy carriageway along Fulham Road.
    Consequently, I do not find harm in relation to this aspect and the setting of the
    adjacent Barclay Road CA would be preserved.
14. Whilst the degree of harm resulting from the proposed Hub and advertisement on
    the significance of the Walham Green CA would be at the lower level, in
    accordance with Policy HE6 (4) of the Framework, that harm should be weighed
    against any public benefits of the proposals.
15. I have considered the various public benefits put forward by the appellant including
    through the Hub’s open-plan accessible design to all users, including those with
    mobility impairments, providing free calls to emergency and other support
    services; offering an interactive wayfinding touchscreen with local information, free
    wi-fi and device charging; air quality sensors; pedestrian flow monitoring; in-built
    CCTV cameras as well as in-built defibrillator and the Hub being powered by
    renewable energy. The appellant has also highlighted the potential for advertising
    for local businesses, free services to the council, public agencies and charities to
    support public service alerts and community messaging.
16. Nonetheless, whilst afforded substantial weight in line with the policies in the
    Framework, given the limited scale of the proposals, these benefits would be
    modest. I therefore find insufficient public benefits arising from the proposals to
    offset the identified harm to which I attach substantial weight.
17. Accordingly, for these reasons, I conclude for Appeal A that the proposed
    development would have an unacceptably harmful effect on the character and
    appearance of the area, including the Walham Green CA. It would therefore be
    contrary to Policies DC1, DC8, DC9 and DC10 of the Hammersmith and Fulham
    Local Plan 2018 (HFLP) and Key Principles CAG2 and CAG3 of the Hammersmith
    and Fulham Planning Guidance Supplementary Planning Document 2018.
    Collectively, these policies and guidance, amongst other things, seek to ensure
    that development and advertising are designed to a high quality urban
    environment that respects and enhances its townscape context; conserve and
    enhance the significance of heritage assets and their settings; and avoids
    telecommunications and illuminated advertising that will have a detrimental impact
    on local townscape and the character and appearance of the area.
18. With regard to Appeal B, I conclude the proposed advertisements would have an
    unacceptable harmful effect on visual amenity. Though not determinative, I have
    taken account of Policies DC1, DC8, DC9 and DC10 of the HFLP, as outlined
    above.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6010443 and 6010445


Appeal A - Highway Safety
19. The appeal site is located opposite the busy strategic roundabout junction between
    the Fulham Road and North End Road, including pedestrian crossings within the
    vicinity. Whilst vehicle speeds appear to be limited to 20 miles per hour, this section
    of the highway comprises multiple lanes and when combined with the number of
    junctions, and the pedestrian crossings, a high level of concentration is required for
    motorists navigating it. I am mindful to the highways objection and the collision data
    from the Council’s Highways Section regarding the high number of accident and
    collisions at this junction, including those involving pedestrians.
20. The proposals would be located within the pavement, close to its edge, near the
    two-way carriageway on Fulham Road. Whilst only one side of the Hub would be
    visible, when combined with the limited amount of street furniture, the proposals in
    this prominent location would be highly visible when viewed by oncoming traffic at
    this busy junction. The size of the proposed advertisement, its proximity to the
    road, and absence of other advertisements within this section of pavement or
    within such a close proximity to the road, would result in it appearing dominant and
    distracting for road users. Even if illumination levels were limited through condition,
    given the absence of luminated advertisements within the footway, the proposals
    would appear more prominent at night and thus the level of distraction would be
    enhanced. Coupled with the level of concentration required to navigate this section
    of highway, the proposals would result in increased potential risk of collision
    between motorists and/or pedestrians/cyclists and as such would have an
    unacceptable effect on highways safety.
21. Fulham Road is a principal commercial shopping street within the Town Centre,
    and it was apparent from my site visit on a weekday that the footpath is relatively
    busy. Although this was just a snapshot in time, I am mindful of the Council’s
    comments regarding the busy footfall in this location and that it is likely to be
    materially greater, particularly at peak times and weekends.
22. I note the appellant’s submitted site plan shows that the proposed Hub would
    provide around 3.6m of unobstructed footpath width in front of the adjacent
    medical centre. However, this does not take into account the footfall and the
    alignment of the footpath which narrows at the corner outside Nos. 498-504
    Fulham Road (Nos. 498-504) and outside the seating area and other structures in
    front of the adjacent restaurant at Nos. 496 Fulham Road. In this respect, I note
    the Council’s comments that part of the footpath falls within the private ownership
    outside Nos. 498-504 and is not part of the public highway. However, there was no
    obvious demarcation or evidence to suggest that pedestrian access and use of the
    footpath would be restricted to members of the public at any time.
23. Nonetheless, whilst I observed many pedestrians naturally moved to the pavement
    in front of the adjacent medical centre, when it became busier and more
    congested, I noted the pedestrians having to wait and walk across the position of
    the Hub, particularly near to the corner pinch point outside Nos. 498-504.
    Consequently, given the use of the space available on the footpath and the
    potential footfall in this busy location, I consider, in my view, that the proposed
    Hub, by virtue of its siting and design, would cause an undue obstruction to
    pedestrians and impede the free flow of pedestrian movements.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decisions 6010443 and 6010445


24. I note the appellant’s willingness to move and re-orientate the proposed Hub to
    reduce the impact on highway safety. This, however, would result in material
    changes to the proposals before me and in any event, I am required to consider
    the proposals on the basis of the same details that were before the Council when it
    made its decision.
25. Therefore, for the reasons given, I conclude with regard to Appeal A that the
    proposed Hub would have a harmful effect on highway safety. Consequently, the
    proposal would be contrary to Policy T3 of the HFLP and Policies T2 and D5 of the
    London Plan 2021 insofar as they relate to ensuring that development achieve the
    highest standards of accessible and inclusive design that promotes opportunities
    for walking and provides accessible, inclusive and safe pedestrian routes.
Other Matters
26. In support of the appeal the appellant has stated that the proposed development
    includes the removal of existing telephone kiosk adjacent to the Hammersmith
    Broadway CA. However, the existing kiosk proposed to be removed is not within
    the appeal site and is located elsewhere in Borough. Therefore, I am not satisfied
    this would mitigate the harm arising from the appeal proposals, nor that a planning
    condition to secure its removal would meet the tests on conditions set out in the
    Framework and advice contained in the Planning Practice Guidance.
27. The appellant has also referenced to similar structures installed across the
    country, including the Hub at 12-14 Beadon Road, London, W6 0DA. However, I
    have not been provided the full details of these to know how directly comparable
    they are to the current proposals. In any event, I have determined the appeals
    before me on their own merits.
28. I acknowledge the existing illuminated advertisements on the bus shelters in the
    locality highlighted by the appellant. However, they appear to have different
    development characteristics to the appeal scheme and as such are not directly
    comparable to the appeal before me. As a consequence, whilst I have taken this
    into account, it does not materially alter my conclusions on the appeal proposals.
29. The appellant states that the proposals would contribute towards improving
    communications infrastructure in line with the policies of the Framework. I have
    considered the various other public benefits put forward by the appellant in the
    main issues above. Nonetheless, given the limited scale of the proposals, these
    benefits would be modest and there is no indication that they could not be
    achieved in a less harmful manner than proposed. Therefore, the above combined
    benefits would not be sufficient to outweigh the harm I have identified in this case.
Conclusion
30. With regard to Appeal A, having regard to all other matters raised, I conclude that
    the proposed development is not in accordance with the development plan when
    read as a whole and Appeal A should be dismissed.
31. For the reasons given above, I conclude Appeal B should be dismissed.

David Troy
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
