Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 July 2026
by A Wright BSc (Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 4th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010313
Branford Wells, Brickhouse Lane, Newchapel, Surrey RH7 6HY
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Central Projects Ltd against the decision of Tandridge District Council.
•    The application Ref is TA/2025/1413.
•    The development proposed is conversion of agricultural building to form five dwellings with
     associated parking and landscaping.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The address in the banner heading above is taken from the application form,
       although I note that the appeal form and decision notice refer to the address as ‘1-
       5 South View Barns, Brickhouse Lane, Newchapel, Lingfield, Surrey RH7 6HY’.
3.     The appellant submitted revised proposed floor plans and sections with the appeal
       documents which show the removal of the flat ceilings over the bedrooms, removal
       of cupboards and relocation of loft hatches. As these minor amendments are
       interior to the building and would not alter the amount of accommodation
       proposed, my consideration of the revised plans would not cause procedural
       unfairness or prejudice to parties.
4.     Significant work to the building and site has already been carried out following the
       issuing of a lawful development certificate for the proposed change of use of the
       barns to five dwellings in 2021. Nevertheless, my consideration of the appeal is
       based on the description of development and the proposals set out in the original
       and, where relevant, revised proposed plans.
5.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
       August 2026. As this could affect the issues and matters in this case, the Council
       and the appellant were invited to make further comments but no responses were
       received. My decision reflects the latest version of the Framework.
Main Issues
6.     The main issues in this appeal are:
       •   whether the appeal site is grey belt land and whether the proposal would be
           inappropriate development in the Green Belt, having regard to the Framework
           and relevant development plan policies;


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010313


        •   the effect of the proposal on the openness of the Green Belt:
        •   the effect of the proposed scheme on the setting of the nearby Branford Wells
            grade II listed building;
        •   the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area;
        •   whether the proposal would provide acceptable living conditions for future
            occupants, with particular regard to the provision of amenity space; and
        •   whether any harm by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm, would
            be clearly outweighed by other considerations, so as to amount to the very
            special circumstances required to justify the proposal.
Reasons
Grey belt and inappropriate development
7.      The appeal site lies in the Green Belt identified in Policy DP10 of the Tandridge
        Local Plan Part 2 Detailed Policies 2014 (DP). Policy DP13 of the DP lists various
        types of development which are not inappropriate in the Green Belt. Owing to
        national policy changes, these differ to the exceptions listed in the Framework.
8.      Policy GB7 of the Framework list the types of development that are not
        inappropriate in the Green Belt. This includes the reuse of an existing building,
        provided that the existing building is of permanent and substantial construction, is
        lawful in planning terms, and any extension will not result in a disproportionate
        increase in size compared to the original building (Policy GB7(1)(b)). It also
        includes development which would utilise grey belt land where it would meet
        several criteria (Policy GB7(1)(g)).
9.      The proposal would reuse an existing building, and the parties do not dispute that
        it is of permanent and substantial construction. It is not proposed to increase the
        size of the building. Therefore, the proposal would meet the exception in Policy
        GB7(1)(b) of the Framework.
10. The definition of grey belt in the Framework includes land that does not strongly
    contribute to several Green Belt purposes. There is no dispute that the land does
    not strongly contribute to the purposes of checking the unrestricted sprawl of large
    built-up areas, preventing neighbouring towns merging into one another and
    preserving the setting and special character of historic towns. Therefore, the site
    meets the definition of grey belt.
11. The Council can only currently demonstrate a 1.97 year supply of housing land,
    significantly less than the five years referred to in the Framework, equating to a
    shortfall in excess of 3,000 homes. At an inquiry for an appeal at Nutfield1, the
    Council agreed that this is persistent, chronic and extremely serious. As such,
    there is an evidenced unmet need for the type of development proposed under
    criterion (ii) of Policy GB7(1)(g).
12. Criterion (iii) of this policy requires development to be in a sustainable location,
    with particular reference to Policy TR3. Proposals which could generate a
    significant amount of movement, in the context of the area in which they would be

1
    APP/M3645/W/25/3374913


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010313


         situated, should be sustainable. This means that the location should limit the need
         for travel, particularly by private car, and offer a genuine choice of transport modes
         for residents.
13. The proposed development would introduce five dwellings into an area with very
    few residential properties. Residents, their visitors, service and delivery vehicles
    associated with the proposed homes would generate a significant amount of
    movement in this context.
14. The appeal site is in a rural area away from settlements, facilities and bus
    services. It lies on Brickhouse Lane which is subject to a 40 mile per hour speed
    limit and lacks footways and streetlighting. Given its location and the nature of the
    road, I consider that future occupiers of the proposed dwellings would be heavily
    reliant on private vehicles to access services, and the location would not offer
    them a genuine choice of transport modes. Consequently, the proposal would not
    fall within the exception in Policy GB7(1)(g) of the Framework and would therefore
    be inappropriate development in the Green Belt.
Effect of the proposal on openness
15. As set out in the Framework, the objective of Green Belt policy is to prevent urban
    sprawl by keeping land permanently open. Openness is the counterpart of urban
    sprawl and often connotates the absence of development. It is an open textured
    term and can have both spatial and visual dimensions.
16. The appeal site comprises an agricultural building consisting of several barns
    which has subsequently been converted, an access driveway, and surrounding
    hardstanding and open land. Unlike an earlier proposal for use of the buildings for
    five dwellings2, the current scheme does not include first floor accommodation.
17. Nevertheless, similar to the findings by the Inspector on the previous scheme, the
    proposal would subdivide the plot, providing residential curtilages. This would
    create inevitable pressure for associated domestic car parking and traffic, fences,
    outbuildings, garden furniture and other domestic paraphernalia associated with its
    use, resulting in a loss of spatial openness. This effect would be over a larger area
    than the previous proposal as the current site also includes undeveloped, open
    land adjoining the access driveway.
18. A lodge house and hedges provide some screening of the site from Brickhouse
    Lane. However, there are glimpsed views of it through the access driveway from
    where the proposed development would be visible. It would also be evident from
    neighbouring properties. Therefore, compared to the original agricultural building,
    the proposal would result in a demonstrable loss of openness, in both visual and
    spatial terms.
Listed building
19. The appeal site lies in the countryside and there are some traditional rural
    buildings nearby, including the grade II listed Branford Wells to the south which is
    a designated heritage asset. The historic and architectural significance of this
    listed building is derived from its architectural and historic value as a 16 th century
    farmhouse which was sympathetically extended in the 20th century.


2
    Planning application ref: TA/2021/1967 and appeal ref: APP/M3645/W/22/3296968 ‘the earlier/previous proposal/scheme’


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 3
Appeal Decision 6010313


20. The Framework indicates that the significance of heritage assets can include any
    contribution made by their setting. It defines the setting of a heritage asset as the
    surroundings in which it is experienced. Branford Wells is experienced in the
    context of the traditional, rural open character, including the barns and land
    forming the appeal site which contribute to its significance.
21. The many glazed openings in the proposed converted building would give it a
    more modern, domestic appearance compared to the traditional agricultural
    appearance of the previous barns. Further, the creation of separate gardens
    subdivided by hedgerows would significantly enclose the space to the west of the
    building. In addition, the proposed parking bays and parked vehicles, patios, paths,
    cycle and bin stores and other domestic paraphernalia would result in substantial
    urbanisation of the rural environment. The domestic, enclosed, urban character of
    the proposed scheme would materially erode the rural setting, causing moderate
    harm to the significance of the listed building.
22. Policy DP20 of the Tandridge Local Plan Part 2 Detailed Policies 2014 (DP) states
    that only where the public benefits of the proposal significantly outweigh the harm
    to the designated heritage asset or its setting will exceptional planning consent be
    granted. These benefits will be proportional to the significance of the asset and to
    the level of harm proposed. This broadly aligns with Policy HE6 of the Framework
    where it states that for a development which would harm the significance of a
    designated heritage asset, the effect on the asset and its significance should be
    weighed against the public benefits of the proposal.
23. The appeal scheme would reuse a vacant building to provide five dwellings, create
    some social and economic benefits, and modestly improve accessibility to the
    building. However, given the relatively modest scale of the public benefits, these
    would not outweigh the harm to the significance of the listed building caused by
    the proposed development.
24. Consequently, I conclude that the proposal would fail to preserve the setting and
    thus the significance of the listed Branford Wells. This would be contrary to Policy
    DP20 of the DP where it seeks to preserve the historic interest, architectural
    character and settings of the District’s heritage assets. It would also conflict with
    Policy HE6 of the Framework.
Character and appearance
25. The appeal site is within a rural area where fields predominate and there is only
    sporadic development, largely comprising farmhouses and associated buildings.
    There is a small lodge house adjacent to the site, with the traditional detached
    dwellings at Branford Wells and Branford Farm located on sizeable plots nearby.
    The barns and surrounding land on the appeal site contribute to the area’s
    traditional, open countryside character.
26. The proposed cluster of five terraced dwellings would be at odds with the scattered
    pattern of detached houses in the locality. Further, as set out above, the proposed
    scheme would change a traditional agricultural building into one with a more
    modern, domestic appearance, enclose outside space and introduce substantial
    urban features into the external environment. Together, these would harm the rural
    open character of the area.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010313


27. Consequently, I conclude that the proposal would harm the character and
    appearance of the area. This would be contrary to Policies CSP18 and CSP21 of
    the Tandridge District Core Strategy 2008 (CS) and Policy DP7 of the DP.
    Amongst other things, these seek to protect countryside character, including
    requiring new development to respect the distinctive character of the area in which
    it is located. It would also conflict with Policy DP3 of the Framework where it
    requires proposals to respond to their context so that they integrate with their
    surroundings.
Living conditions
28. The DP does not set out minimum requirements for amenity space. Nonetheless,
    amongst other things, Policy DP7 of the DP expects new development to be of a
    high quality design, with amenity and garden areas proportionate to the size of
    residential units and appropriate for the intended occupiers.
29. The proposed scheme would provide 2 x 2-bedroom units and 3 x 3-bedroom units
    which, although smaller than the earlier proposal, are likely to be used by families.
    The plans indicate a sizeable area of land to the north of plot 5, accessed from its
    living area, and I am satisfied that this would provide a sufficient, private garden
    area for the future occupants of this 3-bedroom property.
30. However, the only clearly defined amenity spaces for plots 1-4 would be in front of
    those dwellings. Given their location amongst the proposed access route and car
    parking areas, they would fail to provide private, suitable and attractive garden
    areas for future occupants of those properties.
31. There is a strip of land to the rear of the dwellings, but it is not shown as proposed
    private space. Even if it were, as several houses would have no rear doors, it is
    unclear how any private space in this location would be accessible to some future
    occupants. The appellant states that land adjacent to the access drive could be
    used for allotments or a community orchard, but this would not alleviate the need
    to provide garden areas appropriate for occupants of the proposed units.
32. Therefore, I conclude that the proposal would provide unacceptable living
    conditions for future occupants, with particular regard to the provision of amenity
    space. This would be contrary to Policy DP7 of the DP. It would also contravene
    Policy DP3 of the Framework where it seeks to create liveable places which will
    function well over the lifetime of the development.
Other Considerations
Benefits
33. Policies in the Framework seek to significantly boost the supply of homes and
    support development which makes efficient use of land. The proposal would
    contribute five dwellings to the supply of housing, making more effective use of the
    site. It would make some difference to addressing the substantial housing shortfall
    in Tandridge. There would also be some social and economic benefits, including
    the support future occupiers would give to local businesses and services. Further,
    it would promote the reuse of an existing vacant building and make modest
    improvements to the building including improved accessibility. It is also indicated
    that savings in carbon dioxide emissions could be achieved. Overall, I attribute
    moderate weight to these benefits.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010313


Fallback Position
34. There is a lawful development certificate for the proposed change of use of the
    existing agricultural barns to five dwellinghouses following the expiry of 56 days in
    relation to the determination of prior approval reference 2021/353/NC 3. There is a
    very real prospect that this development could take place.
35. The fallback scheme covers a much smaller area of land than the appeal proposal,
    with the plans not indicating any subdivision of the surrounding land or formal
    parking spaces. Thus, whilst it would provide the same number of similar sized
    units to those proposed, it would cause less harm to the openness of the Green
    Belt, significance of the listed building, and character and appearance of the area.
    Conversely, without any defined amenity spaces, it would provide worse living
    conditions for future occupiers than the appeal proposal. However, the fallback
    scheme would cause less harm overall and therefore I accord it limited weight.
Other Matters
36. The Council did not find harm or development plan conflict in relation to several
    other matters, including highways safety, parking provision, loss of the best and
    most versatile agricultural land, trees, biodiversity, neighbouring living conditions,
    archaeology, and contamination. Nevertheless, even if I were to agree with the
    Council on these points, the absence of harm would be a neutral matter which
    would not carry weight in favour of the scheme.
Whether there would be Very Special Circumstances
37. Policy DP10 of the DP outlines that inappropriate development which is, by
    definition, harmful to the Green Belt, will only be permitted where very special
    circumstances exist. This aligns with the approach set out in Policy GB6 of the
    Framework. There would also be harm to Green Belt openness and the character
    and appearance of the area, as well as a failure to preserve the significance of the
    listed Branford Wells and unacceptable living conditions for future occupants.
    Substantial weight should be given to the harm caused to the Green Belt. Very
    special circumstances will not exist unless the harm to the Green Belt and any
    other harm are clearly outweighed by other considerations.
38. I give modest weight to the provision of additional dwellings and social and
    economic benefits, and limited weight to the fallback position. However, the other
    considerations would not clearly outweigh the harm to the Green Belt by reason of
    inappropriateness and other harm. Consequently, the very special circumstances
    necessary to justify the proposed development do not exist. As such, it would be
    contrary to Policy DP10 of the DP and Policy GB6 of the Framework.
Conclusion
39. For the reasons given above, the proposal conflicts with the development plan and
    the material considerations, including the Framework and the very special
    circumstances test therein, do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other
    than in accordance with it. Therefore, the appeal should be dismissed.

A Wright INSPECTOR

3
    Reference: 2021/1218


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
