Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 28 August 2026
by F Leung BSc(Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6010661
Pavement o/s, 43-47 Bethnal Green Road, London, E1 6LA
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Mr Nathan Still of Infocus Public Networks Limited against the decision of the
       Council of the London Borough of Tower Hamlets.
•      The application Ref is PA/26/00088.
•      The development proposed is removal of two static advertised kiosks followed by the installation of a
       multifunctional communication hub including defibrillator and advertisement display, as illustrated in
       the attached documentation.

Appeal B Ref: 6010662
Pavement o/s, 43-47 Bethnal Green Road, London, E1 6LA
•      The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
       Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
       consent.
•      The appeal is made by Mr Nathan Still of Infocus Public Networks Limited against the decision of the
       Council of the London Borough of Tower Hamlets.
•      The application Ref is PA/26/00089.
•      The development proposed is removal of two static advertised kiosks followed by the installation of a
       multifunctional communication hub including defibrillator and advertisement display, as illustrated in
       the attached documentation.

Decisions
1.       Appeals A and B are dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       Appeal A relates to the refusal of planning permission for the proposed
         communication hub. Appeal B concerns the refusal of advertisement consent for
         the digital signage that would form an integral part of the hub proposed under
         Appeal A. I have combined the appeals into a single decision letter because they
         are intrinsically linked and raise similar issues, although I have considered each
         appeal on its individual merits.
3.       In respect of Appeal B, the Town and Country Planning (Control of
         Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) makes clear that
         advertisements are subject to control only in the interests of amenity and public
         safety. The Planning Practice Guidance1 confirms this approach. Section 38(6) of
         the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 does not apply to advertisement
         appeals. Nevertheless, I have taken the relevant development plan policies into
         account as material considerations, although they are not determinative.

1
    Paragraph: 001 Reference ID: 18b-001-20140306

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6010661 & 6010662


4.     Prior to the determination of this appeal, a revised version of the National Planning
       Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. The main
       parties were given an opportunity to comment. I have had regard to the revised
       Framework in reaching my decisions. References hereafter are to the revised
       version of the Framework.
Main Issues
5.     For Appeal A, the main issue is the effect of the proposal on:
           •    the character and appearance of the area; and
           •    the existing public cycle infrastructure.
6.     For Appeal B, the main issue is the effect of the advertisement on the visual
       amenity of the area.
Reasons
Character and appearance (Appeal A)/ visual amenity (Appeal B)
7.     The appeal site comprises an area of pavement outside Rich Mix, which is a
       cinema, music venue and creative hub. The site forms part of a pavement
       containing a line of cycle stands and street trees. There is also an access ramp in
       front of the entrance to Rich Mix. This section of Bethnal Green Road is
       characterised by buildings of varied styles and ages, including high-rise apartment
       blocks and other mixed-use buildings, together with retail and commercial
       frontages. Given the width of the pavement and the low-rise nature of the existing
       street furniture, this section of the road has an open and spacious character.
8.     The proposal would provide a telephone handset, a defibrillator, a charging
       connection and a touchscreen providing interactive services. A digital display
       screen would be installed on the opposite side. The proposed hub would be
       positioned so that the digital screen faced vehicular traffic on the highway, leaving
       approximately 2.7m of unobstructed pavement between the hub and the nearest
       building. The proposed hub would measure approximately 2.6m in height and
       1.3m in width.
9.     Although there is a proliferation of street furniture along this section of the
       pavement, the existing items have a relative spatial order, with sufficient space
       around and between them to prevent the street scene from appearing unduly
       cluttered. The cycle stands are low-level and visually permeable features. By
       contrast, the proposed hub would be considerably taller, wider and more solid in
       appearance. Its scale, height and bulk would make it substantially more visually
       prominent than the existing street furniture and would disrupt the existing spatial
       order of this part of the pavement.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decisions 6010661 & 6010662


10. The visual effect of the hub would be exacerbated by its prominent position close
    to the edge of the pavement, where it would draw attention to itself as an unduly
    dominant feature. Taken together, its scale, height, bulk and location would result
    in a prominent and visually intrusive addition to the street scene, adding materially
    to the existing visual clutter and diminishing the open and spacious character of
    this section of the pavement. Although modern development, varied shopfronts,
    internally illuminated signage and other street furniture are commonplace in the
    immediate area and reflect its commercial character, these features do not justify
    the introduction of a structure of the proposed scale and prominence in this
    particular location.
11. With regard to Appeal A, I conclude that, due to its scale, height and prominent
    location, the proposal would cause significant harm to the character and
    appearance of the area. Accordingly, it would conflict with Policy S.DH1 of the
    Tower Hamlets Local Plan 2031 (2020) (the THLP) and Policy D3 of the London
    Plan. Amongst other things, these policies seek high-quality design that responds
    positively to the local context. The proposal would also conflict with Policies
    D.DH10 and D.DH11 of the THLP, which require, in summary, advertisements and
    telecommunications apparatus to be well designed and integrated and to minimise
    their effects on the street scene.
12. With regard to Appeal B, the scale and height of the digital display screen,
    together with its prominent position on the proposed hub, would make the
    advertisement a conspicuous and visually intrusive feature. For these reasons,
    and those given above, the proposed advertisement would harm the visual
    amenity of the area. Insofar as it is a material consideration, the proposal would
    not accord with Policy D.DH10 of the THLP, which seeks to ensure that
    advertisements are well-designed and well-integrated within the public realm. It
    would also fail to accord with the relevant objectives of Policy S.DH1 of the THLP
    and Policy D3 of the London Plan. Although the Council has also referred to Policy
    D.DH11 of the THLP, that policy does not directly relate to the control of
    advertisements and has not been determinative in my consideration of Appeal B.
13. Furthermore, due to their visually intrusive form and prominent location, the appeal
    proposals would not respond positively to their context or integrate with and
    enhance their surroundings. Accordingly, Appeals A and B would conflict with
    Policy DP3 of the Framework.
Public cycle infrastructure (Appeal A)
14. The Appeal A proposal would result in the removal of three of the 17 existing cycle
    stands that provide publicly accessible cycle parking in front of Rich Mix. During
    my site visit, I observed that at least seven of the stands were in use.
15. The appellant indicates that three replacement cycle stands would be provided on
    the opposite side of the road. However, the proposed replacement location lies
    outside the appeal site, and there is no evidence before me to establish the
    ownership or control of that land. Nor is there a planning obligation, highway
    agreement or other mechanism to secure the installation and continued availability
    of the replacement stands. In the absence of such evidence or any secured
    delivery mechanism, I am not satisfied that the proposed replacement provision
    would be feasible or delivered.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6010661 & 6010662


16. I have considered whether a planning condition could secure the provision of the
    replacement cycle stands before the proposed hub is installed. However, the
    proposed replacement site lies outside the appeal site, and there is no evidence
    that the appellant owns or controls that land or otherwise has the ability to carry
    out the necessary works. Compliance with such a condition would therefore
    depend on the agreement and actions of a third party. Although a negatively
    worded condition can, in principle, require works outside the application site and
    prevent development until those works have been carried out, on the evidence
    before me, there does not appear to be a reasonable prospect of the works being
    delivered because ownership, control and the delivery mechanism are uncertain.
    Such a condition would therefore not be reasonable or capable of being framed
    with sufficient precision to ensure compliance and enforceability.
17. In conclusion, it has not been demonstrated that the proposal would avoid an
    unacceptable loss of existing public cycle infrastructure or that suitable
    replacement provision would be delivered. Accordingly, the proposal would conflict
    with Policies S.TR1 and D.TR3 of the THLP and Policies T1, T2, T3 and T5 of the
    London Plan. Amongst other things, these policies seek to support and facilitate
    cycling, prioritise the needs of cyclists, contribute to creating a healthy
    environment in which people choose to cycle, safeguard infrastructure used for
    active travel, and provide appropriate cycle parking.
Other Matters
18. The appeal site is close to the Grade II listed Knave of Clubs Public House.
    Mindful of the statutory duty in section 66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
    Conservation Areas) Act 1990, I have had special regard to the desirability of
    preserving its setting. The significance of the listed building derives principally from
    its architectural and historic interest as a late-19th-century public house, including
    its distinctive corner form, external architectural detailing and surviving traditional
    features. Notwithstanding the proximity of the appeal site to the listed building and
    the degree of intervisibility between them, having regard to the nature and scale of
    the proposed development and the presence of modern development and street
    furniture within the surrounding street scene, the proposal would preserve the
    setting of the listed building and would not harm its significance.
19. The appellant contends that the appeal site is not within the Brick Lane and
    Fournier Street Conservation Area or the Redchurch Street Conservation Area.
    Nevertheless, the absence of harm in these respects, including the absence of
    harm to the significance of the listed building identified above, is a neutral
    consideration in my determination of the appeals.
Planning Balance
20. The Appeal A development would harm the character and appearance of the area
    and the existing public cycle infrastructure. The Appeal B advertisement would
    harm the visual amenity of the area. Consequently, I have found that the Appeal A
    proposal would conflict with a number of development plan policies and that the
    Appeal B proposal would not accord with the objectives of the relevant
    development plan policies.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decisions 6010661 & 6010662


21. Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 applies only to
    the Appeal A development. Given the harm and development plan policy conflicts I
    have identified, I conclude that the Appeal A development would conflict with the
    development plan when read as a whole.
22. Policy S3 of the Framework states that decisions on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. Policy S4
    provides that development proposals within settlements should be approved
    unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse
    effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the
    Framework. Policy S4 also sets out a non-exhaustive list of circumstances in
    which the benefits of approving development are likely to be substantially
    outweighed by adverse effects. These include a failure to comply with a national
    decision-making policy that states that development proposals should be refused
    in specified circumstances.
23. As it would harm the character and appearance of the area, I have found that the
    proposed hub and advertisement would conflict with Policy DP3 of the Framework.
    The appeal proposals would therefore fail to comply with a national decision-
    making policy that states that proposals should be refused in specified
    circumstances.
24. Policy CO1 of the Framework requires substantial weight to be given to the
    benefits of proposals for the expansion or upgrading of electronic
    telecommunications networks where they would maintain or improve network
    coverage, capacity, reliability or resilience. It also requires such proposals to be
    sited and designed to minimise their visual impact, especially where a new site or
    structure is proposed. Insofar as the proposed hub under Appeal A would provide
    those network benefits, I give them substantial weight. Nevertheless, the proposed
    hub would occupy a prominent location and, due to its scale, height and design,
    would have a significant adverse visual effect. It would therefore fail to minimise its
    visual impact as required by Policy CO1.
25. The proposal under Appeal A would also provide a range of public benefits,
    including free Wi-Fi, telephone access, access to emergency services, a
    defibrillator, charging facilities and wayfinding information. I attach positive weight
    to these benefits. However, there is limited evidence before me about the extent to
    which the proposal is necessary to provide these facilities at this particular
    location, or the level of public demand for them. Accordingly, while the benefits
    weigh in favour of the proposal, they do not outweigh the significant and long-
    lasting harm that would be caused to the character and appearance of the area.
26. Reference has been made to the intended removal of an existing telephone kiosk
    outside 185 Bethnal Green Road, more than 300m from the appeal site. However,
    there is no proposed mechanism before me to secure its removal. Moreover,
    based on my site visit, that location is materially different from the appeal site,
    including because it does not contain the same concentration of street furniture in
    its immediate surroundings. I therefore attach limited weight to the proposed
    removal of the kiosk.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decisions 6010661 & 6010662


27. I have given substantial weight to the benefits of the Appeal A proposal in
    maintaining or improving telecommunications network coverage, capacity,
    reliability or resilience, in accordance with Policy CO1 of the Framework. I have
    also given positive weight to the other public benefits identified above.
    Nevertheless, taken together, those benefits would be substantially outweighed by
    the significant harm to the character and appearance of the area and the
    unacceptable loss of existing public cycle infrastructure. Assessed against the
    national decision-making policies of the Framework, Policy S4 therefore does not
    indicate that planning permission should be granted.
Conclusion
28. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the proposed development of Appeal
    A would conflict with the development plan when read as a whole, and there are
    no material considerations that indicate the proposal should be determined
    otherwise than in accordance with it. Therefore, Appeal A should be dismissed.
29. For the above reasons, the advertisement proposed under Appeal B would harm
    visual amenity. Having regard to all relevant material considerations, including the
    Framework, I conclude that Appeal B should also be dismissed.

F Leung
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
