Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by R Major BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 14th September 2026
Appeal A Ref: 6010838
Denmark Hill, Outside No. 124, London SE5 8RX
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Ms Safia Rana-Jaswal of BT against the decision of the Council of the
     London Borough of Lambeth.
•    The application Ref is 26/00295/FUL.
•    The development proposed is removal of an existing InLink Unit, and the deployment of a
     replacement Street Hub 3 unit.
Appeal B Ref: 6010837
Denmark Hill, Outside No. 124, London SE5 8RX
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Ms Safia Rana-Jaswal of BT against the decision of the Council of the London
     Borough of Lambeth.
•    The application Ref is 26/00296/ADV.
•    The advertisement proposed is two digital 75-inch LCD display screens, one on each side of the
     Street Hub unit.

Decision
1.     Appeal A is allowed and planning permission is granted for removal of an existing
       InLink Unit, and the deployment of a replacement Street Hub 3 unit at Denmark
       Hill, Outside No. 124, London SE5 8RX in accordance with the terms of the
       application, Ref 26/00295/FUL, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
2.     Appeal B is allowed and express consent is granted for two digital 75-inch LCD
       display screens, one on each side of the Street Hub unit at Denmark Hill, Outside
       No. 124, London SE5 8RX in accordance with the terms of the application,
       Ref 26/00296/ADV. The consent is for five years from the date of this decision and
       is subject to the five standard conditions set out in Schedule 2 of the 2007
       Regulations and the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
3. The two appeals relate to the same proposal on the same site. Appeal A concerns
   the refusal of planning permission to erect a street hub unit (the hub). Appeal B
   concerns the refusal of express consent for advertisement panels on either side of
   the hub. I have considered each appeal on its individual merits, however, as they
   raise similar issues, I have combined both decisions into a single decision letter.
4. In respect of Appeal B, the Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements)
   (England) Regulations 2007 (the Regulations) require that decisions are made only
   in the interest of amenity and public safety. Therefore, whilst I have taken account
   of the Lambeth Local Plan 2020-2035 (the Local Plan) and the London Plan 2021


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010838


      (the London Plan) policies that the Council considers to be relevant, these have not
      been decisive in my determination of this appeal.
5. Subsequent to the Council issuing its decision the revised National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. The main parties
   were given the opportunity to comment on the implications of the revised Framework,
   and I have taken the comments received into consideration in my determination of
   these appeals.
Main Issues
6.     The main issues in respect of Appeal A is the effect of the proposal on highway
       and pedestrian safety.
7.     The main issues in respect of Appeal B is the effect of the proposed advertisement
       on public safety.
Reasons
8.     The appeal relates to the site of an existing BT InLink Unit located on a section of
       pavement on the western side of Denmark Hill (A215), directly outside the
       Faraday Building which is operated by the NHS. In this location the vehicular
       carriageway of Denmark Hill is three lanes wide, with the lane closest to the
       appeal site being designated as a Bus Lane, although I observed it was also used
       by cyclists.
9.     The appeal site is located within a mixed-use area, consisting of a range of
       commercial properties and residential dwellings, and during my visit this section of
       footway was well used by pedestrians.
10.    In addition to the existing BT InLink Unit, within the immediate vicinity are other
       items of street furniture, including bollards, lighting columns, street trees and
       wheelie bins. Furthermore, I observed that the shop directly to the north at number
       122 Denmark Hill (no. 122) was using the external area at the front of their property
       to store retail items for sale.
11.    Additionally, due to the commercial character of the immediate surroundings,
       particularly to the north of the appeal site, this area is not currently devoid of
       signage and advertising. Nearby shops have a variety of fascia signs, projecting
       signs and window adverts, as well as freestanding A-board signs on the footway.
12.    The appeal proposal seeks to remove the existing BT InLink Unit and erect a street
       hub unit with advertisement panels on either side in its place. The proposed
       installation would be sited on the same footprint as the existing unit, however it
       would be 346mm wider and also slightly taller. The proposed hub would house
       features that provide free Wi-Fi, free UK calls, USB charging, access to emergency
       services and other facilities.
13.    Whilst acknowledging that the proposed street hub would be larger than the
       existing unit, given that one street hub is being replaced by another, the proposal
       would not result in an increase in the overall number of items of street furniture
       and clutter in this location. The increase in width of the proposed unit would
       however reduce the amount of useable space on the footway.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010838


14.     In this regard, the submitted plan shows a distance of 3.3m would be provided on
        the footway between the proposed hub and the front wall of the Faraday Building.
        In the absence of any specific details from the Council in respect of the width of
        this footway I have no reason to doubt this measurement.
15.     This gap of 3.3m would meet the required technical stipulations in respect of width
        clearance guidance contained within the inclusive mobility guidance document1 and
        I see no reason why this document should not be afforded weight as a material
        consideration.
16.     I note the Council has made reference to a wheelie bin that has been positioned on
        the pavement and I observed this bin during my visit. However, I have very limited
        information before me in respect of who owns this bin, its exact size, or its status as
        a permanent feature on the footway. Furthermore, I noted that it was moveable and
        based on the images provided, and my observations on site, its exact location in
        relation to the existing/proposed hub can vary slightly.
17.     In addition, I observed existing narrow sections of pavement in close proximity to the
        appeal site. These included the section between the retail items being stored outside
        no. 122 and the existing street tree, as well as the gap between the front wall of
        number 128A Denmark Hill and an existing street tree. Overall, I did not find that
        pedestrians, including wheelchair users and those with buggies, had difficulty moving
        safely and conveniently along these sections of footway in close proximity to the
        appeal site.
18.     In view of the above, even allowing for times of the day when there may be greater
        footfall around the appeal site than what I observed during my site visit, I find
        sufficient space would remain to allow for unimpeded access along the footway
        between the proposed hub and the front elevation of the Faraday Building, including
        when the wheelie bin is located directly in line with the proposed hub. Pedestrians
        would not therefore be required to leave this footway as a result of the appeal
        proposal and could negotiate the area without being unduly impeded.
19.     Consequently, I find the proposal would not result in a harmful impact upon
        pedestrian movements and would not place pedestrians at risk with cyclists and
        vehicles on the highway.
20.     The Council also state the larger hub and screens could distract road users and has
        drawn my attention to the accident record along the section of highway between
        numbers 110 – 134 Denmark Hill for the period 2017 – 2025. The Council state that
        this data suggests an ongoing need for targeted road danger reduction improvements
        along this highway.
21.     Whilst this accident data is acknowledged, the specific details of these accidents
        has not been provided and there is no substantive evidence before me as to how
        many, if any, of these accidents were caused by road users being distracted by the
        existing BT InLink Unit.
22.     Additionally, I have not been provided with any accident data for the period before
        the existing BT InLink Unit was installed, or accident data from other sections of
        Denmark Hill, that would enable me to make any direct comparisons with the

1
  Inclusive Mobility – A Guide to Best Practice on Access to Pedestrian and Transport Infrastructure. Department for Transport
(2021)



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 3
Appeal Decision 6010838


         accident record provided. As such, I do not find that the accident record data
         provided by the Council is evidence that the proposed, larger, unit would cause a
         distraction to road users.
23.      Furthermore, the Planning Practice Guidance2 (PPG) acknowledges that all
         advertisements are intended to attract attention and that there are less likely to be
         road safety problems if the advertisement is on a site within a commercial or
         industrial locality. The PPG also states that proposed advertisements at points
         where drivers need to take more care are more likely to affect public safety.
24.      With this guidance in mind, given the mixed-use commercial character of the area and
         the existence of a BT InLink Unit, I do not find that the proposed larger, replacement
         hub and adverts would be a distraction to road users as digital advertisements on the
         side of busy roads are not an uncommon feature in general. Furthermore, the proposal
         would be sited a sufficient distance away from any traffic lights.
25.      In view of all the above, and for the reasons given, I conclude that the proposal
         would not be harmful to highway, pedestrian and public safety. I therefore find no
         conflict with the provisions of Local Plan Policies Q17, T1, T2, T3 and T9, and
         London Plan Policy T4, where they together seek to ensure, amongst other things,
         that proposals encourage sustainable travel patterns, including walking and cycling;
         do not result in unnacceptable transport impacts; do not increase road danger; and
         do not harm public safety and add unnacceptable street clutter.
26.      In addition, given that I have found that the proposal would not have an
         unnacceptable impact on highway safety, I find no conflict with Policy TR6 of the
         Framework. I also find no conflict with Policy TR4 of the Framework where it states
         that proposals should minimise the scope for conflict between pedestrians, cyclists
         and vehicles.
Other Matters
27. As mentioned above, the Regulations require that advertisements (Appeal B) be
    subject to control only in the interests of amenity and public safety. The Council has
    not suggested the proposed advertisement would affect visual amenity and based
    on my observations on site I see no reason to disagree.
Conditions
28. The Council and the appellant have provided some suggested conditions for both
    appeals which I have considered against Policy DM6 of the Framework, and the
    advice contained in the PPG. I have edited the suggested conditions to improve
    precision and enforceability where necessary.
29. In Appeal A, in addition to the statutory time condition (1), a condition listing the
    approved drawings (2) is needed to ensure clarity of what has been permitted. I
    have also imposed a condition which requires the development to be carried out in
    accordance with the details included within the submitted supporting documents (3).
    This condition is necessary in the interests of visual amenity and public safety, and
    to ensure that the development operates as per the submitted details.
30. I note that the Council suggested a condition be imposed that requires the structure
    to be removed from the land when it is no longer required for telecommunication or

2
    Paragraph: 067 Reference ID: 18b-067-20140306


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            4
Appeal Decision 6010838


       electronic communication purposes. The Council state that this condition is required
       to safeguard the character and appearance of the immediate area. However, given
       that I have not found that the proposed hub, and adverts, would be harmful to the
       visual amenity of the area I do not consider this condition to be reasonable or
       necessary to make the development acceptable. This suggested condition has
       therefore not been imposed.
31. In Appeal B, all advertisements granted express consent are subject to the five
    standard conditions set out in the Regulations. In addition to these, to prevent visual
    intrusion it is necessary to apply conditions (1 & 2) to control the illumination of the
    advertisements so they do not stand out significantly from the background
    illumination in the street.
32. Conditions to ensure there are no moving images (3); the minimum display time is
    10 seconds with the interval between successive displays being instantaneous and
    that the display will switch off in the event of a malfunction (4); and that no content
    on the display shall resemble a traffic sign (5), have been imposed. These are all
    necessary to avoid the risk of distraction to passers-by.
33. Regulation 14(7) of the Regulations requires that an express consent shall be
    subject to the condition that it expires at the end of such a period specified when
    granting consent, or a period of 5 years. In this regard the appellant has requested
    an additional condition be attached to Appeal B which allows the advertisement to
    remain valid for 10 years from the date of the consent.
34. Whilst acknowledging that I have discretion to grant express consent for a period
    longer than 5 years, I have been provided with limited justification as to the reasons
    why, in this case, the standard 5 years is not appropriate and express consent
    should be granted for 10 years. I do not therefore consider this condition to be
    reasonable or necessary, and it has therefore not been included.
35. In any event, on the expiration of the 5-year express consent period, the
    advertisements would not necessarily need removing as they would benefit from
    deemed consent. Only if the Council considered that a discontinuance notice was
    necessary would their removal be required. Therefore, it is entirely feasible that the
    advertisements could remain in situ for the 10-year period requested.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
36. Policy S3 of the Framework states that decisions on development proposals should
    apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. In this case, the
    development would be located within a settlement, where Framework Policy S4
    indicates that development should be approved, unless the benefits of doing so
    would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against
    the Framework’s national decision-making policies.
37. For the reasons given, I conclude that there are no adverse effects arising from the
    proposal when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the
    Framework and consequently Policies S3 and S4 of the Framework indicate that the
    proposal should be approved.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010838


38. In view of all the above, and taking into account all matters raised, both Appeal A
    and Appeal B are allowed.



R Major
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6010838


                                       Schedule of conditions


Appeal A Ref: 6010838
1)     The development must be begun not later than the expiration of three years
       beginning with the date of this permission.
2)     The development hereby approved shall be carried out in accordance with the
       following approved plans:

       •     24007290_PLN_LOC_1.1 – Site Location Plan
       •     24007290_PLN_SI_2.1 – Proposed Site Plan
       •     24007290_PLN_EL_3.1 – Elevation Plan
       •     PROPOSED BT STREETHUB 3 UNIT
3)     The development hereby approved shall be installed and maintained at all times
       thereafter in accordance with the details specified within the documents titled:

        •    Street Hub Product Statement (V2.2, November 2025);
        •    Street Hubs Anti-Social Behaviour Management Plan (Version 3);
        •    Street Hub Noise Management Plan (V2.1)
        •    ICNIRP Declaration of Conformity (Dated 03/09/2026)


Appeal B Ref: 6010837
In addition to the five standard conditions in the Regulations:
1)     In daylight hours, the intensity of the illuminance of the advertisements shall be
       controlled in order to reflect ambient light conditions (to ensure they are neither
       too bright or too dull), and shall at all times be no greater than the recommended
       maximum daytime luminance values set out in Table 10.5 within the Institution of
       Lighting Professionals - Professional Lighting Guide (PLG 05) 'Brightness of
       Illuminated Advertisements including Digital Displays' (2023) (or its equivalent in a
       replacement guide) in cd/m2.
2)     In the hours of darkness (between dusk and dawn), the intensity of the
       illuminance of the advertisements shall be no greater than maximum night-time
       luminance value set out in Table 10.4 within the Institution of Lighting
       Professionals - Professional Lighting Guide (PLG 05) 'Brightness of Illuminated
       Advertisements including Digital Displays' (2023) (or its equivalent in a
       replacement guide) in cd/m2.
3)     The digital display screens shall not display any moving, or apparently moving,
       images (including animation, flashing, scrolling three dimensional, intermittent or
       video elements).
4)     The minimum display time for each piece of content on the digital display screens
       shall be 10 seconds. The interval between successive displays shall be
       instantaneous and the complete screen shall change with no visual effects
       (including swiping or other animated transition methods) between displays and the
       display will include a mechanism to switch to a blank screen with a black
       background in the event of a malfunction.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        7
Appeal Decision 6010838


5)     No content on the digital display screens shall resemble traffic signs, as defined in
       section 64 of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984.


                                           ***End of conditions***




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         8
