Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by Nick Davies BSc(Hons) BTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 14 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010442
Land to the West of Pits Mingle Bungalow, Tregoss Moor, Tregoss, Roche,
St Austell PL26 8LZ
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•      The appeal is made by Mr M Aldin against the decision of Cornwall Council.
•      The application Ref is PA25/07857.
•      The development proposed is a single Self Build property.


Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       The proposal is for permission in principle. The Planning Practice Guidance (the
         PPG) advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
         housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has two
         stages: the first stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site
         is suitable in-principle, and the second (technical details consent stage), is when
         the detailed development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first
         of these two stages.
3.       The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
         land use and the amount of development permitted1. All other matters are
         considered as part of a subsequent technical details consent application if
         permission in principle is granted. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
4.       A proposed site plan, floor plans and elevations have been submitted, but I have
         considered these to be solely for illustrative purposes because the application only
         relates to the principle of the proposed development.
5.       On 17 August 2026, the Government published a new National Planning Policy
         Framework (the Framework). Both parties have had the opportunity to comment
         on its implications for their respective cases. I have considered the new
         Framework in my determination of the appeal.
Main Issue
6.       The main issue is whether the site is suitable for the proposal, having regard to its
         location, the proposed land use, and the amount of development.


1
    The PPG Paragraph: 012 Reference ID: 58-012-20180615

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010442


Reasons
7.     Pits Mingle Bungalow is part of a small cluster of buildings that is surrounded by
       undeveloped agricultural land to the north, south, and west. The appeal site
       comprises a level area of grassed land that borders its garden. The village of
       Roche lies to the east, beyond the recently constructed A391.
8.     The proposal is specifically for a self-build dwelling, and the appellant has
       indicated that an obligation could be secured to ensure this method of
       construction, together with a local occupancy clause. Nevertheless, I have not
       been directed to any policies that indicate an exemption to the spatial strategy of
       the development plan in these circumstances. The strategy is set out at Policies 2
       and 3 of the Cornwall Local Plan Strategic Policies 2010 – 2030 (adopted 2016)
       (the Local Plan), and housing growth is focussed on identified main towns. Roche
       is not one of these. However, Policy 3 also supports residential development in
       other locations through the identification of sites through Neighbourhood Plans;
       rural exception sites; rounding off of settlements; development of previously
       developed land (PDL) within or adjoining a settlement; and infill schemes.
9.     The Roche Parish Neighbourhood Plan 2016-2030 (the Neighbourhood Plan),
       which was made in 2018, identifies sites for development. It also establishes a
       settlement boundary for the village. The appeal site is about 280 metres beyond
       this boundary. Policy A1 says that development outside the boundary will not
       normally be permitted unless one of the specified exceptions applies. The only one
       that could be applicable is the redevelopment of PDL. Whilst the site has the
       appearance of being part of the garden of Pits Mingle Bungalow, I have no
       evidence to demonstrate that this is its lawful use, or even that it is in the same
       ownership. Although the site once accommodated kennels, any previous buildings
       have been demolished, and the fixed surface structures have blended into the
       landscape. The site is now largely laid to grass. Consequently, there is no
       compelling evidence that the site comprises PDL. The proposal would, therefore,
       conflict with Policy A1.
10. The proposal has not been submitted as a rural exception site, and, as the
    proposal would not fill a gap in an otherwise continuous built frontage it would not
    be an infill scheme. Paragraph 1.68 of the Local Plan says rounding off of
    settlements applies to land that is substantially enclosed but outside of the urban
    form of a settlement. The small cluster of buildings is not a settlement in its own
    right, and the site is a considerable distance away from the built-up edge of Roche.
    It is contended that the A391 marks the edge of Roche, and that the site is
    therefore in close proximity to the settlement. There is, however, a substantial tract
    of land between the western edge of the settlement and the new highway. Even if
    this land were to be developed, the A391 would form a distinct edge to the village.
    Furthermore, the cluster of buildings which includes the appeal site does not lie
    adjacent to the road, but is separated from it by intervening undeveloped land.
    Consequently, the proposal cannot reasonably be described as the rounding off of
    a settlement.
11. I have already concluded that the site is not PDL, so the proposal would not
    comprise any of the forms of development that are acceptable under the strategy
    for housing outside main settlements. Paragraph 2.33 of the Local Plan says that
    land outside the physical boundaries of existing settlements is defined as open
    countryside. Consequently, although the land has a rather domesticated

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010442


       appearance, it lies within the countryside for planning purposes. Policy 7 says that
       the development of new homes in the open countryside will only be permitted
       where there are special circumstances, none of which apply in this case.
       Consequently, the proposal would conflict with the spatial strategy set out in
       Policies 2, 3, and 7 of the Local Plan and Policy A1 of the Neighbourhood Plan.
12. Policy 21 of the Local Plan encourages sustainably located proposals that
    increase building density where appropriate. Policies C1 and T1 of the Climate
    Emergency Development Plan Document 2023 (the CEDPD) seek to maximise the
    ability for occupants of new development to make trips by sustainable and active
    modes of transport, rather than private vehicles. The site lies within about 280
    metres of the built edge of Roche, but the walking route to the centre of the village,
    where the convenience store and other facilities are located, is about 900 metres,
    and the school is 1.25 km away. These distances alone would discourage walking,
    but there are added disincentives. Firstly, Tregoss Road is unlit and has no
    footpaths, so pedestrians must share the carriageway with vehicles, which I
    observed passing the site at some speed, albeit sporadically.
13. The main deterrent to walking, however, is the need to cross the A391 close to a
    busy roundabout junction. Whilst there are footpaths and a central refuge, there is
    no street lighting, and pedestrians must cross four lanes of traffic. I saw that traffic
    approaching and leaving the roundabout did so at considerable speed, with drivers
    focussing on their route across the junction. In the absence of any traffic controls,
    the crossing is not comfortable for any pedestrian, and would be particularly
    unsuitable for children, or those with limited mobility, especially outside daylight
    hours. Therefore, in view of the distance and the difficulties in crossing the A391,
    walking to the village to obtain services would not be an attractive option for
    occupants of the development.
14. There is a bus stop in Roche, approximately 450 metres from the site, providing
    links to higher order services elsewhere. However, occupants of the site would
    have to traverse the roundabout to reach this stop, so would face the same
    deterrents as those walking to the local services. Similarly, cycling to the village
    would be a feasible option in terms of distance and topography, but the A391
    crossing would deter less able or confident cyclists. Overall, therefore, although
    the site is located in reasonable proximity to a settlement with services, there is a
    significant barrier to the use of active or sustainable transport methods to obtain
    those services. Occupants of the development are, therefore, likely to be largely
    reliant on private vehicles to access daily services and facilities. Whilst I recognise
    that the number of traffic movements from a single dwelling would be limited, the
    proposal would, nevertheless, be contrary to the aims of Policies C1 and T1 of the
    CEDPD and would not draw support from Policy 21 of the Local Plan.
Planning Balance
15. The proposal would conflict with the spatial strategy of the development plan,
    together with policies that seek to maximise sustainable transport options. It would,
    therefore, conflict with the development plan as a whole. It is not disputed,
    however, that the Council cannot currently demonstrate a five-year supply of
    deliverable housing sites. The most recent evidence indicates that the supply is
    3.9 years, so the shortfall is considerable. This is a significant material
    consideration and, although a single dwelling would only make a modest
    contribution to addressing the shortfall, it would provide a self-build opportunity for

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010442


       a local family, and substantial weight should be given to this benefit in accordance
       with Policy HO7 of the Framework.
16. Paragraph 2 of Annex A of the Framework says that development plan policies
    should not be given reduced weight simply because they were adopted prior to
    publication of the Framework. The spatial strategy set out in Policies 2, 3, and 7 of
    the Local Plan and Policy A1 of the Neighbourhood Plan is consistent with the
    Framework’s aims to meet development needs through sustainable patterns of
    development, and limiting development away from settlements. However, it is not
    delivering a sufficient supply of homes in accordance with the other aims of the
    Framework. Consequently, I can only afford moderate weight to the conflict with
    the development plan policies that govern the spatial location of housing.
17. Policies C1 and T1 of the CEDPD are consistent with the aim of Policy TR3 of the
    Framework to ensure that development is located where it can support sustainable
    patterns of movement, enable good accessibility for different users, and make the
    most of existing and proposed transport infrastructure. I therefore give substantial
    weight to the harm resulting from the conflict with these Policies.
18. Set against the harm that I have identified, there would be benefits associated with
    the development in addition to the provision of a dwelling. There would also be
    economic benefits, through the creation of jobs during the construction phase, and
    residents thereafter contributing to the rural economy through ongoing spending
    and support for local services. The scale of the development means that these
    benefits carry modest weight.
19. It is contended that the proposal would not harm the character and appearance of
    the area. However, the absence of harm in this regard does not amount to a
    benefit in favour of the proposal. Similarly, the potential for the proposed dwelling
    to be of energy efficient construction could apply to any development, so does not
    add to the substantial weight that I have already afforded to the benefit of an
    additional dwelling.
20. Whilst I attach substantial weight to the delivery of additional housing, particularly
    given the absence of a five-year housing land supply, the site lies outside the
    settlement and, for the reasons given above, is not physically well-related to it.
    Consequently, the approach to decision-making in Policy S5.1.j of the Framework
    does not apply. Furthermore, Policy S5 advises that outside settlements only
    certain forms of development should be approved. One of these is limited infilling
    within groups of houses. Whilst the site is adjacent to a dwelling, the proposal
    would be an extension to the group of buildings, rather than being within the
    cluster, so would not be infilling. The proposal does not, therefore, fall within any of
    the categories of acceptable development set out in Policy S5. In these
    circumstances, the policy advises that development should only be approved in
    exceptional circumstances, where the benefits of the proposal would substantially
    outweigh the adverse effects, including in relation to promoting sustainable
    patterns of movement.
21. When assessed against the policies in the Framework, taken as a whole, the
    benefits of the proposal do not substantially outweigh the harm. Therefore, there
    are no material considerations to indicate that a decision should be made contrary
    to the provisions of the development plan.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010442


Conclusion
22. For the reasons given above, the appeal should be dismissed.



Nick Davies
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
