Appeal Decision
Site visit made 11 August 2026
by O Marigold BSc DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010020
Land South Of Mount Pleasant Cottage, Poundstock, Bude, Cornwall EX23 0DD
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Mitchell against the decision of Cornwall Council.
•    The application Ref is PA25/05551.
•    The development proposed is single custom build dwelling and solar array.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     I have used the description of the proposal and the address of the site as set out in
       the Council's decision notice, which are more accurate and concise than those
       used in the application form. The appellants have used the revised description and
       address in the appeal form and so I am satisfied that no party would be prejudiced
       as a result.
3.     Since the appeal was made, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) has been published, on 17 August 2026. The Council and the
       appellants have had the opportunity to comment on this change in policy. I have
       determined the appeal on the basis of the current planning policy position.
4.     The appellants submitted a Unilateral Undertaking, dated 25 August 2026. This
       secures that the dwelling would be constructed as a Self-build and Custom
       Housebuilding (SBCH) unit. The Council has had the opportunity to comment on
       the Unilateral Undertaking (UU), and I have taken it into account in my decision.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues are whether the proposal would accord with the spatial strategy of
       the Development Plan, having regard to (a) its effect on the character and
       appearance of the area, and (b) its access to services and facilities.
Reasons
Character and Appearance
6.     The site consists of a field associated with Mount Pleasant Farm. There are
       dwellings close to opposite corners of the field, at The Elms and Mount Pleasant
       Cottage. They form part of a handful of properties hereabouts along the route of
       the former A39, which is now a lay-by and cul-de-sac off the current A39. More
       broadly, the area consists of fields and countryside with only sporadic

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010020


       development. The application seeks to erect a two-storey dwelling, together with
       an attached garage. Also proposed is a small solar array to serve the new
       dwelling.
7.     Policy 2 of the Cornwall Local Plan (CLP), adopted November 2016, seeks to
       maintain the dispersed pattern of development in Cornwall, and to provide homes
       based on the role and function of each place. CLP Policy 7 relates to housing in
       the countryside, which it permits only in circumstances that do not apply here. CLP
       policy 21 seeks to increase building densities but only where appropriate, taking
       into account the character of the surrounding area.
8.     CLP policy 3 permits housing in specific circumstances. These include infill
       schemes that fill a small gap in an otherwise continuous built frontage. However,
       the gap formed by the field including the appeal site is relatively large.
       Furthermore, the field is set back from the road, behind another parcel of land. The
       Elms is also set well back from the road. Consequently, any built frontage of other
       properties in the vicinity does not extend to the appeal site. As the site would not
       fill a small gap in an otherwise continuous built frontage, CLP policy 3 would not be
       satisfied.
9.     CLP policies 2, 12 and 23 seek to protect, conserve and enhance the natural
       landscape and the distinctive character of Cornwall. Policy C1 of the Climate
       Emergency Development Plan Document (CEDP), adopted February 2023, has
       similar aims. The Cornwall Design Guide seeks to ensure that new development
       contributes to a sense of place and visual distinctiveness.
10. Although the busy A39 here diminishes the degree of tranquillity, the wider
    landscape has an intact rural character. Despite the presence of a disused
    polytunnel, the site has the green, open and rolling appearance of countryside.
    The proposed dwelling would result in the domestication and suburbanisation of
    the land, caused by the additional built form, the new access, and residential
    paraphernalia associated with the use. The solar array would introduce a new
    structure with a hard and utilitarian appearance which would also conflict with the
    soft landscape.
11. The proposed dwelling would be set back from the cul-de-sac, behind other land
    and accessed via an existing driveway. That said, most dwellings locally front onto
    the road, or are perpendicular to it. In contrast, the proposed dwelling would have
    an off-set and angled position. It would also have a sweeping driveway. These
    features would not be characteristic of the pattern of development and would add
    to the harmful suburbanising effects of the proposal on its surroundings.
12. For the reasons given above, the proposal would not accord with the spatial
    strategy of the Development Plan in respect of the character and appearance of
    the area. It would therefore conflict with CLP policies 2, 3, 7, 12, 21 and 23 and
    CEDP policy C1(7). I give this harm and conflict very substantial negative weight in
    the planning balance. I shall consider CLP policies 1 and 27, and CEDP policy T1,
    below.
Access, Services and Facilities
13. CEDP policies C1(6) and T1 seek to maximise the ability of people to make trips
    by public transport and other sustainable modes of travel. This is to support
    walking and cycling for daily living, and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. CLP

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010020


       policy 27 has similar aims. The nearest settlement with a range of services and
       facilities is the town of Bude. Access on foot or by bike to Bude would require use
       of the busy A39, which has no street lighting or pavement in the area. As such,
       walking and cycling is unlikely to provide a realistic alternative for many people.
14. Even so, the length of car journeys to Bude would be relatively short. This would
    limit the adverse effects of private vehicle use, such as increased carbon
    emissions. Furthermore, bus stops are available within walking distance of the site.
    Access to the northbound stop would require crossing the A39. However, the
    carriageway here is straight, with a reasonable degree of intervisibility.
15. Bus services are available at approximately two-hourly intervals on both weekdays
    and weekends. These provide public transport access to Bude and to other
    settlements, and so buses may provide an alternative option for some journeys.
    Consequently, given its rural context, the proposal would maximise the ability of
    people to make trips by public transport and other sustainable modes of travel
16. An appeal on land south of Swelle Cottage1, further along the A39, has been
    drawn to my attention. Amongst other things, the appeal was dismissed because
    of poor access to services and facilities. Nevertheless, accessing the bus stops
    from that site would require walking along sections of the A39 itself, much less
    appealing that the access available from the site before me.
17. Appeal decisions for new dwellings at Menheniot2 and Mawgan Port3 have been
    provided to me, but there is little indication of bus stops or other services near to
    these sites. Moreover, at the time of these decisions, the planning policy position
    was different. These cases do not therefore change my findings in respect of this
    issue.
18. For the reasons given above, the proposal would accord with the spatial strategy
    of the Development Plan in respect of access to services and facilities. As such, it
    would comply with CLP policy 27, and CEDP policies C1(6) and T1. I shall
    consider CLP policy 1 below.
Other Considerations and Matters
19. CLP policy 1 applies a presumption in favour of sustainable development which
    reflects an earlier version of the Framework. There is no dispute that the Council is
    unable to demonstrate an adequate supply of housing land. On this basis, the
    policy requires that permission is granted unless material considerations indicate
    otherwise, taking into account whether any adverse impacts of the proposal would
    significantly and demonstrably outweigh the benefits when assessed against the
    Framework, or if specific Framework policies indicate that development should be
    restricted.
20. The site lies outside of a settlement, defined by the Framework as excluding
    scattered groups of houses located outside predominantly built-up areas.
    Consequently, Framework policy S5 is engaged. Policy S5(1)(e) permits limited
    infilling within groups of houses. That said, even if the housing here forms a group,
    given the large gap formed by the existing field including the appeal site, I am not


1 APP/D0840/W/20/3252472
2 APP/D0840/W/24/3354839
3 APP/D0840/W/24/3348094



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010020


       convinced that the proposal constitutes infilling. Accordingly, policy S5(1)(e) is not
       met.
21. Policy S5(1)(j) permits development that would address an evidenced unmet need,
    including in respect of housing supply. This would include the proposal. That said,
    amongst other things, this policy limb requires it to be physically well-related to an
    existing settlement. Given that the site is some distance from a settlement, this
    requirement would not be met.
22. Framework policy S5(4) states that proposals which do not fall within one of the
    categories set out in S5(1) should only be approved in exceptional circumstances,
    where the benefits would substantially outweigh the adverse effects, including to
    the character of the countryside.
23. The proposal would provide an additional unit, and one of SBCH accommodation,
    secured by the UU. I am mindful of the statutory duty under the Self-build and
    Custom Housebuilding Act 2015. I give substantial positive weight to this benefit,
    in accordance with Framework policy HO7. The development would have other
    social and economic advantages such as local spending during construction and
    by future occupiers. However, as just a single dwelling, these advantages would
    be relatively small and so I give them only very limited additional positive weight.
    No exceptional circumstances have been demonstrated.
24. Given my findings above, I conclude that the proposal would not accord with the
    policies of the Framework, read in the round. The Framework is a material
    consideration of critical importance, and so this conflict weighs heavily against the
    proposal. Similarly, in respect of CLP policy 1, the harm caused would significantly
    and demonstrably outweigh the benefits of the development. As such, it would
    conflict with CLP policy 1.
Conclusion
25. For the reasons given, I have found conflict with the Development Plan as a whole.
    The material considerations in this case, including the Framework, do not indicate
    a decision other than in accordance with the Development Plan. This leads me to
    conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

O Marigold
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
