Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 6 August 2026
by S Leonard BA (Hons) BTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 27 August 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6010617
Pavement Outside 10 Bargate Street, Southampton SO14 2DA
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Nathan Still (In Focus Public Networks) against the decision of
     Southampton City Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00357/FUL.
•    The development proposed is described as “the installation of a multifunctional communication hub
     including defibrillator and advertisement display”.

Appeal B Ref: 6010618
Pavement Outside 10 Bargate Street, Southampton SO14 2DA
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent to display an advertisement.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Nathan Still (In Focus Public Networks) against the decision of
     Southampton City Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00358/ADV.
•    The development proposed is described as “the installation of a multifunctional communication hub
     including defibrillator and advertisement display”.


Decisions
1.     Appeals A and B are dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     There are two appeals relating to the same proposal on the same site. As set out
       above, they are considered under different complementary legislation. The first
       relates to a communications hub structure and the other relates to an
       advertisement that would be displayed on one side of it.
3.     The communication hub and advertisement are integral to each other and they
       raise similar considerations. Accordingly, whilst I have dealt with each case on its
       individual merits, to avoid duplication, both appeals are considered together in this
       decision, except where otherwise indicated.
4.     In respect of Appeal B, The Town and Country Planning (Control of
       Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (the Regulations) require that
       advertisement appeal decisions are made only in the interests of amenity and
       public safety, taking into account the provisions of the development plan, so far as
       they are material, and other relevant factors. The national Planning Practice
       Guidance (PPG) confirms this approach. In this case, the reasons for refusing


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6010617 and 6010618


           express advertisement consent do not indicate that public safety would be harmed.
           I have dealt with the appeal accordingly.
5.         The Council’s decision notices refer to the effect of the proposal on the designated
           heritage asset of the Old Town Conservation Area (OTCA). However, the
           Council’s appeal documents include a plan which shows that the boundary of the
           OTCA lies to the south of the footway where the appeal scheme is proposed to be
           sited. Accordingly, the proposal would lie outside the OTCA and as such, the
           statutory duty imposed by section 72 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
           Conservation Areas) Act 1990, which relates to land within a conservation area,
           would not be engaged.
6.         Following the submission of both appeals, a revised version of the National
           Planning Policy Framework (the Framework), was published on 17 August 2026.
           This replaces the 2024 Framework. I am satisfied that the revised Framework
           does not differ significantly from the 2024 Framework in respect of the substance
           of the matters before me and I have not deemed it necessary to seek comments
           from the main parties on the revised Framework.
7.         Like the 2024 Framework, the revised version supports high-quality
           communications infrastructure. It supports the expansion and upgrading of
           telecommunications infrastructure, in ways which limit an unnecessary proliferation
           of equipment and respect important environmental safeguards.
8.         The revised Framework also shares the same objective of the 2024 Framework of
           conserving and enhancing the historic environment, noting that heritage assets are
           an irreplaceable resource which should be conserved in a manner appropriate to
           their significance so that they can be enjoyed for their contribution to the quality of
           life of existing and future generations.
9.         When considering the impact of a proposal on the significance of a designated
           heritage asset, the 2024 Framework required “great” weight to be given to the
           asset’s conservation, with the more important the asset, the greater the weight
           should be. In the 2026 revised Framework, “great” is replaced by “substantial”.
           There is still a requirement to balance any harm to the significance of a designated
           heritage asset against any public benefits, and in the case of identified substantial
           harm, there is a presumption that consent be refused unless it can be shown that
           substantial harm to or total loss of significance of a designated heritage asset is
           necessary to achieve substantial public benefits that outweigh that harm or loss.
Main Issues
10. Given the linked nature of the appeals which both relate to the same proposal, and
    having regard to paragraph 4 above, I consider that the main issues raised by
    these appeals are:
       •    The effect the development would have on the character and appearance of the
            area, including the significance of the Grade 1 listed and scheduled Bar Gate
            and Guild Hall1 (the Bar Gate) and the OTCA; and
       •    The effect the advertisement would have on amenity having regard to the
            character and appearance of the area, the significance of the Grade 1 listed and
            scheduled status of the Bar Gate and the significance of the OTCA.
1
    The Scheduled Monument is known as Town wall: the Bar Gate


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               2
Appeal Decisions 6010617 and 6010618




Reasons
Character and appearance
11. Bargate Street comprises a short stretch of city centre road, which is restricted to
    bus traffic only, and links Portland Terrace to the west with West Bargate to the
    east.
12. The appeal site is located approximately midway along the wide pavement which
    runs in front of a row of retail properties which line the north side of the road. The
    street is close to the main city shopping area, and stalls associated with weekly
    and seasonal markets are regularly positioned along the north side of Bar Street.
13. There are bus stops on the opposite side of the road, which is flanked by high
    walling, largely comprising part of the Medieval Old Town Walls. The Bargate lies
    to the southeast of the appeal site.
14. The street already contains a variety of street furniture, including signs, bus
    shelters, cycle stands, information maps, and waste bins. Much of this is on the
    opposite side of the road to the appeal site and closer to the boundary of the
    OTCA which aligns with that side of the road. The existing structures include two
    digital advertisement displays which are like that of the appeal scheme, one of
    which is sited opposite the appeal site on the other side of the road, and the other
    at the Portland Terrace end of the northern side of the road.
15. Notwithstanding the number of existing structures, the larger and more visually
    prominent elements such as advertisements, a street map and bus shelters are
    well spaced out along the road with generous separation between them. As such,
    they have retained a degree of spaciousness and order within the streetscape.
16. The northern side of the road contains a row of 5 regularly spaced street trees with
    clear gaps in between each, which make a positive contribution to the appearance
    of the streetscape. They provide an orderly arrangement of green infrastructure,
    and their stems are clearly visible as an uninterrupted line. The existing
    advertisement structure at the Portland Terrace end of the street roughly aligns
    with the western end of these trees and there is another vertical structure to the
    east of the line.
17. The proposed communication hub would introduce a large 2.63m high by 1.34m
    wide structure between two of these trees and within close proximity to the existing
    advertisement structure at the western end of the road. The proposed bulky solid
    oblong structure would interrupt the existing spacious line arrangement of trees,
    and it would be seen in most views with either the adjoining advertisement
    structure close to in the foreground or background, thereby eroding the existing
    spacious arrangement of street furniture and giving a cluttered appearance.
18. The appeal scheme’s proximity to the existing advertisement unit, combined with
    its relationship with it, and the row of trees, would respond poorly to the existing
    streetscape and render it an awkward and intrusive element. This adverse effect
    would also be noticeable in hours of darkness because of the illuminated
    advertisement display. Accordingly, the proposal would harm the character and
    appearance, and therefore the visual amenity of the area.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6010617 and 6010618


Designated heritage assets
19. The Bar Gate is a designated heritage asset of the highest significance as
    recognised by its grade I listed and scheduled monument status. Originating in the
    late C12 with alterations through the centuries, this impressive stone structure sits
    not far from the site at the junction of Bargate and High Streets. Its considerable
    significance is derived from its age, history, architecture, structure and historic
    associations with the city.
20. It also derives some significance from the townscape setting in which it sits. The
    generous proportions of Bargate Street to the west enable the Bar Gate’s
    significance to be appreciated and understood by revealing it as a prominent
    feature in views along the street, along with its context with the nearby town walls
    and, in part, as a result of the simple and unfussy elevations of buildings along
    Bargate Street which do not visually compete with the asset. This part of its setting
    is therefore a notable component of its significance.
21. The OTCA covers an extensive area incorporating an historic street layout, many
    of which are lined with historic buildings and bounded in places, including opposite
    the appeal site, by the substantial remains of the medieval town walls. Near the
    appeal site the spacious streetscape enables the historic town, and particularly the
    town walls which form a component of it, to be appreciated and understood and
    forms an important part of the significance that it derives from its setting.
22. However, as the significance that the Bar Gate and the OTCA derive from their
    settings relies to a large extent on the scale and proportions of the street and the
    visibility of the assets from it, the proposed communication hub unit and the size of
    the advertisement on it would not be of a scale or in a position that would harmfully
    intrude on those settings. Although it would interrupt views of the Bar Gate from a
    discrete section of the footway, this effect would be fleeting and only experienced
    in one direction. Importantly, it would also be experienced in the context of other
    street furniture, many items of which are closer to the Bar Gate and are within the
    OTCA boundary.
23. Having had special regard to the desirability of preserving the listed building or its
    setting, the development would not harm its special interest. I have given great
    weight to their conservation, but overall, the proposal would not harm the
    significance that either of the designated heritage assets derive from their settings.
    As such the proposal would preserve the setting of the listed Bar Gate. It would
    have a negligible effect on how the significance of the Bar Gate as a scheduled
    monument and the OTCA are experienced. In this particular respect, the
    advertisement would not harm amenity, including the historic, architectural or
    cultural interest of those features.
Overall findings
24. Despite my finding no heritage harm, this does not alter the harmful effects I have
    identified on character and appearance, and visual amenity, because of the
    proposals’ siting, size and design, and in the case of the advertisement,
    illumination.
25. As the development would not contribute to placemaking nor the quality of the
    public realm, it would not accord with Policy CS13 of the Core Strategy Partial
    Review (March 2015) (the CSPR). It would consequently conflict with the high-

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decisions 6010617 and 6010618


         quality public realm design requirements of Policies AP16 and AP19 of the City
         Centre Action Plan (March 2015) (the CCAP) and Policies KDP16 and KDP21 of
         the supporting Streets and Spaces Framework SPD (November 2015) which
         requires new street furniture to be of an appropriate scale to its context and to
         avoid creating clutter.

26. I have taken account of these policies in respect of the advertisement appeal and,
    as I have concluded that the advertisement would harm amenity, that part of the
    proposal would conflict with those policies also.
27. However, given my findings on heritage, the proposal would avoid conflict
    with CSPR Policy CS14 and with Saved Policies HE1 and HE3 of the City of
    Southampton Local Plan Review (March 2015) in so much as these policies,
    amongst other things, seek to ensure that new development preserves or
    enhances the character and appearance of the conservation area and does not
    adversely affect the character or setting of a listed building.
28. The above conclusions concur with the Inspector’s conclusions in respect of two
    dismissed appeals2 in relation to an almost identical scheme to that of the current
    appeal proposal on the pavement outside No.14 Bargate Street.
29. Whilst the location of the current appeal lies further east, the distance between the
    two schemes is small. Moreover, the proposed positioning of a similarly sized and
    designed scheme between two of the street trees is such, that it raises the same
    concerns as those that applied to the previously dismissed scheme.
30. Furthermore, having regard to the current appeal submissions and my site visit, I
    find that there is no cogent evidence before me to suggest that there have been
    any significant changes to the relevant planning policies or notable differences in
    site circumstances within Bargate Street since the determination of those appeals,
    that would render coming to a different view to that of the previous appeal
    Inspector.
Other Matters
31. In accordance with the Framework, I have no reason to question the need for the
     proposed electronic communication systems. There would be public benefits
     because of increased digital connectivity particularly for vulnerable people or
     people in vulnerable situations. These include an increased awareness of public,
     local and emergency services, access to free phone calls, Wi-Fi, maps and
     wayfinding, information sharing, device charging facilities, public messaging, the
     provision of medical and life-saving equipment, the ability to support
     environmental monitoring such as air quality, and the provision of CCTV.
32. The proposed communications hub is proposed to form part of a wider network,
    which would cumulatively have significant public benefits. However, individually,
    the proposal would have localised benefits. Moreover, there is no firm evidence
    that the proposed location before me is the only means of securing such benefits
    within this area, thereby moderating the weight I afford these matters. Also, I have
    seen from my site visit and the information provided by the Council, that a number
    of similar structures exist within the wider commercial area around the appeal site,
    including on the opposite side of Bargate Street, outside 12-16 Above Bar Street

2
    APP/D1780/W/22/3299729 and APP/D1780/H/22/3299730 Dismissed 24 May 2023


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           5
Appeal Decisions 6010617 and 6010618


       and outside Hanover Buildings.
33. I have noted that the appellant proposes the removal of existing
     telecommunication structures sited in Queensway and Briton Street. However,
     based on the information before me, these structures are not directly comparable
     with the appeal scheme in terms of their design and size. Moreover, their removal
     would not directly impact upon the character and appearance of immediate vicinity
     of the appeal site in Bargate Street. As such, I afford minimal weight to their
     proposed removal in my determination of the current appeal. The benefits do not,
     therefore, outweigh the harm I have identified in respect of the first main issue.
34. Moreover, in relation to Appeal B, as the power to control advertisements under
    the regulations is exercised in the interests of public safety and amenity, the
    environmental, social, or economic benefits emanating from the appeal scheme
    would not outweigh my findings on the first main issue.
Conclusion
35. Appeal A: The proposed development would conflict with the development plan as
    a whole and there are no material considerations, including the Framework, which
    indicate that the decision should be made other than in accordance with it.
    Therefore, for the reasons given, I conclude that Appeal A should be dismissed.
36. Appeal B: For the reasons given, I conclude that Appeal B should be dismissed.



S Leonard
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
