Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by R Gee BA (Hons) Dip TP PGCert UD MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 20 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010542
Northolm Farm, Crowland Road, Eye Green, Peterborough PE6 7TT
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Mr David Ellis against the decision of Peterborough City Council.
•      The application Ref is 25/01330/FUL.
•      The development proposed is Change of use of Agricultural Barn to B2/B8 use.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       The Appellant’s submission includes plans that would amend the red-line
         boundary to provide an extended hardstanding. The Procedural Guide for Planning
         Appeals is clear that the appeal process should not be used to evolve a scheme,
         and it is important that what is considered is essentially what was considered by
         the Council, and on which interested people’s views were sought. Under the
         principles established by the Courts in Holborn Studios Ltd1 to consider such a
         modification would be a substantive difference and procedurally could prejudice
         interested parties by depriving those who should have been consulted on the
         change the opportunity of such consultation. For this reason, I have determined
         the appeal on the basis of the plans that were before the Council when it made its
         decision.
3.       A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
         August 2026. This has introduced significant changes to its structure and
         presentation, including the incorporation of development management policies.
         However, having carefully considered the revised Framework, I am satisfied that,
         insofar as the issues determinative of this case are concerned, the relevant policy
         approach has not fundamentally changed, and my consideration of it would not
         cause procedural unfairness or prejudice to parties. Therefore, the parties have
         not been invited to make further comments.
Main Issue
4.       The main issue is the effect of the proposal on highway safety.
Reasons
5.       The appeal property is an agricultural building in the countryside, accessed via an
         established vehicular access from Crowland Road that serves the existing farm
1
    Holborn Studios Ltd v The Council of the London Borough of Hackney [2017] EWCH 2823 (Admin)

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010542


       complex. In the immediate vicinity of the appeal site, it is predominantly rural in
       character, with agricultural land and dispersed development.
6.     Permission is sought for the change of use of the existing barn from agricultural
       use to a mixed B2/B8 use. It is understood that the barn would be used for the
       storage of parts, materials and plant associated with a mobile agricultural repair
       business, with the substantive repair works carried out off-site, at the location of
       the plant being repaired. Accordingly, the Appellant states that the building would
       provide for storage and act as a dispatch base.
7.     Amongst other things, Policy LP13 of the Peterborough Local Plan 2019 (LP)
       requires that appropriate provision is made for safe access for all user groups,
       subject to appropriate mitigation.
8.     Whilst the Council is satisfied that gates would be set back into the site, allowing a
       vehicle to stand clear of the public highway, and that appropriate visibility splays
       would be provided at the junction with Crowland Road concerns have been raised
       that it has not been demonstrated that two vehicles could pass safely within the
       access arrangement due to the sharp bend in the track at this point, in particular
       where one of those vehicles is large.
9.     Whilst the Appellant indicates that a new hardstanding could be provided
       proximate to the junction with Crowland Road, the revised plan shows this in an
       area of land that was not previously identified as red or blue land on the original
       Location Plan2. Accordingly, the submitted location plan fails to identify all land
       necessary to facilitate the proposal.
10. The Planning Practice Guidance stipulates that: “The application site should be
    edged clearly with a red line on the location plan. It should include all land
    necessary to carry out the proposed development (e.g. land required for access to
    the site from a public highway, visibility splays, landscaping, car parking and open
    areas around buildings)”3.
11. I am mindful that in the interests of highway safety, the proposal would need this
    additional land to facilitate two-way traffic proximate to the junction with the public
    highway. In the absence of this, there is a potential for vehicles to have to reverse
    or wait onto the public highway.
12. Whilst the Appellant suggests that the matter could be addressed through the use
    of a planning condition, I have not been provided with persuasive evidence that the
    necessary land is within the Appellant's control or that the required works could be
    delivered with a reasonable degree of certainty. In these circumstances, a
    Grampian-style condition would not overcome my concerns. I therefore cannot be
    satisfied that the proposal would have an appropriate access.
13. The Appellant contends that the proposed change of use would not result in a
    material increase in vehicular movements when compared with the existing
    historic lawful use of the site. Furthermore, they submit that traffic associated with
    the proposal would predominantly comprise cars and light goods vehicles4.



2
  PL01A.
3
  Paragraph: 024 Reference ID: 14-024-20140306
4
  The Transport and Access Statement


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         2
Appeal Decision 6010542


14. Precise details of vehicle movements associated with the existing agricultural use
    of the appeal building have not been provided. However, the lawful use of the
    building is not in dispute between the parties, and it is reasonable to expect a
    degree of vehicular activity associated with that use. Nevertheless, the absence of
    robust evidence regarding the likely frequency, scale and nature of vehicle
    movements associated with the proposed use adds further uncertainty to the
    assessment of the proposal's highway impacts and it would be difficult to enforce
    that no HGV’s entered the site.
15. It is not disputed that a Fire Engine has been able to access the site. However,
    photographic evidence to this end does not demonstrate that two-way HGV’s could
    be accommodated and accordingly, this does not address my concerns regarding
    the ability of larger vehicles to pass safely near the site entrance or the
    implications for vehicles waiting or manoeuvring in proximity to the public highway.
16. Whilst locational sustainability attracts moderate weight in favour of the proposal,
    given the nature of the proposed use, vehicular movements would form an integral
    part of the business operation, and this matter does not outweigh the unresolved
    highway safety concerns arising from the proposed access arrangements.
17. The Framework states that development should only be prevented or refused on
    highway grounds if there would be an unacceptable impact on highway safety or
    the residual cumulative impacts on the road network would be severe. For the
    reasons stated, I cannot be satisfied that the type of traffic generated by the
    proposal could be safely accommodated without having a detrimental impact on
    the free flow of traffic, or the safety of other highway users, on Crowland Road.
    This draws the proposal into conflict with Policy LP13 of the LP and criterion 4 of
    TR65 of the Framework.
Other Matters
18. The site is in proximate to the Grade II* listed building known as Northolme Farm
    (formerly listed as Northole House). From the information before me, the special
    interest and significance of this asset primarily stem from its historic and
    architectural interests, including its Elizabethan origins as a historic farm complex.
    The surrounding fenland agricultural landscape contributes to its setting and
    illustrate the site’s evolution.
19. The appeal site comprises a single steel-framed agricultural barn with profiled
    metal cladding and a pitched roof. The evidence indicates that the barn is likely to
    postdate 1948 and therefore is not considered to be a curtilage listed structure.
    Given the limited nature of the proposed works and the minor extent of external
    alterations, the development would not give rise to any harm to the significance or
    setting of the principal listed building or any curtilage-listed structures.
20. Given the location and extent of the development in relation to the listed building, I
    consider that the setting of this designated heritage asset is preserved and the
    contribution it makes to the asset’s significance is not harmed. This meets the
    requirements of section 66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation
    Areas) Act 1990 and the provisions in the Framework regarding the conservation
    and enhancement of the historic environment. I note the Council raised no
    concerns in this respect either.

5
    Assessing Transport Impacts of Part 15: Promoting Sustainable Transport


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 3
Appeal Decision 6010542


Planning Balance and Conclusion
21. Policy S36 of the Framework states that decisions on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. This means for
    development outside settlements, policy S5 should be applied.
22. Policy S57 of the Framework states that only certain forms of development should
    be approved outside settlements, as set out in a) -j). These should be approved,
    unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse
    effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the
    Framework.
23. The proposal would re-use an existing building of permanent and substantial
    construction. The principle of the use of the building is not in dispute between the
    parties, and I have no reason to conclude otherwise. Whilst limited information is
    before me in respect of the business the proposal would result in some economic
    benefits through employment and farm diversification.
24. No harm has been identified in respect of character and appearance, amenity,
    ecology, drainage or heritage. However, these are neutral matters that weigh
    neither for, nor against, the proposal.
25. Set against this is that it has not been demonstrated that the proposal would not
    cause an unacceptable impact to highway safety. The evidence before me does
    not satisfactorily demonstrate that vehicles associated with the proposed use,
    including larger vehicles that could reasonably be expected to visit the site, could
    safely access and egress the site without prejudice to highway safety. Nor does it
    demonstrate that suitable mitigation could be secured with sufficient certainty.
26. I am, therefore, not satisfied that the benefits of approving the development
    proposal would be substantially outweighed by adverse effects. The appeal is
    therefore dismissed.

         R Gee
        INSPECTOR




6
    Presumption in favour of sustainable development
7
    Principle of development outside settlements


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               4
