Appeal Decision
by B Pattison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010428
 30 Cranleigh Close, Cheshunt, Hertfordshire EN7 6HH
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Demetrios Kaizer and Alexandra Laffa against the decision of
      Broxbourne Borough Council.
 •    The application Ref is 07/26/0156/F.
 •    The development proposed is Retrospective planning application for change of use of land from
      amenity land to residential garden and the erection of a boundary fence.

 Decision
 1.     The appeal is dismissed.
 Preliminary Matter
 2.     The National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was updated on 17
        August 2026. Although I have made my determination against the updated
        national policy context, the relevant changes to the Framework are not
        fundamental to matters which are determinative to the outcome of this appeal.
 Main Issues
 3.     The main issues are the effect of the proposal on:
             •    the character and appearance of the area; and
             •    public safety, with particular reference to the effect on visibility on the
                  adjoining public footpaths.
 Reasons
 Character and appearance
 4.     Cranleigh Close is a relatively tight-knit residential development comprising a mix
        of two storey houses and a small block of flats. The appeal site is a kite-shaped
        piece of land which is associated with an end dwelling within a small terrace of two
        storey houses which are accessed via a public footpath. The house and appeal
        site occupy a corner plot, adjacent to a small network of footpaths which meet at a
        crossroads next to the site’s southern corner. Beyond the crossroads further to the
        south are larger areas of grassed open amenity space with mature trees. This
        contributes to creating an open, attractive character immediately to the south of
        Cranleigh Close.
 5.     The proposal incorporates a fence that encloses an area which was previously
        open space, albeit the submitted evidence indicates that it was surrounded by low


 https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010428


       level fencing and hedge planting. The Council explains that this open space had
       been deliberately retained since the estate’s original construction.
6.     The piece of land may not have previously been useable to members of the public
       for activities such as children’s play, jogging and dog walking. However, it would
       have contributed to a visually open aspect around the crossroads. Even with a tall
       hedge surrounding the site, this would have helped soften the visual impact of the
       appeal site adjacent to the crossroads.
7.     In contrast, the introduction of the wood panel fencing has created a hard edge
       closer to the footpaths and diminished the openness at the edge of Cranleigh
       Close. It visually narrows the areas around the crossroads and erodes the sense
       of relief that the open space would have provided. As a result, the fence appears
       as a cramped and intrusive addition to the street scene. In coming to this view, I
       have taken into consideration that some nearby amenity areas may have
       previously been lost, and that local character can evolve over time.
8.     Consequently, the proposal does not sympathetically respond to the existing
       character and appearance of the area. I therefore find that it would conflict with
       policies DSC1 and ORC3 of the Broxbourne Local Plan (2020) (LP). Amongst
       other matters, these require proposals to enhance local character, and establish a
       presumption against the loss of amenity spaces unless they no longer provide a
       visual break.
Public safety
9.     Policy DSC 6 of the LP requires that proposals demonstrate that paths used for
       walking and cycling are secure and widely visible, whilst avoiding the creation of
       blind corridors and narrow alleyways. Policies DSC1 and DSC3 of the LP promote
       the creation of natural surveillance and permeability of the public realm.
10. The submitted evidence indicates that this part of the appeal site was previously
    open, with relatively unobstructed views across the site. As a result, users of the
    footpaths which run alongside the appeal site would have benefited from a good
    level of visibility, and would likely have found the crossroads a relatively welcoming
    section of the route. Whilst I note that adjacent open amenity areas remain
    unobstructed, the installation of the tall, non-permeable fence next to the
    crossroads has reduced the sense of openness and the visibility between the
    footpaths. In particular, a blind corner has been created, meaning that views from
    one footpath to the other are now largely obstructed where the routes meet. In my
    view, this is likely to result in some users feeling less safe when using the
    footpaths adjacent to the appeal site.
11. The appellant has indicated that a planning condition could be imposed to require
    external planting to soften the impact of the fence. However, the addition of
    planting would not overcome the reduction in visibility, and the resultant creation of
    a blind corner.
12. Overall, the proposal’s design does not contribute to the aims of policies DSC1,
    DSC3 and DSC6 of the LP, which are outlined above. Consequently, the proposal
    conflicts with these policies.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010428


Other Matters
13. My attention has been drawn to examples of planning permissions for changes of
    use from amenity areas to private gardens and the relocation of garden fences on
    Cranleigh Close and Hollybush Way. However, the submitted evidence indicates
    these were approved before the adoption of the LP which has specific policies
    which require that paths for walking and cycling are secure and widely visible.
    Images of other fences on Hollybush Way and Cranleigh Close were also
    provided. However, having viewed these during my site visit, I did not find that the
    fences contributed to creating good natural surveillance, and therefore did not set
    a precedent which should necessarily be repeated throughout the area. In any
    event, each case must be considered on its own merits.
14. The appellants indicate that prior to the erection of the fence, the appeal site was
    subject to anti-social behaviour, such as littering. However, given my findings in
    relation to the effect of the proposal on public safety, I afford this factor limited
    weight.
15. I understand the fence was erected by a previous owner and that the appellants
    purchased the appeal property unaware of any related planning issues, in good
    faith that the appeal site was private garden land. I also acknowledge that there
    have been no objections from neighbours, and that the fencing creates a safe
    garden space for the appellants. It has been put to me that the fence has been in
    place for over five years and in that time there has been no case of crime, or issue
    of safety noted or reported on this area of footpath. Whilst I am sympathetic to the
    situation the appellants have found themselves in, these matters do not outweigh
    the harm I have identified.
16. The concerns expressed regarding the Council’s conduct during the processing of
    the application fall outside of the remit of this Decision.
Conclusion
17. For the above reasons, having had regard to the development plan as a whole,
    along with all other relevant material considerations, I conclude that the appeal
    should be dismissed.

B Pattison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
