Appeal Decision
Hearing held on 26 August 2026
Site visit made on 26 August 2026
by N Bromley BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010155
The Crown Inn, 97 Station Road, Cradley Heath B64 6NT
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Sham Singh against the decision of Sandwell Metropolitan Borough Council.
•   The application Ref is DC/25/70389.
•   The development proposed is demolition of existing public house and proposed retail unit with
    parking, landscaping and associated works.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the proposed
   demolition of existing public house and proposed retail unit with parking,
   landscaping and associated works at The Crown Inn, 97 Station Road, Cradley
   Heath B64 6NT in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref DC/25/70389,
   subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Applications for costs
2. An application for costs was made by Sham Singh against the decision of Sandwell
   Metropolitan Borough Council and is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3. In the banner heading above and my formal decision, I have used the description of
   development taken from the Council’s decision notice, as opposed to the
   application form, as it more accurately and succinctly describes that for which
   permission is sought. The revised description was agreed with the main parties at
   the Hearing, and I have therefore determined the appeal on that basis.
4. A new version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) came
   into force on the 17 August 2026. The main parties were able to address matters
   arising from this, both in writing prior to the Hearing, and orally at the Hearing itself.
   I have had regard to those comments and the relevant policies of the Framework in
   making my decision.
Main Issue
5. Although refused for two reasons, during the course of the appeal the Council
   confirmed that following the submission of additional information they are satisfied
   that the second reason for refusal, relating to the sequential test and retail impact,
   has been suitably addressed. Accordingly, the main issue in this appeal is the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010155


     principle of the proposed development, including the loss of the existing public
     house, having regard to the development plan and any other considerations.
Reasons
6. The appeal site comprises the former Crown Inn public house (the public house),
   located within a busy urban environment, along Station Road. The site is adjacent
   to the Broadcott Industrial Estate, with land and buildings to either side in
   commercial / industrial use. Houses are located along Station Road, and the wider
   surrounding area has a mixed character, comprising employment uses and
   residential dwellings.
Current Development Plan
7. The site is allocated for housing development in the Sandwell Metropolitan Borough
   Council Site Allocations and Delivery Development Plan Document (the SADDP)
   2012, and Policy SAD H1 states that the land is suitable for residential
   redevelopment and can accommodate 10 dwellings or more. Policy SAD H1 of the
   SADDP also recognises that other ancillary uses appropriate for residential areas,
   such as health facilities, community facilities and local shops, may also be
   acceptable where there is a gap in service provision and where they can be
   integrated successfully into the residential environment. Other uses will not be
   acceptable on these sites.
8. As a local convenience store, the proposal would offer services and a large
   selection of convenience goods to the neighbourhood nearby, predominantly within
   walking distance of the site.
9. There are existing shops located close to the appeal site. In particular, a Londis
   and Lifestyle Express, a short walk away towards Old Hill, and a Heron Foods
   much further away in the other direction. No other convenience stores or shops
   offering similar goods and services to the proposal have been identified within
   proximity of the appeal site.
10. Although the Londis and Lifestyle Express provide some service provision for the
    local community, not all of the nearby residential areas are within walking distance
    of those shops. In addition, as Heron Foods is a notable distance away from the
    appeal site, I am not persuaded that it is within a convenient location for the nearby
    population. In these circumstances, and on the evidence before me, there is a gap
    in service provision.
The emerging Local Plan
11. With commercial / industrial buildings and land to either side and to the rear,
    housing development has not been delivered on the land, and the Council accept
    that residential development would be difficult to deliver. Indeed, in the emerging
    Sandwell Local Plan 2024-2041 (the eSLP) the appeal site forms part of a wider
    allocation for Local Employment use, covered by Policy SEC3 of the eSLP – Local
    Employment Areas.
12. I am told that the eSLP is at an advanced stage following consultation on main
    modifications. Whilst the final Inspectors’ report has yet to be received, it is not
    disputed that there are no outstanding objections to Policy SEC3 of the eSLP.
    Therefore, having regard to Policy DM4 of the Framework, I afford it considerable
    weight.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010155


13. Point 2) of Policy SEC3 of the eSLP states that Local Employment Areas will
    provide for the needs of locally based investment and will be safeguarded for,
    amongst other things, industry and warehousing, haulage and transfer depots,
    trade, wholesale retailing and builders’ merchants. However, point 3) of Policy
    SEC3 of the eSLP identifies that some ancillary employment-generating non-Class
    E(g)(ii), E(g)(iii) and B uses, may be permitted where they can be shown to strongly
    support, maintain or enhance the business and employment function of the area,
    and where they meet sequential and other national or local policy tests. The
    policy’s supporting text at paragraph 8.35 of the eSLP indicates that such uses may
    include small-scale food and drink provision or childcare facilities. They should be
    of a scale, nature, and location to serve the needs of an employment area where
    existing facilities are inadequate or where such needs cannot be met in adjacent
    centres.
14. A local convenience store would not fall within a use that Local Employment Areas
    would ordinarily be safeguarded for, but it would nonetheless be an ancillary
    employment-generating use. Indeed, although the exact number of jobs that would
    be generated by the proposal is not confirmed, it would nevertheless employ a
    notable number of staff. Thus, generating new jobs locally.
15. The scale and nature of the proposed store would improve the quality of goods on
    offer in this area, and I have already found that there is a gap in service provision
    locally and the proposal would satisfy the sequential test and retail impact.
16. Although the proposed shop on the site would prevent other uses on the land,
    particularly those specified in point 2) of Policy SEC3 of the eSLP, with existing
    employment uses adjacent and locally, the convenience goods on offer would
    generate custom from the businesses nearby. Thus, the proposal would serve the
    needs of the employment area, as well as local residents nearby.
17. In combination, the above factors would ensure that the proposed development
    would help to strongly support, maintain and / or enhance the business and
    employment function of this area.
18. The Council suggest that the proposal would prevent the wider redevelopment of
    the area. However, the appeal site is not large and due to its juxtaposition with the
    road and neighbouring businesses, there is no substantiated evidence which
    demonstrates that the proposal would stifle the future redevelopment of the wider
    employment area should a scheme come forward. In any event, Policy SEC3 of the
    eSLP allows ancillary employment-generating non- Class E(g)(ii), E(g)(iii) and B
    uses alongside uses that Local Employment Areas would ordinarily be safeguarded
    for and there is no reason to suggest that a convenience store cannot successfully
    integrate into an employment area.
The loss of the public house
19. The public house has been intermittently closed for the last 12 months and has not
    been open since January due to various challenges, particularly price increases
    and a lack of customers. Albeit there is some suggestion that when it was open it
    was busy.
20. The loss of the public house was not cited as a concern within the reason for
    refusal and there are no policies within the SADDP that prevent the loss of public
    houses. However, Policy HC6 of the Framework, sets out that development

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010155


     proposals should not result in the loss of key community facilities and public service
     infrastructure, which includes public houses, unless a set of limited circumstances
     apply. Including, that it can be demonstrated that there is no reasonable prospect of
     the use being retained, and that evidence is provided that reasonable steps have
     been taken to market the property for its existing use without success for a period
     of at least 12 months, or there is sufficient alternative provision such that its loss
     will not diminish access to key community facilities and public service infrastructure.
     Similarly, Policies SDS6 and SDM8 of the eSLP seek to retain community facilities,
     subject to a number of criteria being met.
21. The main parties agreed at the Hearing that as Policy SDM8 of the eSLP
    references public houses it is more relevant than Policy SDS6 which relates to
    community facilities more generally. Indeed, Policy SDM8 of the eSLP, seeks to
    prevent the loss of a public house, unless there is an alternative venue that can
    meet similar needs within walking distance. Therefore, Policy SDM8 of the eSLP is
    broadly consistent with Policy HC6 of the Framework.
22. The residential area surrounding the appeal site is well served by other public
    houses which include the Waterfall, the Spring Meadow and the Haden Cross.
    They are each within walking distance of the local community nearby. There are
    also a plentiful number of other public houses within the wider area as well. In
    these circumstances, and despite concerns from a small number of interested
    parties about the loss of public houses locally, the loss of The Crown Inn would not
    diminish access to key community facilities and public service infrastructure. As
    such, the loss of the public house would not conflict with Policy HC6 of the
    Framework, and Policy SDM8 of the eSLP.
Findings
23. I have found that the proposed shop would be appropriate for the area as there is a
    gap in service provision locally. Therefore, it would be in accordance with Policy
    SAD H1 of the SADDP. I also afford Policies SEC3 and SDM8 of the eSLP
    considerable weight, which, for the reasons given, the proposal would not conflict
    with. There would also be no conflict with Policy HC6 of the Framework.
24. Within settlements, such as the appeal site, Policy S4 of the Framework states that
    development proposals should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would
    be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework. No such adverse effects have
    been identified.
25. As there would be no conflict with the development plan, the Framework, or the
    policies of the eSLP, I conclude that the principle of the proposed development,
    including the loss of the existing public house, having regard to the development
    plan and any other considerations, is acceptable.
Conditions
26. I have considered the suggested conditions, taking into account the discussions at
    the Hearing, the policies in the Framework and the advice given in the Planning
    Practice Guidance. Where necessary I have made amendments to the suggested
    conditions for the sake of clarity and precision.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010155


27. In addition to the standard time limit condition, it is necessary to impose a condition
    that requires the development to be carried out in accordance with the approved
    plans for certainty.
28. Conditions which restrict the amount of dedicated retail floorspace of the building
    and its use class to Class E(a) are necessary to safeguard the vitality and viability
    of existing nearby local centres. However, I have not included the suggested
    condition which would prevent the amalgamation or sub-division of the unit, or the
    installation of mezzanine floors, unless otherwise agreed in writing by the local
    planning authority, as I am not persuaded that it is necessary to make the
    development acceptable.
29. To ensure that the appearance of the development is satisfactory, conditions are
    imposed to require samples / details of the external materials and any means of
    enclosure to be approved prior to above ground construction works. Likewise, and
    for the same reason, a condition to secure the prior approval of a soft landscaping
    scheme is necessary.
30. In the interests of highway safety, a condition would be necessary to secure the
    proposed parking and turning arrangements, prior to the occupation of the building.
    A condition to secure the prior approval of cycle parking storage is also necessary
    to promote sustainable transport use for staff and customers.
31. A condition to secure the submission and approval of waste storage arrangements
    is necessary to ensure appropriate and convenient measures are in place for waste
    disposal and collection. The prior approval of external lighting is necessary to
    ensure that light pollution from the development does not harm the amenity of the
    area, including neighbouring residential properties. Similarly, in order to protect
    neighbouring amenity levels, conditions for the prior approval of noise levels for
    fixed plant associated with the proposed development, as well as the submission
    and approval of a construction management plan are appropriate.
32. Conditions which control the hours of demolition and construction works, opening
    times and delivery times for the retail store are reasonable and necessary in the
    context of the development proposed, and the proximity to adjacent houses.
33. Ground contamination investigations, along with any associated remedial works
    conditions are necessary to prevent risk to the environment and to protect the
    public. A condition to secure appropriate means for the disposal of foul and surface
    water drainage, is necessary to provide adequate drainage measures in the
    interests of flood prevention and to protect the environment also.
34. Conditions 3-5 relate to pre-commencement activities. In each case I am satisfied
    that the conditions are necessary to make the development acceptable in planning
    terms and that it would have otherwise been necessary to refuse planning
    permission. The appellant has provided written agreement to those conditions.
Conclusion
35. For the reasons given, subject to conditions, and having regard to all other matters
    raised, the appeal is allowed.

N Bromley
INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010155


APPEARANCES

FOR THE APPELLANT:


Alastair James Thornton MRTPI                  Director, Simply Planning Limited

Jasdeep Sahota                                 On behalf of the appellant



FOR THE COUNCIL:


Andrew Dean MRTPI                              Senior Planning Officer
Bart Shirm MRTPI                               Senior Planning Policy Officer
Carl Mercer MRTPI                              Principal Planning Officer




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6010155


                                           Schedule of Conditions

    1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
       the date of this decision.

    2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
       following approved plans, numbered:

              •    (11) 002 Location Plan Revision P1
              •    (11) 001 Proposed Site Plan Revision P1
              •    (30) 001 Proposed Ground Floor Plan Revision D2
              •    (41) 001 Proposed Elevations Revision D2

    3) No development hereby permitted shall take place until a detailed surface water
       drainage and foul sewage scheme for the site has been submitted to and
       approved in writing by the local planning authority. The development shall be
       carried out in accordance with the approved details.

    4) Prior to the commencement of the development hereby permitted a Construction
       Environmental Management Plan (the CEMP) shall be submitted to and
       approved in writing by the local planning authority. The CEMP shall include the
       following details:

               a) The parking of vehicles of site operatives and visitors;
               b) Loading and unloading of plant and materials;
               c) Storage of plant and materials used in constructing the development;
               d) The erection and maintenance of security hoarding;
               e) Wheel wash facilities including means of dealing with water runoff; and
               f) Measures to control the emission of dust and dirt during demolition and
                  construction.

         The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved CEMP
         and shall be adhered to throughout the construction period.

    5) No development hereby permitted shall take place until an assessment of the
       risks posed by any contamination, carried out in accordance with British
       Standard BS 10175: Investigation of potentially contaminated sites - Code of
       Practice and the Environment Agency‚ Land Contamination Risk Management
       (LCRM) (or equivalent British Standard and Model Procedures if replaced), has
       been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. If any
       contamination is found, no development shall take place until: i. a report
       specifying the measures to be taken, including the timescale, to remediate the
       site to render it suitable for the development hereby permitted has been
       submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority; ii. the site
       has been remediated in accordance with the approved measures and timescale;
       and iii. a verification report has been submitted to and approved in writing by the
       local planning authority. If, during the course of development, any contamination
       is found which has not been previously identified, work shall be suspended until:
       i. additional measures for the remediation of the site have been carried out in
       accordance with details that shall first have been submitted to and approved in
       writing by the local planning authority; and ii. a verification report for all the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         7
Appeal Decision 6010155


         remediation works has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local
         planning authority.

    6) No development above ground level shall take place until details of the materials
       to be used for the external surfaces of the development hereby permitted have
       been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
       development shall be constructed in accordance with the approved materials.

    7) No development above ground level shall take place until a scheme showing
       details of the height, type and position of all means of enclosure to be erected on
       the site have been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
       authority. The approved means of enclosure shall be erected before the
       development is first occupied or brought into use.

    8) Before the development hereby permitted is brought into use a detailed hard and
       soft landscaping and planting scheme shall be submitted to and approved in
       writing by the local planning authority. The approved hard and soft landscaping
       and planting scheme shall be implemented within eight months of the
       development being occupied. Any tree, hedge or shrub planted as part of the
       soft landscaping scheme (or replacement tree/hedge) on the site which dies or is
       lost through any cause during a period of 5 years from the date of first planting
       shall be replaced in the next planting season.

    9) Before the development hereby permitted is first brought into use details of
       secure cycle parking provision within the site shall be submitted to and approved
       in writing by the local planning authority. The approved secure cycle parking
       shall be implemented before the development is first occupied or brought into
       use and thereafter retained as approved.

    10) Before the development hereby permitted is first brought into use details of
        waste storage arrangements for the development hereby permitted shall be
        submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
        approved waste storage arrangements shall be implemented before the
        development is first occupied or brought into use and thereafter retained as
        approved.

    11) Before the development hereby permitted is occupied or first brought into use an
        external lighting scheme shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the
        local planning authority. The approved lighting scheme shall be implemented
        before the development is first occupied or brought into use and shall thereafter
        be retained as approved.

    12) The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied or brought into use
        until the space shown on, drawing number - (11) 001 Proposed Site Plan
        Revision P1, for the parking and manoeuvring of vehicles has been provided.
        When provided the space for the parking and manoeuvring of vehicles shall
        thereafter be retained as approved.

    13) Prior to the installation of any fixed plant associated with the proposed
        development full noise details, including calculated noise levels at the nearest
        affected dwellings, shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6010155


         planning authority. The development shall be carried out and thereafter retained
         in accordance with the approved details.

    14) Construction and demolition works and the delivery of materials on site shall
        occur only between the hours of 07:30 and 18:00 Monday to Friday; 08:30 to
        14:30 on Saturdays and no work on Sundays or bank holidays.

    15) The retail unit shall only operate between the hours of 06:00 and 23:00 Monday
        to Sunday. Deliveries shall only take place between the hours of 07:00 and
        22:00 Monday to Saturday and 08:00 to 22:00 hours on Sunday.

    16) The maximum total net retail sales area of the development hereby permitted
        shall not exceed 232m².

    17) Notwithstanding the provisions of The Town and Country Planning (Use
        Classes) Order 1987 (as amended) and The Town and Country Planning
        (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended), (or any
        Order revoking and re-enacting those Orders with or without modification), the
        approved use shall be used solely for Class E(a) use only and for no other
        purposes.


                                           ***END OF SCHEDULE***




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      9
