Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 14 August 2026
by Elaine Moulton BA (Hons) BPl MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010311
15 Compton Road, Buxton SK17 9DN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Residents of 15 Compton Road against the decision of High Peak Borough
     Council.
•    The application Ref is HPK/2025/0140.
•    The development proposed is replacement windows and door set to both the front and rear porches
     to the side elevation.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for replacement
       windows and door set to both the front and rear porches to the side elevation at
       15 Compton Road, Buxton SK17 9DN in accordance with the terms of the
       application, Ref HPK/2025/0140, subject to the following conditions:
       1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
          date of this decision.
       2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
          following approved plans: 6479_PL01 and 6479_PL03.
       3) Prior to the commencement of development, a full schedule of works to all
          windows, including detailed sections and plans of the replacement windows, to
          a 1:20 scale, and full details of the texture, colour and finish of all windows and
          doors, shall be submitted to and agreed in writing by the local planning
          authority. The works shall then be carried out in full accordance with the
          approved details and shall be retained as such thereafter.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The description of development set out in the banner heading above is taken from
       the application form. I have, however, omitted the words ‘at 15 Compton Road,
       Buxton’ as it does not describe an act of development.
3.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
       17 August 2026 during the appeal process. However, as the policy content of the
       Framework, insofar as it relates to this case, has not significantly changed, there is
       no requirement for me to seek further submissions from the main parties. I am
       satisfied no party would be prejudiced if I determine the appeal accordingly.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010311


Main Issue
4.     The main issue is whether the proposal would preserve or enhance the character
       or appearance of the Buxton College Conservation Area.
Reasons
5.     The appeal site is located within the Buxton College Conservation Area (BCCA).
       Accordingly, in determining this appeal, I am required by Section 72(1) of the
       Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990, to pay special
       attention to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance
       of that area.
6.     The significance of the BCCA derives in part from its mix of Arts and Crafts houses
       and tall, three-storey Victorian houses of gritstone. The Buxton Conservation
       Areas Character Appraisal (the Appraisal), dated April 2007, notes that the semi-
       detached houses along College Road and Compton Road were often designed
       with covered stone-built side porches to create the impression of a single large
       dwelling.
7.     The appeal property forms one of a pair of three-storey, stone-built semi-detached
       houses, and includes two stone porches with slate-tiled roofs and timber-framed
       windows and doors on the side elevations. As such, it displays the characteristics
       identified within the Appraisal and it thereby makes a positive contribution to the
       character and appearance of the BCCA.
8.     The front porch is located within the angle formed by the side elevation of the
       principal part of the building and the projecting side gable. Having regard to the
       Appraisal and the presence of a similar porch on the adjoining property, it is
       reasonable to conclude that this porch either formed part of the original design or
       was added at an early stage in the building’s history.
9.     By contrast, the rear porch appears likely to be a later addition, occupying the
       space between the projecting side gable and a two-storey side extension.
       Nevertheless, it remains a sympathetic component of the building, sharing a
       broadly similar design and appearance with the earlier porch.
10. Owing to their location and the substantial gap between the appeal property and
    17 Compton Road, both porches are prominent features in views from Compton
    Road and Compton Grove. On my visit, I observed that some porches within the
    surrounding area, including the adjoining property, have been altered through the
    replacement of the timber frames and doors. In addition, some original timber
    windows have been replaced with uPVC.
11. The proposal involves the replacement of the timber window frames and doors to
    both porches. Given the contribution that the porches make to the character and
    appearance of the BCCA, careful consideration must be given to whether such
    existing fabric should be retained or replaced.
12. While the Council has questioned the justification for replacement on the basis it
    relies on photographs rather than a structural report, a visual inspection of the rear
    porch indicates that substantial sections of the timber are rotten or missing.
    Consequently, the state of the existing rear porch detracts from the character and
    appearance of the BCCA. Given the extent of the deterioration I observed on site, I
    am satisfied that repair would require substantial intervention and that replacement

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010311


       represents the most appropriate solution subject to appropriate design details
       being secured.
13. The timberwork to the front porch appears to be in a better state of repair and is
    not evidently in need of replacement. Nevertheless, replacing the windows and
    doors to both porches as part of a single scheme would ensure a consistent
    appearance and detailing across these closely related architectural features. Given
    that replacement of the rear porch joinery is justified, I am satisfied that
    replacement of the front porch joinery would also be acceptable.
14. The proposal involves the replacement of the existing timber doors and windows
    with heritage-style composite uPVC. The submitted plans show that, other than
    different materials, the only alteration to the appearance would be a change to the
    style of the door to the rear porch. However, the manufacturer’s literature
    submitted in support of the proposal shows windows with flat profiles and
    substantially thicker frames than the existing timber units. These differ noticeably
    from the existing windows and those shown on the proposed plans. Consequently,
    the information before me is inconsistent and insufficient to fully assess the
    detailed appearance of the proposals and its effect on the character and
    appearance of the BCCA.
15. Notwithstanding these concerns, the use of composite uPVC would not, in itself,
    be unacceptable. Although it would introduce a variation in materials compared
    with other elements of the appeal property and many buildings within the BCCA,
    composite uPVC windows are available in a wide range of designs and
    specifications. I am therefore satisfied that a high-quality timber-effect solution
    could be achieved that would preserve the character and appearance of the
    BCCA. I thus find that the use of composite uPVC is acceptable in principle.
    Furthermore, while the Council’s Conservation Officer disagrees with my
    conclusion that replacement of the existing timber joinery is justified, they have not
    objected to the use of uPVC in principle. Rather, their concerns relate to the
    absence of detailed product specifications.
16. As the outstanding concerns relate to matters of detailed design rather than the
    principle of replacement or the use of composite uPVC, they could be addressed
    through a condition requiring the submission and approval of the detailed
    specifications, including profiles and finish, prior to installation.
17. Consequently, subject to a condition, the proposal would preserve the character
    and appearance of the BCCA. Therefore, the proposal accords with policies EQ6
    and EQ7 of the High Peak Local Plan, adopted April 2016, which require
    development proposals to be well-designed and respect and enhance the
    character of the historic environment. It would also be compliant with the similar
    objectives of the Appraisal, the Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document
    and the Framework.
Conditions
18. I have imposed a condition that requires the development to be carried out in
    accordance with the approved plans in the interests of certainty. I have also
    imposed a condition to secure agreement of the full details of the replacement
    windows in the interests of the character and appearance of the BCCA. I have not,
    however, included conditions requiring a survey and structural assessment of the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010311


       windows or details of their removal and repair, given that I have found the loss of
       the timber window frames to be acceptable for the reasons set out above.
Conclusion
19. For the reasons given above, having regard to the development plan as a whole
    and all relevant material considerations, I conclude that the appeal should be
    allowed.

Elaine Moulton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
