Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by K Mee BA(Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 October 2026
Appeal Ref: 6010578
Land at Dunvilles Farm, Bollington Lane, Chelford Road, Monks Heath,
Macclesfield
Grid Reference Easting: 384059, Northing: 374217
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•    The appeal is made by Mr William Whittaker on behalf of Whittaker Cap Limited against the decision
     of Cheshire East Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/0676/PIP.
•    The development proposed is the erection of 5 dwellings.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and permission in principle is granted for a minimum of 5
       dwellings and a maximum of 5 dwellings at Land at Dunvilles Farm, Bollington
       Lane, Chelford Road, Monks Heath, Macclesfield, Grid Reference Easting:
       384059, Northing: 374217 in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref
       26/0676/PIP, dated 18 February 2026.
Applications for Costs
2.     An application for costs was made by Mr William Whittaker on behalf of Whittaker
       Cap Limited against Cheshire East Council, and this is the subject of a separate
       decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     No postcode was given on the application form, and the grid reference provided is
       positioned outside the red line boundary. While the postcode given on the decision
       notice and appeal form is close to the site, I have used a corrected grid reference
       in the address above to accurately locate the site area.
4.     The proposal is for permission in principle. Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
       advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
       housing-led development. The permission in principle route has 2 stages: the first
       stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site is suitable in-
       principle and the second (“technical details consent”) stage is when the detailed
       development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first of these 2
       stages.
5.     The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
       land use and the amount of development. All other matters are considered as part
       of a subsequent Technical Details Consent (TDC) application if permission in
       principle is granted.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010578


6.       Permission in principle may be sought by expressing a minimum and maximum
         net number of dwellings. In this case, however, the application seeks permission
         for a fixed number of 5 dwellings. Nonetheless, in accordance with the relevant
         Regulations1, within the decision above I am required to express this as a
         minimum and maximum range of dwellings that are, in principle, permitted.
         Furthermore, I am not under any positive duty to specify any alternative range to
         that applied for.
7.       The Government published a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
         Framework) on 17 August 2026. The main parties were provided with an
         opportunity to comment. I have had regard to the 2026 version of the Framework
         in my decision. References hereafter are to the August 2026 version.
Main Issue
8.       Having regard to the evidence before me, including the responses received to the
         revised Framework, I consider the main issue to be whether the site is suitable
         having regard to its location, proposed land use and amount of development; with
         particular regard to the Green Belt, access to services and facilities, and the risk of
         flooding.
Reasons
Whether inappropriate development in the Green Belt
9.       The appeal site is located in the Green Belt. The Framework states that the
         fundamental aim of Green Belt policy is to prevent urban sprawl by keeping land
         permanently open; the essential characteristics of Green Belts are their openness
         and their permanence.
10. Policy GB7(g) of the Framework advises that the development of homes in the
    Green Belt should not be regarded as inappropriate where 4 criteria are met,
    including (i) where it would utilise grey belt land and would not fundamentally
    undermine the purposes (taken together) of the remaining Green Belt across the
    plan area, (ii) where there is a evidenced unmet need, (iii) where the development
    would be in a sustainable location, with particular reference to Policy TR3 of the
    Framework, and (iv) where applicable the ‘Golden Rules’ are met.
11. With regard to criterion i), the main parties do not dispute that the site would meet
    the definition of grey belt land and that the proposal would not undermine the
    purposes of the remaining Green Belt. Based on the evidence before me and my
    site visit, I concur on this matter.
12. Turning to criterion b), there is no dispute between the parties that the Council
    cannot demonstrate a 5-year supply of deliverable housing land. Consequently,
    there is an unmet need for housing in the area, and the proposal would comply
    with this requirement.
13. Criterion (iii) requires consideration of whether the development is in a sustainable
    location, with particular regard to Policy TR3. Policies SD 1 and SD 2 of the
    Cheshire East Local Plan Strategy 2010-2030 (July 2017) (CELPS) seek to ensure
    that development is accessible by public transport, walking and cycling, and has
    access to a range of services and facilities. Table 9.1 within Policy SD 2 sets

1
    Article 5A of the Town and Country Planning (Permission in Principle) Order 2017


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                   2
Appeal Decision 6010578


         recommended accessibility thresholds. Development is considered to be
         accessible where it lies within the recommended distances of a bus stop, multi-
         functional open space, convenience store and at least four other services or
         amenities. These distances include 500m to a bus stop, post box and convenience
         store, 1km to a primary school, leisure facility, local meeting place/community
         centre and public house, and 2km to a railway station.
14. The appeal site lies outside any defined settlement, with only Dunvilles Farm
    located opposite. Whilst sections of the pedestrian route to the available services
    and facilities, including bus stops, are uneven and vary in surface condition, the
    footpath remains generally usable and is separated from the carriageway by a
    substantial grass verge. Although the route is mostly unlit, its alignment alongside
    the main road and the presence of residential development along part of its length
    provide a degree of natural surveillance.
15. I am informed that the nearest bus stop is approximately 391m from the appeal
    site, comfortably within recommended walking distance. It is served by the No 87
    and No 130 routes, providing connections to Macclesfield, Knutsford and
    Manchester Airport. The bus stops are equipped with shelters and seating and,
    although each service operates hourly, their staggered timetables provide more
    frequent opportunities for travel throughout the day including during key
    commuting periods.
16. The site benefits from access to a range of day-to-day services and facilities. A
    café is located opposite on Bollington Road, with a convenience store within
    walking distance via the footpath network. A gym, restaurant, children's nursery,
    petrol filling station, car wash and vehicle dealership are all situated within around
    500m of the site. Alderley Park, which provides employment and leisure
    opportunities, is accessible on foot via connecting lit footpaths at a distance of
    around 1km. Railway stations can be reached via bus or cycle, and Alderley Edge,
    with its wider range of services and facilities, is within a reasonable cycling
    distance. Taken together, these facilities are readily accessible by a variety of
    transport modes and contribute positively to the site's overall level of sustainability.
17. Although the appellant refers to a children's play area in close proximity to the site,
    the evidence indicates that this is a private facility associated with the adjacent
    farm and café rather than a publicly accessible recreation space. Furthermore,
    whilst the entrance to Alderley Park lies within the recommended 0.8km walking
    distance of a public park, that entrance serves the wider development and is some
    distance from the principal publicly accessible open spaces within the site.
    Consequently, the proximity of publicly available recreational facilities is more
    limited than the appellant suggests.
18. However, in combination, the availability of sustainable transport options and the
    site’s accessibility to services and facilities indicate that it occupies a sustainable
    location. This conclusion is supported by the Connectivity Tool assessment,
    undertaken as recommended by Policy TR3(2) of the Framework, which I am
    informed resulted in an overall score of 33. This represents an above average
    result for a site in this type of location. I also note that this score is comparable to
    those achieved by nearby residential schemes that have recently been approved
    at Eagles Road2 and Alderley Park3 which reportedly ranged between 29 and 34. I
2
    LPA reference 16/5853M
3
    LPA reference 18/0403M


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010578


       therefore find that the site is overall sustainably located and that the proposal
       accords with Policy GB7(g)(iii) of the Framework.
19. Criterion (iv) requires the application of the ‘Golden Rules’, however, these only
    apply to major development and are therefore not pertinent to this appeal
    proposal.
20. Therefore, all criteria within Policy GB7(g) would be met and as such the proposal
    would not be inappropriate development in the Green Belt. Accordingly, I conclude
    that the site would be suitable for residential development, with particular regard to
    whether it would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt. It would comply
    with Policies SD 1 and SD 2 of the CELPS, which together require residential
    development to provide access to public transport, services and facilities.
21. As I have found that the proposal would not be inappropriate development in the
    Green Belt, there is no place for a subsequent assessment of the effect of the
    development on the openness of the Green Belt. Additionally, there is no need for
    me to assess other considerations, and whether very special circumstances exist
    in order to justify the development.
22. Moreover, where a development falls within any of the exceptions of Policy GB7,
    there is no requirement to demonstrate that any of the other exceptions within the
    Framework would also be met, such as that under Policy GB7(1)(h).
    Consequently, I find that the proposed development would not constitute
    inappropriate development in the Green Belt.
Accessibility
23. As set out above, I find that the appeal site accords with the accessibility
    expectations set out in the Council’s recommended standards and occupies a
    sustainable location for the purposes of the Green Belt assessment.
24. Concerns have been raised regarding accessibility for wheelchair users and others
    with reduced mobility, due to the physical condition of the footpath linking the site
    to the identified services and facilities. However, having regard to the site’s semi-
    rural context, I am not convinced that the condition of the local footpaths along
    renders the location unsustainable.
25. Although future occupiers would be likely to make some use of the private car for
    day-to-day journeys, the evidence indicates that there remains a genuine and
    realistic choice of transport modes. Moreover, whilst the Highway Officer identified
    concerns regarding accessibility, these were not sufficient to warrant an objection
    in principle to the proposal.
26. Taking these matters together, I conclude that the appeal site is suitable for
    residential development having regard to access to services and facilities. The
    proposal would comply with Policies SD 1 and SD 2 of the CELPS, which together
    require residential development to provide access to public transport, services and
    facilities. The proposal would also comply with the aims of Policy TR3 of the
    Framework.
27. I find no material conflict with Policies MP 1 and PG 1 of the CELPS. As
    overarching policies supporting the delivery of housing and a positive approach to
    development, they broadly reflect the Framework’s presumption in favour of
    sustainable development.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010578


Flood risk
28. The parties agree that the site lies within Flood Zone 1 and that a small area in the
    south-west corner is subject to a medium risk of surface water flooding. The
    Council also notes that a pond adjacent to the north-east of the site is affected by
    medium and high risk of surface water flooding. Nevertheless, the substantial
    majority of the site, including potential access points, is not affected by surface
    water flooding.
29. The Framework requires a sequential approach to steer new development to areas
    with the lowest risk of flooding from any source. Policy F5(2)(b)(i) outlines that a
    sequential test would not be necessary where a site-specific flood risk assessment
    demonstrates that built development, including access or escape routes, would not
    be at risk of flooding from any source. Policy F5(2)(b)(ii) further provides that,
    where the flood risk is limited to surface water flooding, the site layout, design and
    mitigation measures should ensure the safety of future occupiers from surface
    water flood risk for the lifetime of the development.
30. In this case, the evidence before me does not suggest that the areas affected by
    surface water flooding would, in principle, prevent the site from accommodating 5
    dwellings. Whilst the detailed layout remains to be determined, there is no
    substantive evidence that development could not avoid the affected areas or
    incorporate appropriate mitigation to manage surface water and prevent increased
    flood risk elsewhere. This would be addressed at the Technical Details Consent
    stage which would also need to be supported by a detailed flood risk assessment.
    This is not therefore, in this case, a reason to withhold permission in principle.
31. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the site location and amount of development
    is suitable in principle for residential development having regard to the risk of
    flooding. The proposal does not therefore conflict with the relevant provisions of
    Policies SD 1, SD 2 and SE 13 of the CELPS and Policy ENV16 of the Cheshire
    East Site Allocations and Development Policies Document (December 2022)
    (SADPD) which together seek to reduce flood risk. For the same reasons, the
    proposal does not conflict with the Framework which seeks to direct development
    away from areas at highest risk of flooding (whether existing or future).
Other Matters
32. Whilst the proposed access would likely be located close to the junction of
    Bollington Road and Chelford Road, the Local Highway Authority raises no
    objection in principle. Any necessary visibility splays and detailed access
    arrangements would be considered at the Technical Details Consent stage.
    Accordingly, the evidence before me does not lead me to a different conclusion.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
33. As set out above, I have found that the proposal would not constitute inappropriate
    development in the Green Belt and would be acceptable in principle with regard to
    accessibility and flood risk. In these circumstances, Policy S5(5) of the Framework
    indicates that, through the application of Policy GB7, proposals should be
    approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any
    adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-making policies in
    the Framework and applying paragraph S5(2).


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010578


34. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the benefits of approving the
    proposal, including the social and economic benefits arising during construction
    and subsequent occupation in proximity to services and facilities and in light of the
    housing need in the area, are not outweighed by any adverse effects. The site is
    therefore suitable for residential development having regard to its location,
    proposed land use and amount of development. Accordingly, the appeal should be
    allowed. It is not possible for conditions to be attached to a grant of permission in
    principle.

K Mee
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
