Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 1 September 2026 by S Manson DipTP MRTPI
Decision by F Harrison BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010207
61 Hawthorn Road, Edmonton, Enfield N18 1EY
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mrs Ashwina Lutchumun against the decision of the Council of the London
    Borough of Enfield.
•   The application Ref is 25/04165/FUL.
•   The development proposed is the conversion of a single family dwellinghouse (C3) to a 3-bedroom 4
    persons HMO (C4) together with refuse and 4 cycle spaces.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matter
3. A Revised National Planning Policy Framework (Framework) was published on 17
   August 2026. I am however satisfied that, having reviewed the relevant changes,
   they do not have a material bearing on the substance of the main issues or indeed
   the arguments of the main parties thereon. Since they would not therefore be
   prejudiced, I have proceeded without further consultation.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are whether the proposal would:
      •    provide adequate living conditions for future occupiers, with particular regard to
           daylight and outlook in the communal area; and
      •    achieve the highest standards of fire safety.
Reasons for the Recommendation
Daylight and Outlook
5. The appeal property is a mid-terrace dwelling, situated within an area characterised
   by similar residential buildings. The proposal is for the change of use to a House in
   Multiple Occupation (HMO) comprising three bedrooms accommodating up to
   four occupiers.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010207


6. The communal living room would not benefit from a window directly facing the
   external environment. Instead, any natural daylight would be filtered from east
   facing French doors on the rear elevation of the primary kitchen area via windows
   located within the internal partition wall between these two rooms.
7. Consequently, given the orientation of the appeal property and the direction of
   travel of the sun which would limit the amount of light at certain times of the day
   and year, and because light would have to percolate through the windows in the
   partition wall, the communal living area would receive a very limited level of natural
   daylight. As such, the occupiers would have to rely heavily on artificial lighting
   throughout much of the day. Due to the distance of the communal area to the
   external French doors the room would also appear enclosed, with a poor standard
   of outlook.
8. Overall, the communal area would be a largely uninviting space, to the detriment of
   the living conditions of the future occupiers since without a comfortable shared
   space for social interaction the occupiers would spend the majority of their time in
   their private bedrooms. The proposal would not therefore employ features that
   promote social interaction and in doing so would fail to comply with the liveability
   key principle for well-designed places required by Framework Policy DP3
   Paragraph 2
9. To conclude, the proposal would fail to provide adequate living conditions for future
   occupiers, with particular regard to daylight and outlook contrary to Policy D6 of
   The London Plan, 2021 (LP), and Policy DMD 5 of Enfield's Development
   Management Document, 2014 (DMD). These policies, amongst other things,
   require proposals to deliver high-quality development that provides adequate living
   conditions through comfortable and functional internal environments.
Fire Safety
10. Policy D12 of the LP requires development proposals to achieve the highest
    standards of fire safety and to provide suitable and convenient means of escape for
    all building users. The plans show that in order to access the front door to reach a
    safe exit in case of a fire, occupants of Bedroom 1 would need to pass through the
    communal living room, which has been identified as a high-risk room. As a
    communal area used for day-to-day domestic activities, directly accessed off the
    kitchen, this living area would contain potential sources of ignition and smoke and,
    in the event of a fire occurring within that room, the principal means of escape from
    Bedroom 1 could be compromised.
11. Other than reference to the front window serving this bedroom as an emergency
    means of escape, insufficient details have been submitted to demonstrate that the
    proposal would provide the highest standards of fire safety. While the front window
    could potentially provide a means of escape in an emergency, as a last resort, I am
    not persuaded that reliance on escaping through a window would represent a
    suitable, convenient and dignified means of escape for all future occupiers. Such
    an arrangement may be achievable for some individuals but could be more difficult
    for others, depending on their age, mobility or physical capability.
12. Consequently, I conclude that the proposed development would not achieve the
    highest standards of fire safety. As such, it would conflict with Policy D12 of the LP.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010207


Other Considerations
13. With regard to Policy S4 of the Framework and the principle of development within
    settlements, the harm I have found, and the subsequent development plan conflict,
    would be obvious and enduring and I therefore ascribe it significant
    negative weight.
14. The proposal would also fail to comply with national decision-making Policy DP3 of
    the Framework which states that proposals should be refused if without clear
    justification, they conflict with relevant aspects of the principles in paragraph 2 of
    Policy DP3 for well-designed places.
15. Whilst the proposal would make a positive contribution to the mix and type of
    housing in the borough, which is a clear benefit, owing to the scale of the scheme it
    attracts limited positive weight.
16. The appeal property benefits from an HMO licence, however as this relates to
    powers under housing legislation, which operate separately to the planning system,
    the weight afforded to the licence as a specific measure for planning purposes is
    limited and does not lead me away from my above findings on the main issues. I
    have no reason to doubt that the appellant is a responsible landlord, however this,
    and the Council’s handling of the application stage, has not affected my
    consideration of the scheme’s planning merits.
17. In applying Framework Policy S4 and having regard to the circumstances listed in
    paragraph 2, the benefits of the proposed development would be substantially
    outweighed by the adverse effects to the living conditions for future occupiers and
    fire safety identified above, when assessed against the national decision-making
    policies of the Framework.
Conclusion and Recommendation
18. For the reasons given above, the appeal scheme would conflict with the
    development plan and there are no sufficiently weighty material considerations to
    indicate a decision other than in accordance therewith. I therefore recommend that
    the appeal should be dismissed.

S Manson
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
19. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

F Harrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
