Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by A James BSc (Hons) MA MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17th September 2026


Appeal A: 6010765
8 High Street, Mayfield TN20 6AA
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Mr Rajesh Sharma against the decision of Wealden District Council.
•      The application reference is WD/2025/2300/F.
•      The development proposed is construction of a new replacement shopfront to include a roller shutter.

Appeal B: 6010767
8 High Street, Mayfield TN20 6AA
•      The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
       1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•      The appeal is made by Mr Rajesh Sharma against the decision of Wealden District Council.
•      The application reference is WD/2025/2299/LB.
•      The works proposed relate to the construction of a new replacement shopfront to include a roller
       shutter.


Decisions
1.      Appeal A is dismissed.
2.      Appeal B is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
3.      As the appeal relates to a listed building and the site lies within a conservation
        area and forms part of the setting of a number of listed buildings, I have had
        special regard to sections 16(2), 66(1) and 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings
        and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act).
4.      Since the Council issued its decision notices, a new National Planning Policy
        Framework (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. Both main parties
        have been given the opportunity to comment on it and I have taken all comments
        received into consideration.
5.      Planning permission and listed building consent were granted for a replacement
        shopfront in 20251, which remains extant. The design of the consented scheme is
        the same as the current appeal scheme, except the current proposal includes a
        roller shutter. Accordingly, this appeal focuses on the effect of the roller shutter.




1
    WD/2024/1736/F and WD/2024/1737/LB



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions – Appeal A: 6010765 and Appeal B: 6010767


Main Issues
6.     The main issues are whether the proposal would preserve a Grade II listed
       building, known as ‘Premises Occupied by Holmwood Gardens; R Stedman and
       Sons, Butcher; J Gravener, Antiques; and Country Wise Grocers’ (Ref: 1028214),
       and any features of special architectural or historic interest that it possesses, and
       whether the proposal would preserve the character or appearance of the Mayfield
       and Coggins Mill Conservation Area and the setting of nearby listed buildings.
Reasons
7.     ‘Premises Occupied by Holmwood Gardens; R Stedman and Sons, Butcher; J
       Gravener, Antiques; and Country Wise Grocers’ is a Grade II listed building, which
       dates back to the 18th century. It is two storeys high with an attic. The terrace has
       a half-hipped, clay tiled roof, with a mix of brickwork and tile hanging at first floor
       level. The front elevation features modern shopfronts, with traditional, sash
       windows above. The appeal site lies in a prominent position on the historic High
       Street.
8.     Based on the evidence before me and my site visit, I find that the special interest
       of this listed building, insofar as is relevant to this appeal, is derived from its
       historic and architectural interests as an illustration of architecture from the 18 th
       century. The building’s surviving historic fabric, presence of traditional materials
       and the contribution that it makes to the group of historic buildings along the High
       Street make important contributions in these regards.
9.     The appeal site lies within the Mayfield and Coggins Mill Conservation Area (CA).
       The CA encompasses the medieval core of the settlement, which among other
       things includes a former Archbishop’s palace and the historic High Street. The
       High Street contains a wealth of historic buildings of various architectural styles
       and periods. The significance of the CA, insofar as is relevant to this appeal,
       derives from the high-quality historic architecture within it and the presence of
       traditional materials and detailing, including traditional shopfronts, which together
       depict the evolution of the village as a historic trading settlement.
10. On the opposite side of the lane to the appeal property is ‘Walnut Tree House’,
    which is a Grade II* listed building (Ref: 1193529). Walnut Tree House dates back
    to the 15th century and has a 16th century wing to the rear. It is a timber framed
    building, which features close studding. Walnut Tree House has a traditional
    hipped roof, which is finished with clay tiles. The building has a first floor jetty and
    features leaded light windows. From the evidence available to me and my site visit,
    I find that the special interest of Walnut Tree House is derived from its historic and
    architectural interests as an illustration of a high-status building from the 15th
    century. The building’s timber frame, the presence of traditional materials and its
    pleasing architectural design contribute to its special interest.
11. Adjacent to Walnut Tree House is ‘Middle House Hotel’ (Ref: 1028215), which is a
    Grade I listed building. Middle House Hotel dates back to 1575. It is two storeys
    high with an attic. It is described in the listing description as ‘one of the best
    timber-framed buildings in Sussex’. The building has a jettied first floor and
    features ornate, circular timber detailing and close studding, with plaster infilling. It
    is clear from the design of the building and the elaborate detailing that this was a
    high-status building. Based on the evidence before me and my site visit, I find that
    the special interest of the Middle House Hotel is derived from its historic and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      2
Appeal Decisions – Appeal A: 6010765 and Appeal B: 6010767


       architectural interests as an illustration of architecture from the late 16 th century.
       The building’s elaborate timber frame and surviving historic fabric, its use of
       traditional materials and its striking architectural design make positive contributions
       in these regards.
12. Opposite the appeal site is ‘The Gatehouse of the Old Palace (The Convent of the
    Holy Child Jesus, St Leonard's Mayfield School)’, which is a Grade II listed
    building (Ref: 1028178). The Gatehouse includes a 15th century arch, which was
    part of the historic entrance to the palace of the Archbishops of Canterbury. A new
    building was added to the arch in the 1860s, which was designed by the renowned
    architect Edward Welby Pugin. Insofar as is relevant to this appeal, I find that the
    special interest of this listed building is derived from its architectural and historic
    interests as an example of a 15th century arch, with a 19th century addition. The
    building’s association with Pugin, its 15th century origins and the presence of
    traditional, high-quality materials contribute to its special interest.
13. Adjacent to the Gatehouse is ‘Stone House’, which is a Grade II* listed building
    (Ref: 1028179), which dates back to the 18th century. Stone House is two storeys
    high, with a semi-basement. The front elevation is constructed of sandstone and
    features traditional, sash windows. It has a symmetrical front elevation, with a
    central porch, which has Ionic columns. Based on the evidence before me and my
    site visit, I find that the special interest of this listed building, insofar as is relevant
    to this appeal, is derived from its architectural and historic interests as an example
    of domestic architecture from the 18th century. The building’s surviving historic
    fabric, its refined architectural composition and presence of traditional materials
    and fenestration form key components of its special interest.
14. The ‘Garden Wall of Stone House to South of Stone House’ is Grade II listed in its
       own right (Ref: 1028180). It has a stone base, with a wooden fence above, which
       contains a Chinese Chippendale pattern. Insofar as it relates to this appeal, I find
       that the special interest of the listed wall is derived from its surviving historic fabric,
       presence of high-quality, traditional materials and its elaborate design.
15. The proposal seeks consent to replace the existing unauthorised shopfront and
    install a new metal roller shutter, together with an external shutter box. The
    appellant argues that the roller shutter would only be visible when the premises
    are closed2 and that its visual impact would therefore be limited. Nevertheless, the
    shopfront occupies a prominent position on the historic High Street and, when
    closed, the shutter by reason of its design, siting and materiality would be a solid,
    harsh and utilitarian feature. I appreciate that pedestrian and vehicular activity
    along the High Street would be lower during the night-time hours. However, the
    shutter would be visible to passers-by when the premises are closed and would
    appear as a stark and incongruous addition to the listed building, which would fail
    to preserve the character and appearance of the CA and the setting of nearby
    listed buildings.
16. The external shutter box would remain in place irrespective of whether the shutter
    was deployed, which would be a visually intrusive and unsympathetic feature on
    the principal elevation of this listed building. Overall, I find that the form, materials
    and detailing of the proposed roller shutter and shutter box would be at odds with


2
 Opening hours 06:00 – 22:00 Monday to Saturday and 06:00 – 21:00 on Sunday (Appellant’s Appeal Statement dated August
2026)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             3
Appeal Decisions – Appeal A: 6010765 and Appeal B: 6010767


       the character of the listed building and the traditional-style shopfronts found within
       the CA.
17. While I observed a variety of different styles of shopfronts in the locality, external
    shutters are not a typical feature. I did observe an internal, open-work shutter on a
    nearby retail unit. While the full circumstances of the internal shutter are not before
    me, I find that the design and siting of the internal shutter is materially different to
    the appeal scheme and I therefore give it limited weight in my decision.
18. The existing shopfront by reason of its design and use of modern materials is not
    sympathetic to the special interest of the listed building nor the character or
    appearance of the CA. While I appreciate that the replacement shopfront would
    represent a betterment in relation to the existing shopfront, as the existing
    shopfront is unauthorised, I give this argument very limited weight in my decision.
19. The appellant argues that the proposed shutter and shutter box would be
    reversible and would not result in the loss of any historic fabric. While reversibility
    limits the permanence of the intervention, it does not overcome the harm that
    would occur while it is in place and I therefore give this argument limited weight in
    my decision.
20. Overall, I find that the proposal would result in an unsympathetic and utilitarian
    addition, which would cause harm to the special interest of the listed building and
    would fail to preserve the character and appearance of the CA and the setting of
    the aforementioned listed buildings. I find the harm to the special interest of the
    listed building, the character and appearance of the CA and the setting of nearby
    listed buildings to be at the lower end of the scale. Nonetheless, a low level of
    harm does not equate to a low planning objection and the Framework is clear that
    any harm to a designated heritage asset will be a matter of considerable
    importance and weight. Where harm is identified, the Framework requires that the
    effect on the asset and its significance be weighed against any public benefits from
    the proposal.
21. The proposal would result in investment into the property, which would result in a
    small economic benefit, which I give limited weight in my decision as a public
    benefit. The proposed shopfront has been designed to reflect the shopfront that
    existed prior to the car accident. The appellant argues that the pre-existing
    shopfront had deteriorated and was unsympathetic to the CA. However, there are
    limited details before me of the condition of the pre-existing shopfront and I
    therefore give this argument limited weight in my decision.
22. The appellant argues that the proposal is necessary to secure the retail unit and
    prevent anti-social behaviour, criminal damage, vandalism and forced entry, which
    could also result in damage to the listed building. The appellant considers that an
    external shutter represents the most practical and effective solution for the
    business and that internal shutters would leave the doors vulnerable to forced
    entry.
23. While I acknowledge the appellant’s and Parish Council’s concerns regarding
    security, there is no compelling evidence before me that crime is a particular issue
    for this retail unit or within this part of the High Street. Nor is there substantive
    evidence to demonstrate that the appellant’s security requirements could not be
    met by a less visually intrusive solution. Accordingly, there is no clear and
    convincing justification for the harm that I have identified. There is also no

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      4
Appeal Decisions – Appeal A: 6010765 and Appeal B: 6010767


       compelling evidence before me to suggest that the retail use would cease in the
       absence of the proposal. As a result, I do not find the proposal necessary to
       secure the viability and long-term conservation of the listed building.
24. Policy S4 of the Framework states that development proposals within settlements
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in the Framework.
25. Overall, I give the public benefits in this case limited weight. Consequently, in
    attributing considerable importance and weight to the identified harm to the
    significance of the designated heritage assets, I find that there would be
    insufficient public benefits arising from the proposal to outweigh this harm.
    Accordingly, I find that the benefits of the proposal would be substantially
    outweighed by the adverse effects.
26. Given the above, the proposal would fail to satisfy the requirements of the Act and
    Policies S4, HE4 and HE6 of the Framework. The proposal would also conflict with
    Saved Policies EN1, EN19 and EN27 of the Wealden Local Plan December 1998,
    Spatial Planning Objectives SPO2 and SPO13 and Policy WCS14 of the Wealden
    District Core Strategy Local Plan February 2013. These policies among other
    things seek to ensure that the intrinsic quality of the historic environment is
    protected and that development promotes local distinctiveness and preserves or
    enhances the character or appearance of the CA.
Conclusion
27. Appeal A: The proposal conflicts with the development plan as a whole and there
    are no other material considerations, including the Framework, that would
    outweigh that conflict. Therefore, for the reasons given above, Appeal A is
    dismissed.
28. Appeal B: For the reasons given above, Appeal B is dismissed.

A James
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      5
