Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by P Hatch BA (Hons) Ad. Dip MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17th August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010623
197 Alderson Road, Liverpool L15 1HQ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
    to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Thomas Smithson of Aerofoil Properties Ltd against the decision of
    Liverpool City Council.
•   The application Ref is 25F/3107
•   The development proposed is change of use from a single dwelling to two self-contained flats
    facilitated by a single storey rear extension and rear dormer.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the change of use
   from a single dwelling to two self-contained flats facilitated by a single storey rear
   extension and rear dormer at 197 Alderson Road, Liverpool, L15 1HQ in
   accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 25F/3107 subject to the following
   conditions:
       1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
          date of this decision.
       2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
          following approved plans: FT24-157 157-01 Rev D: Extg & Prop Plans,
          Elevations & Sections.
       3) A scheme for the provision of cycle parking in accordance with the Council’s
          current standards shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local
          planning authority. The scheme shall be implemented as approved before any
          part of the development is first occupied or brought into use and shall be
          retained as such thereafter.
Application for costs
2. An application for costs was made by the appellant against Liverpool City Council.
   This application is subject to a separate decision.
Main Issues
3. The main issues are the effect of the proposed development on:
       • the provision of family dwellings in the area;
       • the living conditions of future occupiers, with particular reference to noise and
         disturbance; and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010623


       • the living conditions of neighbouring occupants, with particular reference to
         privacy.
Reasons
       Loss of Family Dwellings
4. The appeal site is a two-storey, mid-terrace property on Alderson Road and
   currently forms a C3 residential dwelling. The predominant character of the
   surrounding area are residential terrace properties.
5. Policy H10 2 (n) of the Liverpool Local Plan (LLP), adopted in 2022, sets out that
   planning permission will be granted for the sub-division of dwellings into self-
   contained flats providing that it would not cause the loss of a dwelling that is
   suitable in size, design, layout and location for continued use as a family dwelling.
6. I have not been presented with any formal definition of what constitutes a family
   dwelling, however the submitted plans show that the proposed development would
   involve the creation of two self-contained residential flats involving a one-bedroom
   flat to the ground floor (Flat 1) and a two bedroom duplex flat which makes use of
   both the first floor and roof space (Flat 2). These both are self-contained residential
   units which include separate kitchens, living areas and bathroom facilities. In my
   view, the size of Flat 2, which includes two bedrooms, could reasonably be
   described as capable of accommodating a family unit.
7. As a result, whilst the proposal would result in the loss of a family dwellinghouse, it
   would not result in the loss of accommodation which could be reasonably occupied
   by a family unit. Moreover, the sub-division of the property into two separate
   residential units results in a more efficient use of the property, capable of
   accommodating a wider variety of housing needs, including the needs set out within
   the Liverpool Strategic Housing Market Needs Assessment (2025).
8. I therefore conclude that the proposal would not result in the loss of a family
   dwelling and is therefore consistent with the requirements of Policy H10 2 (n) of the
   LLP.
       Internal Layout
9.     Flat 1 would involve the creation of a self-contained unit which spans across the
       ground floor of the appeal property, including a lounge / kitchen area to the front of
       the property and a bedroom and shower room to the rear. Directly above the living
       space on the ground floor are the two bedroom spaces associated with Flat 2. The
       Council’s ‘Conversion of Buildings into Flats and Bedsits’ Supplementary Planning
       Guidance Note 7 (SPG7) indicates that ‘the vertical arrangement of layouts should
       ensure that bedrooms are not located above or under living areas, kitchens, or
       WC’s unless a suitable scheme of acoustic insulation is proposed’.
10. I have noted the appellants view that the self-contained nature of the duplex flat on
    the first / second floors should ensure that acoustic insulation is not required.
    However, this is not the essence of the Council’s concerns which relate to the
    activities taking place in the ground floor flat and their impacts on the bedroom
    spaces on the first floor above.
11. Given the self-contained nature of both flats, there are likely to be instances of
    comings and goings within the living room / dining room of Flat 1 across the course

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010623


     of the day. This will include the use of a television, the playing of music,
     conversations between occupants, the opening and closing of doors and the
     cooking and preparation of food in the kitchen area. It is therefore reasonable to
     assume that the level of noise and disturbance associated with those activities
     would have a harmful effect on the living conditions of the future occupiers of Flat 2.
     This is particularly the case given it is the larger of the two flats and has the ability
     to accommodate a family group and young children.
12. I have noted that the proposal does not include information in regard to how noise
    and disturbance issues would be mitigated through acoustic insulation. The
    appellant has suggested that, if necessary, this matter could be appropriately
    addressed through the imposition of a planning condition. I have had due regard to
    this issue and the effectiveness of imposing a condition and have concluded that
    such an approach would be unnecessary as it duplicates the requirements of the
    Building Regulations ‘Approved Document E: Resistance to the Passage of Sound’
    which applies to flats created through the sub-division of a dwelling house.
13. I would therefore conclude that this matter can be satisfactorily dealt with through
    Building Regulations and therefore the proposal is consistent with Policy H10 2 (a)
    of the LLP which states, amongst other things, that the premises should be suitable
    for full or part conversion in terms of location, the provision of amenities and the
    size and number of households to be accommodated.
       Privacy of Neighbouring Occupants
14. The proposed development involves the creation of a new dormer extension to the
    rear elevation of the property, facilitating additional space in the roof area to
    accommodate the living room / kitchen associated with Flat 2. The proposed
    dormer would run across the full length of the roof of the appeal property and would
    include one large window to support the outlook from the kitchen space of Flat 2.
15. The broad character of properties on Alderson Road are high density terraced
    houses with small rear yard areas with the rear elevation of the appeal property
    looking towards the semi-detached houses on Salisbury Road. These properties
    are separated by a privately gated alleyway which marginally extends the distances
    between the rear elevations of properties on both terraces.
16. The Council’s ‘New Residential Development’ Supplementary Planning Guidance
    (SPG10) sets out guidance on the range of separation distances to be afforded
    between development. In regard to window-to-window separation distances,
    SPG10 states that ‘the rear elevations of two-storey houses should be normally a
    minimum of 23m from other habitable room windowed elevations’.
17. It is not in dispute between the parties that the separation distance which is
    afforded between the rear elevation of the appeal property and the properties of
    Nos.13 and 15 Salisbury Road are well below the separation distances which are
    indicated in SPG10. However, I observed during my site visit the presence of a
    number of dormers within the rear elevation of properties on both Alderson Road
    and on surrounding streets.
18. The Council recognise that, due to the high density nature of properties within this
    area, that the separation distances are generally much lower than those which are
    prescribed in SPG10 and it is clear that the existing relationship between the rear
    elevation of properties on both Alderson Road and Salisbury Road include many

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010623


     examples of habitable windows which fall below the ambitions of SPG10. Whilst it
     is clear that the proposed dormers cannot accommodate such separation
     distances, I am satisfied that they would not have a materially greater impact on the
     living conditions of neighbouring occupiers than the current relationship of habitable
     windows between the rear of properties on Alderson Road and Salisbury Road.
19. I therefore conclude that the proposal is consistent with Policies H7, H8, UD1, UD2
    and UD7 of the LLP which state, amongst other matters, the promotion of good
    quality design and layout which retains local character and distinctiveness and that
    the living conditions of occupiers of neighbouring properties should be protected,
    particularly in regard to privacy and overlooking.
Other Matters
20. I have noted the requirements of Policy GI8 of the LLP which requires new
    development to make a financial contribution towards tree planting which equates
    to a new tree per additional dwelling. The contribution set out is for a commuted
    sum of £800. I have noted there is no dispute between parties in regard to securing
    the required monies and having considered the request I am satisfied that it passes
    the three tests set out in Paragraph 58 of the National Planning Policy Framework.
Conditions
21. To meet legislative requirements, a condition shall be imposed to address the
    period for commencement. I shall also impose a condition specifying the relevant
    drawings as this provides certainty. A condition is also necessary in regard to cycle
    storage to ensure satisfactory living conditions for future occupiers and to establish
    measures to encourage non-car modes of transport.
Conclusion
22. For the reasons given above I conclude that the proposed development does not
    conflict with the development plan and therefore should be allowed.



P Hatch
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
