 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 29 July 2026
 by Philip Willmer BSc Dip Arch RIBA
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 18 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010555
 38 Leatherhead Road, Ashtead, Surrey, KT21 2SY.
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Bijelica against the decision of Mole Valley District Council
 •   The application Ref is MO/2025/02713
 •   The development proposed is erection of part single storey front, side and rear extension with front
     entrance canopy and raised roof ridge height to create accommodation at first floor level with 3 No.
     dormer windows at front, 4 No. dormer windows at rear and 1 No. dormer window at side.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issues
2. I consider the main issues to be:
         •    The effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of
              the street scene; and,
         •    Whether the proposal would have an overbearing impact on the occupiers of
              No.36 and result in overlooking of No. 40, and if obscured glazed the
              bedroom window in the north-east elevation of the proposed extension
              would provide a suitable outlook for future residents.
Reasons
3. The appeal property, 38 Leatherhead Road (No 38) is a detached bungalow with
   an integral garage.
4. The appellants propose, following the demolition of the existing conservatory to the
   rear, the construction of a part single storey front, side and rear extension together
   with a front entrance canopy. It is further proposed, by increasing the height of the
   ridge and the construction of eight dormer windows, to create what would be first
   floor accommodation within the roof space.
Street scene:
5. The area is characterised by a mix of bungalows and chalet bungalows that are set
   back well from the road and within relatively large garden plots. When viewed from
   the street these early post war dwellings appear to be built across the full width of

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6010555


     their plots. However, due to the attached single storey garages to one side and
     their hipped roofs they appear set back from the boundary, thereby resulting in a
     visual gap having been created between neighbouring dwellings.
6. The Council has raised no objection to the proposed increase in height of the roof
   or the formation of a hipped roof. From what I have seen and read I would concur
   with its findings on these matters.
7. However, by reason of the proposed new higher hipped roof being extended over
   the garage and the side/rear extension the dwelling would be extended right up to
   its side boundary with No 36. It would therefore infill the current space between the
   neighbouring properties. I consider that this would result in a cramped form of
   development which would not respect the established character of the area.
8. I note from the appellants evidence that a similar extension has been approved at
   70 Leatherhead Road. However, from the drawing submitted I note that, unlike this
   proposal, by reason of a single storey side projection, a gap would be maintained
   between the two-storey element and the site boundary.
9. For the reasons set out above I conclude in respect of the first main issue that due
   to the design the dwelling as extended it would appear cramped and thereby cause
   significant harm to the character and visual amenity of the street scene. To allow
   the development would therefore be contrary to the objectives of Policy EN4 of
   Mole Valley Local Plan 2020-2039 (Adopted October 2024) (LP), the Ashtead
   Neighbourhood Development Plan 2015-2026 (7 December 2016) (NDP) the
   National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) and the Ashtead Design
   Code (Adopted November 2025) (DC) as they relate, along with other things ,to a
   requirement for all new development to be of a high-quality of design that makes a
   positive contribution to the local character.
Living conditions:
10. The neighbouring property to the appeal site No 36 is also a detached bungalow
    located close to the common boundary to No 38. There is a roof light in the roof
    slope facing No 36. Given the orientation of the properties one to another I am not
    persuaded, from my observations that the proposed extension would either
    overshadow the roof window or appear so overbearing as to cause significant harm
    to the residential living conditions of the occupier of No 36.
11. The scheme design includes for a dormer window, serving new bedroom 3 in the
    roof slope facing No 40. Due to concerns in respect of potential overlooking the
    designer proposed that the glazing to the dormer window should be obscure
    glazed. As this would be the only window to this bedroom obscure glazing would
    cause harm to the living conditions of the future occupier due to a lack of outlook.
    Furthermore, as identified by the local planning authority, in order to avoid
    overlooking the window would in addition also need to be fixed shut below 1.7
    metres. However, in the event that this window was required to provide a means of
    escape from the bedroom it would need to be openable, thereby resulting in
    overlooking.
12. In the event that the window was not obscure glazed and not fixed shut it would
    result overlooking. This would in turn lead to a loss of privacy the development
    appearing overbearing to the occupants of No 40.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
 Appeal Decision 6010555


13. The appellants have suggested replacing the dormer with roof lights to over come
    potential overlooking. However, it would be for the Council to consider such a
    revision to the design in the first instance.
14. I therefore conclude in respect of the second main issue that the development
    would not have such an overbearing impact or result in such a loss of light for the
    occupiers of No 36 as to result in significant harm to their living conditions.
15. However, if the window to new bedroom 3 were obscure glazed, even if not also
    fixed shut below 1.7 metres, this would cause unacceptable harm to the living
    conditions of any future occupier of the bedroom. If the window were to be
    openable and not obscure glazed, it would result in a loss of privacy for and have
    an overbearing impact on the occupiers of No 40. I therefore consider these to be
    overriding considerations. To allow the appeal would be contrary to the aims of LP
    Policy EN4, the Framework and the DC as they seek, amongst other things, to
    protect residential living conditions.
Conclusions
16. For the reasons set out above, the proposal would conflict with the development
    plan as a whole and there are no material considerations, including the Framework,
    that would outweigh the conflict. Therefore, the appeal should be dismissed.



Philip Willmer
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
