Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 September 2026
by R Hall BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 11 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010310
2 West Edge Cottage, West Edge, Marsh Gibbon, Buckinghamshire OX27 0HA
•    The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
     1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•    The appeal is made by Mr David Sykes against the decision of Buckinghamshire Council.
•    The application reference is PL/25/5588/HB.
•    The works proposed are described as ‘proposed glazed link extension between main house and
     outbuilding. New window to kitchen (west elevations). New French doors (south elevation).
     Associated alterations.’

Decision
1.    The appeal is allowed and listed building consent is granted for proposed glazed
      link extension between main house and outbuilding, new window to kitchen (west
      elevations), new French doors (south elevation), and associated alterations, at 2
      West Edge Cottage, West Edge, Marsh Gibbon, Buckinghamshire OX27 0HA in
      accordance with the terms of the application reference PL/25/5588/HB, subject to
      the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.    As the proposal is in a conservation area and relates to a listed building I have had
      special regard to sections 16(2) and 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
      Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (as amended) (the Act).
3.    The Council did not identify any harm in respect of the effect of the proposal on the
      character or appearance of the Marsh Gibbon Conservation Area. Given the
      modest scale of the proposal and its lack of prominence from the public realm, I
      see no reason to conclude otherwise and find that the character and appearance
      of the Conservation Area would be preserved.
4.    The Government revised the National Planning Policy Framework on 17 August
      2026 (the Framework), after this appeal was submitted. This took effect from the
      day of publication. I have consulted the main parties on the updated Framework
      and I am satisfied that no prejudice would arise from these changes.
Main Issue
5.    The main issue is whether the proposal would preserve a Grade II listed building
      known as “West Edge” (Ref: 1288459) (the LB), or any of the features of special
      architectural or historic interest that it possesses.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010310


Reasons
6.    The appeal building comprises one part of the LB which has been divided into two
      dwellings. The LB dates from the 17th to 18th centuries, comprising a two storey,
      timber framed building of coursed rubble stone with timber lintels and an old tile
      roof. It is described in the listing as L-plan, albeit the two storey element of the
      house has a T shape and has 20th century extensions. Given the above, I find that
      the special interest of the LB, insofar as it relates to this appeal, to be primarily
      derived from its illustration of a 17th to 18th century cottage in a vernacular style.
      Important contributions are its surviving historic fabric and the legibility of its
      historic plan form.
7.    The proposal is for a link building that would join a 20th century side extension with
      a 20th century detached garage. The garage is to be used as additional living
      space in light of certificate of lawfulness for that use. The link would comprise a
      natural stone wall on one side, with aluminium powder coated, double glazed, full
      height windows and doors to the other side, with a leaded flat roof. Accordingly,
      the proposal would link only the 20th century extensions, avoiding any loss of
      historic fabric. In addition, the proposal would have a very modest footprint and
      scale, adding a linking passage between those two buildings rather than additional
      living space in its own right.
8.    Moreover, rather than it appearing as an enclosed internal corridor the use of
      glazing along its proposed garden elevations would appear lightweight and would
      create intervisibility between the link and the rear garden. As such, the
      accommodation within the garage would remain distinct from that of the main
      house. Furthermore, the footprint of the historic rooms within the main house, with
      their characteristic exposed timber framing, would be unaltered by the appeal
      scheme. Consequently, the proposal would not materially harm the legibility of the
      LB’s historic plan form.
9.    In addition, the proposal would be confined to the back rear corner of the main
      house, leaving space between the proposed link and the historic two storey
      element of the LB. Given the modest scale of the proposal, and the degree of
      separation of the proposed built form with the historic element of the building, I find
      that it would not visually compete with views of the historic elements of the LB. The
      proposed alterations to include French doors and new kitchen window on the 20 th
      century kitchen extension would also not appear out of place on that part of the
      building and a such would not distract from views of the building’s historic façades.
      From the front (side) of the appeal building, a short stretch of natural stone wall
      would be visible, linking the 20th century side extension with the garage. This
      would be modest in height, giving it the appearance of a boundary wall. In addition,
      it would have a discreet, flat leaded roof. As such, it would not detract from the
      ability to appreciate the historic form and fabric of the two storey LB in views from
      this side.
10. Accordingly, I find that the proposal would not harm the special interest of the LB.
    This would therefore satisfy the requirements of the Act and the Framework.
    Insofar as it is relevant, it would also comply with Policy BE1 of the Vale of
    Aylesbury Local Plan (September 2021), which generally seeks to protect heritage
    assets.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010310


Conditions
11. I have considered the wording and suggested conditions put forward by the
    Council. In addition to the standard time-limit condition, a condition requiring that
    the works be carried out in accordance with the approved plans is necessary to
    ensure that it is implemented as approved. Conditions requiring further details of
    stonework and stone coping, and the replacement and new windows, doors and
    external glazing, are required to ensure the works preserve the special interest of
    the listed building.
Conclusion
12. Given the above and considering all other matters raised, the appeal should be
    allowed.

R Hall
INSPECTOR
                                           Schedule of Conditions
     1)       The works hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the date
              of this decision.
     2)       The works hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
              following approved plans: Location Plan; S4; SYKES/S4/P/01;
              SYKES/S4/P/04; and SYKES/S4/P/05.
     3)       No works above slab level shall take place until a sample panel of the natural
              stonework and the stone coping to be used in the construction of the external
              surfaces of the extension shall have been prepared on site for inspection and
              approved in writing by the local planning authority. The sample panel shall be
              at least 1.5 metres x 1.5 metres and shall be accompanied by details of the
              source/supplier. The works shall thereafter be constructed in accordance with
              the approved sample, which shall not be removed from site until completion
              of the works.
     4)       Prior to the replacement or alteration of existing windows or doors hereby
              approved, details of their design (including profile, cills, head and reveals,
              materials, finish and colour) shall have been submitted to and approved in
              writing by the local planning authority. The details shall include a 1:20 scale
              elevation drawing of each window or door type showing the glazing pattern,
              and a 1:5 scale vertical and horizontal cross section drawing showing the
              dimensions of the glazing, the profile and dimensions of the glazing bars, and
              details of any other mouldings. The windows and doors shall be installed in
              accordance with those approved details.
     5)       Notwithstanding the details shown on approved drawing number
              SYKES/S4/P/05, prior to works proceeding above slab level for the extension
              hereby approved, detailed drawings to include elevations to a scale of 1:20
              and cross-sections to a scale of 1:5 or 1:2, for all the glazing to the extension,
              shall have been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
              authority. The works shall thereafter be carried out in accordance with the
              approved details.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
