Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 17 August 2026
by P Terceiro BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010645
60 Market Street, Harlow, Essex CM17 0AQ
•      The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
       1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•      The appeal is made by Mr Mark Stower against the decision of Harlow District Council.
•      The application Ref is HW/LBC/26/00066.
•      The works proposed are single storey rear and side extension.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       As the proposal is in a conservation area and relates to a listed building, I have
         had special regard to sections 16(2) and 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings
         and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act).
3.       The revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published
         on 17 August 2026, and I have had regard to this in my decision. The main parties
         were invited to provide comments on the revised Framework and the comments
         received have been taken into account in my determination of the appeal.
Main Issue
4.       The main issue is the effect of the proposed works on the special interest of the
         Grade II listed building, Nunns (also known as 60 Market Street) and the extent to
         which it would preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the Old Harlow
         Conservation Area.
Reasons
5.       The appeal property is a Grade II listed building1 constructed circa 1700. It is
         externally finished in red brick laid in Flemish bond to the ground floor and brown
         hanging tiles to the first floor. The dwelling is two storeys under a hipped roof, and
         it has an external brick chimney stack on its rear elevation which appears to be an
         accurate reconstruction of an earlier historic stack. There is a single storey building
         used as a store, which is connected to the dwelling’s rear elevation by its pitched
         roof over a covered access. The evidence indicates that, although reconstructed, it
         uses historic fabric and lies in a similar position to the structure that it replaced.




1
    List Entry Number: 1111683

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010645


6.     Having regard to the above, the special interest and significance of the listed
       building derive, in part, from its historic fabric, architectural form, and prominent
       external and lateral chimney stack.
7.     The site lies within the Old Harlow Conservation Area (CA). The CA derives its
       significance, in part, from its late medieval market town character and street
       pattern present on Market Street, Fore Street and the High Street, which
       evidences the organic growth of the village. Market Street, where the site lies
       within, has a village character with a tight-knit, historic layout.
8.     The appeal building, as an end-of-terrace property, occupies a prominent position
       within the street scene. Public views towards the dwelling’s rear elevation,
       including to the chimney and store building, can be gained from Broadway
       Avenue, while its front elevation is prominent in views within Market Street. Nunns
       retains a stylistic and fabric evidence important to the significance of the CA.
9.     The appeal proposal seeks to construct a single storey side and rear extension.
       Even though it would only be single storey, the width of the extension, in
       combination with its depth, would result in a significant addition that would
       overwhelm the proportions of the listed building. Moreover, the proposal would
       cover over the base of the chimney stack, where it is at its widest and most
       interesting. Whereas the chimney stack was re-constructed, the evidence before
       me suggests that its reconstruction is not only significant visually, but also in terms
       of the building’s plan form and it aids an understanding of how the building
       functioned historically. The extension would therefore harm the ability to
       appreciate the chimney, which in turn would be harmful to the significance of the
       listed building. The use of suitable materials would not overcome this harm.
10. Moreover, the application form and plans indicate that the existing store would be
    demolished to accommodate the proposal. This would result in the loss of a
    sympathetic element which, although reconstructed, uses historic fabric and
    reflects the form of the outbuilding it replaced, despite its smaller size.
11. Thus, the proposal would represent an incongruous addition which would conflict
    with the architectural form and significance of the host building. Given the positive
    contribution that Nunns makes to the historic and architectural significance of the
    CA, the proposal would also harm the character of the CA.
12. Policy HE6(1) of the Framework advises that, when considering the potential effect
    of a development proposal on the significance of a designated heritage asset,
    substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation. Policy HE4(2)
    states that any harm to the significance of a designated asset, including from
    development within its setting, should have a clear and convincing justification.
13. Given the scope of works, the proposal would result in moderate harm to the
    significance of the Grade II listed building and moderate harm to the CA. Any harm
    to a designated heritage asset will be a matter of considerable importance and
    weight. Where a development proposal would harm the significance of a
    designated heritage asset, Policy HE6(4) informs us that the effect on the asset
    and its significance should be weighed against any public benefits resulting from
    the proposal.
14. The proposal would improve the dwelling’s floorspace and would provide a ground
    floor home office to support the appellant’s business, enlarged kitchen and utility

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010645


       room. However, there is nothing before me to suggest that this could not be
       achieved in another, less harmful manner. There would be some economic
       benefits brought about through the construction phase. These public benefits
       attract modest weight and fall short of overcoming the substantial weight I give to
       the harm that would arise to the designated heritage assets.
15. Consequently, the proposed works would have a harmful effect on the special
    interest of the Grade II listed building, Nunns, and would fail to preserve the
    character or appearance of the Old Harlow CA, thus failing to satisfy the
    requirements of the Act, the Framework and would conflict with Policies PL1, PL12
    and WE5 of the Harlow Local Development Plan 2020. Amongst other things,
    these policies support a high standard architectural design for all development and
    seek to conserve or enhance the heritage assets and their settings found within
    the district.
Other Matters
16. The Council’s decision notice expressed concern in relation to the associated
    internal works. However, the officer’s report did not expand upon this, and
    therefore the reasons for the Council’s concerns are not known. In any event, the
    proposed plans do not suggest any internal works, so I have not considered this
    matter any further.
17. Albeit this was not raised by the Council, the proposed plans and elevations are
    not fully consistent with each other. However, as the appeal is to be dismissed on
    other grounds, I have not considered this matter further.
Conclusion
18. For the reasons given above the appeal is dismissed.

P Terceiro
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
