Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 8 April 2026
by K Lancaster BA (hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 11th September 2026
Appeal A Ref: 6010150
Pavement o/s Aldi, 76-86 High Street, Feltham TW13 4DD
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Safa Rana-Jaswal of BT Communications PLC against the decision of the
     Council of the London Borough of Hounslow.
•    The application Ref is P/2026/0885.
•    The development proposed is the installation of 1no. BT Street Hub and removal of associated BT
     payphones.
Appeal B Ref: 6010152
Pavement o/s Aldi, 76-86 High Street, Feltham TW13 4DD
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Safa Rana-Jaswal of BT Communications PLC against the decision of the
     Manchester City Council.
•    The application Ref is P/2026/0780
•    The advertisement proposed is two digital 75-inch LCD display screens, one on each side of the
     Street Hub unit.

Decision
1.    Appeal A is allowed and planning permission is granted for the installation of 1no.
      BT Street Hub at Pavement o/s Aldi, 76-86 High Street, Feltham TW13 4DD in
      accordance with the terms of the application, P/2026/0885, subject to the
      conditions set out in the attached schedule.
2.    Appeal B is allowed and express consent is granted for two digital 75-inch LCD
      display screens, one on each side of the Street Hub unit at Pavement o/s Aldi, 76-
      86 High Street, Feltham TW13 4DD in accordance with the terms of the
      application, Ref P/2026/0780. The consent is for ten years from the date of this
      decision and is subject to the five standard conditions set out in Schedule 2 of the
      2007 Regulations and the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
3.    A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
      August 2026. As this could affect the issues and matters in this case, the Council
      and the appellant were invited to make further comments. My decision reflects the
      latest version of the Framework, and the responses received on it.
4.    The description of development as set out above for Appeal A includes the
      removal of existing BT kiosks in the area. However, those structures are not
      identified within the application site boundary and there is no alternative
      mechanism before me which would secure their removal. As they are not located
      within the immediate vicinity of the appeal site, their removal would not be

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6010150 and 6010152


      determinative to the appeals. I have also removed reference to their removal from
      the description of development used in my formal decision.
5.    The appeals relate to the same site and the same proposed development, namely
      a multifunctional communications hub which, amongst other things, would have an
      illuminated digital advertisement display. To avoid unnecessary repetition, both
      appeals have been dealt with in a single decision letter, but the appeals
      themselves have been considered based upon their own merits.
6.    The Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements) (England)
      Regulations 2007 (the Regulations) require that applications for the display of
      advertisements are considered in terms of amenity and public safety. Whilst the
      reason for refusal for Appeal B refers to policies contained within the London
      Borough of Hounslow Local Plan 2015-2030, adopted 2015 (the HLP), they are
      material considerations rather than being decisive in the determination of this
      appeal. The Council has not raised any objections on the grounds of amenity, and
      I see no reason to reach a different conclusion.
Main Issues
7.    The main issue for Appeal A is the effect of the proposed development on highway
      safety, with particular regard to pedestrian movement and safety.
8.    For Appeal B, the main issue is the effect of the proposed advertisement on public
      safety.
Reasons
9.    The appeal site comprises an area of pavement outside 80-86 High Street, which
      is currently a supermarket (Aldi). The site is within the Feltham Town Centre and
      fronts a designated secondary shopping frontage. The surrounding area is a mix of
      commercial uses and residential flats. As a result, the area experiences a high
      level of pedestrian activity. The existing pavement on this part of the High Street
      measures approximately 5.4 metres wide.
10. The proposed hub would measure 1.2 metres wide and be set back from the
    pavement edge by approximately 1 metre. As a consequence, the proposal would
    reduce the width of the pavement to approximately 2.9 metres. The Council has
    raised concerns regarding the reduction in pavement size, the proximity of cycle
    storage and a pedestrian crossing leading to high levels of pedestrian footfall and
    activity. They state that the reduction of the pavement to approximately 2.9 metres
    is not supported.
11. However, I have not been directed to any specific adopted standards for pavement
    width. The appellant has drawn my attention to National Guidance on Inclusive
    Mobility – A Guide to Best Practice on Access to Pedestrian and Transport
    Infrastructure, published December 2021, which states that footpaths would be
    made as wide as practicable, but under normal circumstances a width of 2000mm
    is the minimum that should be provided, as this allows enough space for two
    wheelchair users to pass. On this basis, the unobstructed pavement width of
    approximately 2.9 metres would comply with these guidelines.
12. During my site visit I observed that there is a variety of pavement widths along this
    section of High Street, with the appeal proposal being located within one of the
    widest sections. The entrance to the supermarket does not front onto High Street

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6010150 and 6010152


      and the nearby pedestrian crossing would not be impeded by the proposal.
      Therefore, even if there are high levels of footfall in this location, given the retained
      footpath width, the proposal would not result in an unacceptable obstruction to
      pedestrian movement.
13. Consequently, in respect of Appeal A, I conclude that the proposal would not harm
    pedestrian flow or safety. Therefore, I find no conflict with Policies EC2 and CC5 of
    the HLP, which seek, amongst other things, to ensure that development supports
    the safe and efficient operation of the transport network whilst respecting local
    character and visual amenity, and that advertisements and associated structures
    are appropriately designed and located so as not to harm the street scene,
    heritage significance or public safety.
14. In relation to Appeal B, I conclude that the proposal would not harm public safety.
    In accordance with the relevant Regulations, I have considered the provisions of
    the development plan to the extent that they are applicable. The aforementioned
    policies are therefore material considerations in this context.
Other Matters
15. Whilst the site is located outside the Feltham Town Centre Conservation Area (the
    CA), it lies immediately adjacent to it. The Council’s Principal Conservation Officer
    raised no objection to the proposal and based on the evidence before me and my
    own observations, I see no reason to reach a different conclusion. Therefore, I find
    that the proposal would preserve the setting of the CA and would neither harm its
    significance nor undermine its special architectural or historic interest.
Conditions
16. For Appeal A, I have considered the imposition of conditions in light of advice in
    Planning Policy Guidance and the Framework. In addition to the standard
    implementation condition, the approved plans are listed for certainty. A further
    condition is necessary to secure the removal of the unit as soon as reasonably
    practicable after it is no longer required. This condition is required in the interests of
    the character and appearance of the area.
17. In respect of Appeal B, all advertisements granted express consent are subject to
    the five standard conditions set out in the Regulations. In addition to these, I have
    imposed conditions to control the maximum luminance, to ensure that only static
    images are displayed, to set a minimum display time of 30 seconds, and also to
    ensure that the interval between successive image displays is instantaneous and
    prohibits message sequencing of advertisements. These additional conditions are
    necessary in the interests of amenity and public safety.
18. Under Regulation 14(7), express consent is granted for a period of five years
    unless otherwise specified. The appellant has sought a 10-year period. As there is
    no substantive evidence before me that the display would be unacceptable at the
    end of the shorter period, I have granted consent for the 10-year period in my
    formal decision.
Conclusion
19. For the reasons given, in respect of Appeal A I conclude that the proposed
    development would accord with the development plan taken as a whole and that


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     3
Appeal Decisions 6010150 and 6010152


      there are no material considerations of sufficient weight to indicate that a decision
      should be taken otherwise in accordance with it. Therefore, Appeal A is allowed.
20. In respect of Appeal B, the proposed advertisement would not be harmful to
    amenity or public safety. Therefore, for the reasons given, the appeal is allowed.

K Lancaster
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    4
Appeal Decisions 6010150 and 6010152


Appeal A – Schedule of Conditions
     1)      The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
             date of this decision.
     2)      The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
             the following approved plans:
                 •   Drawing Number - 002(A) – Proposed Site Plan
                 •   Drawing Number - 003(A) – Existing and Proposed Elevations
                 •   Street Hubs Product Statement (Ver 2.1)
                 •   Street Hub Anti-Social Behaviour Management Plan (Ver 3)
     3)      The structure hereby permitted shall be removed from the land on which it is
             situated as soon as reasonably practicable after it is no longer required, and
             the site shall be left in a condition that does not endanger the public or impair
             visual amenity.

Appeal B – Schedule of Conditions

     1)      Between sunset and sunrise, the advertisement shall not exceed a maximum
             luminance of 300 cd/m², or such alternative maximum luminance level as
             may be recommended in any guidance superseding the Institution of Lighting
             Professionals (ILP) PLG05 Guidance on the Reduction of Obtrusive Light.

     2)      Between sunrise and sunset, the advertisement shall either remain
             unilluminated or shall not exceed the maximum luminance levels
             recommended in the ILP PLG05 Guidance on the Reduction of Obtrusive
             Light, or any superseding guidance.

     3)      The advertisement shall be fitted with an automatic light intensity monitoring
             sensor and dimming control system to ensure that the luminance of the
             display responds to ambient light conditions and remains within the maximum
             luminance limits specified in this permission.

     4)      The advertisement shall display only static images and shall not display any
             moving, animated, scrolling, flashing or intermittently illuminated content.

     5)      The interval between successive displays shall be instantaneous (0.1
             seconds or less), the complete screen shall change, there shall be no visual
             effects (including fading, swiping or other animated transition methods,
             flashing, scrolling, three dimensional, intermittent or video elements, noise,
             smell, smoke, animation, exposed cold cathode tubing) between successive
             displays and the display shall include a mechanism to freeze the image in the
             event of a malfunction.

     6)      The advertisement displayed shall also not change more frequently than
             once every 30 seconds, the use of message sequencing for the same
             product is prohibited and the advertisements shall not include
             features/equipment which would allow interactive messages/advertisements
             to be displayed.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      5
