Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 19 August 2026
by Lewis Condé BSc, MSc, MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010848
Land off Cheddington Road, Pitstone, Easting (x) 493294, Northing (y) 216008
    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Grinstead against the decision of Buckinghamshire Council.
    The application Ref is PL/25/4416/FA.
    The development proposed is the erection of new dwelling and detached double garage.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
      17 August 2026. Main parties have been provided with an appropriate opportunity
      to comment on its implications, and where received comments have been
      considered in my determination of the appeal.
3.    The site visit was undertaken on an unaccompanied basis. From the evidence
      before me, including from interested parties, I am satisfied that I was able to
      observe everything necessary from the unaccompanied site visit to reach a fair
      and just decision.
Main Issues
4.    The main issues are: i) the effect of the proposal on the integrity of the Chilterns
      Beechwoods Special Area of Conservation; and ii) whether the appeal site is an
      appropriate location for the proposed development, having regard to the local
      development strategy.
Reasons
5.    The appeal site lies within the recreational Zone of Influence (ZOI) for the Chilterns
      Beechwoods Special Area of Conservation (SAC), which comprises nine
      component sites across the Chilterns. The relevant component is Ashridge
      Commons and Woods Site of Special Scientific Interest. The SAC is internationally
      designated for its beech forests, semi-natural dry grassland and scrubland
      habitats, and population of stag beetles.
6.    The conservation objectives for the SAC are to ensure that its integrity is
      maintained or restored, as appropriate, and that it contributes to achieving
      favourable conservation status for its qualifying features.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010848


7.       The evidence indicates that additional residential development within the ZOI can
         increase recreational pressure on the SAC through increased visitor activity,
         leading to impacts including vegetation wear, soil compaction and erosion.
         Although the effects of an individual dwelling may be limited, housing growth within
         the ZOI has the potential to cause significant cumulative effects.
8.       The proposal would introduce one additional dwelling within the ZOI, whose
         occupiers could reasonably be expected to visit the SAC for recreation. On the
         basis of objective information, I cannot exclude the possibility of a likely significant
         effect on the SAC, in combination with other plans and projects.
9.       It is therefore necessary, as competent authority, to undertake an appropriate
         assessment of the proposal’s implications for the SAC in view of its conservation
         objectives.
10. The Habitats Regulations permit planning permission to be granted only where the
    competent authority has ascertained that the proposal would not adversely affect
    the integrity of the habitat site. As the competent authority, I may take account of
    any conditions or other restrictions which could secure mitigation and so provide
    certainty that the proposal would not adversely affect the integrity of the site.
11. Natural England has advised that the effects of qualifying development within the
    ZOI can be sufficiently mitigated through measures set out in the ‘Chilterns
    Beechwoods Special Area of Conservation Recreational Pressure Mitigation
    Strategy for Ashridge Commons and Woods Site of Special Scientific Interest’ (the
    Mitigation Strategy). The Mitigation Strategy for the SAC seeks to address such
    effects through a combination of Strategic Access Management and Monitoring
    and Suitable Alternative Natural Greenspace measures, secured where necessary
    by a planning obligation or other legally effective mechanism. These measures are
    intended to avoid or reduce the additional recreational pressure arising from new
    residential development within the ZOI.
12. The appellants have expressed a willingness to make the required contribution.
    However, no executed planning obligation or other legally effective mechanism is
    before me. The relevant appeal guidance1 advises that, where an appellant
    intends to rely on a planning obligation in a written-representations appeal, an
    executed and certified copy should be submitted with the appeal. As no
    appropriate legal agreement is before me, I have no certainty that the necessary
    mitigation would be delivered. The appropriate assessment has therefore been
    undertaken in the absence of secured mitigation.
13. In the absence of a completed planning obligation, I am unable to ascertain that
    the proposal would not adversely affect the integrity of the SAC, either alone or in
    combination with other plans or projects.
14. As I am unable to ascertain that the proposal would not adversely affect the
    integrity of the SAC, permission could be granted only if the applicable derogation
    tests were satisfied. There is no evidence before me to demonstrate either an
    absence of alternative solutions or imperative reasons of overriding public interest.
    In any event, the provision of a single dwelling would not amount to such an
    overriding public interest. The Habitats Regulations indicate that permission must
    therefore not be granted.

1
    Procedural Guide: Planning appeals – England. For appeals relating to applications dated on or before 31 March 2026


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  2
Appeal Decision 6010848


15. Bringing these matters together, I am unable to ascertain that the proposal would
    not adversely affect the integrity of the Chilterns Beechwoods Special Area of
    Conservation, either alone or in combination with other plans or projects. The
    proposal would therefore conflict with Policy NE1 of the Vale of Aylesbury Local
    Plan 2013–2033 (adopted 2021), insofar as it seeks to protect internationally
    designated sites, and would not satisfy the requirements of the Habitats
    Regulations.
       Location
16. The appeal site forms part of a grassland field at the edge of the village of
    Pitstone. Together Local Plan Policies S2 and S3 establish the Council’s spatial
    strategy for growth across Aylesbury Vale, including identifying a settlement
    hierarchy. Development is predominantly directed towards sustainable locations,
    including main towns, allocated sites and larger villages. Policy S3 also seeks to
    restrict development in the countryside unless it accords with other specific
    development plan policies.
17. Pitstone is identified as a larger village within the settlement hierarchy and is
    recognised as a relatively sustainable location with access to services, facilities
    and public transport. However, despite adjoining residential development, the
    appeal site lies outside the settlement boundary defined by Policy 1 of the Pitstone
    Neighbourhood Plan (Made 2016) (the Neighbourhood Plan). It is therefore
    located within the countryside for planning policy purposes.
18. Policy D3 of the Local Plan supports small-scale development and infilling in larger
    villages where its specified criteria are met. Although the proposal would not harm
    the character and appearance of the area, the appeal site lies outside the defined
    settlement boundary and has not been demonstrated to satisfy the policy’s design
    requirements. Similarly, Neighbourhood Plan Policy 1 restricts development
    outside the settlement boundary unless one of its stated exceptions applies. While
    the proposed dwelling may achieve high standards of energy efficiency, it has not
    been shown to be of exceptional or innovative design, and compliance with any
    other exception has not been demonstrated.
19. Consequently, I find that the proposal conflicts with Local Plan Policies S2, S3 and
    D3, as well as Policy 1 of the Neighbourhood Plan.
20. Nevertheless, the appeal site is well related to the existing village. It lies within
    reasonable walking or cycling distance of a range of facilities and services,
    including a health centre, convenience store, playing fields and a school. The
    surrounding area also benefits from extensive footway provision, street lighting
    and relatively gentle topography, making active travel a realistic option for future
    occupiers. In addition, nearby bus services provide regular access to larger
    centres and local schools.
21. Given the site’s relationship with the existing settlement, the availability of local
    facilities and the opportunities for walking, cycling and public transport, the
    proposal would be in a reasonably sustainable location for transport purposes. It
    would therefore accord with Policy T1 of the Local Plan as well as Policy TR3 of
    the Framework.
22. Drawing these matters together, the appeal site is not an appropriate location for
    residential development having regard to the local development strategy and the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010848


         conflict with Local Plan Policies S2, S3 and D3 and Policy 1 of the Neighbourhood
         Plan. Nevertheless, the site is reasonably accessible and sustainable for transport
         purposes, and there is no conflict with Local Plan Policy T1. Its accessibility
         therefore weighs in favour of the proposal.
23. The Council’s decision notice also refers to Local Plan Policy S1, which requires
    development to comply with the principles of sustainable development set out in
    the Framework. I consider that policy in the overall planning balance.
Other Matters
24. Orchard Farm adjoins the appeal site and includes three Grade II listed buildings:
    a seventeenth-century farmhouse and two timber-framed barns. Their significance
    derives mainly from their age, architectural and historic interest, and their group
    value as part of a former farmstead at the edge of the settlement.
25. The appeal site has not been demonstrated to have any direct historic
    associations with the farmstead. Although it may once have formed part of the
    farmstead’s wider rural setting, mature boundary trees now provide substantial
    visual and physical separation. As a result, the site is experienced as a distinctly
    separate parcel of land, while the wider setting of Orchard Farm already includes
    residential development of varied age and character.
26. For these reasons, although the appeal site may historically have formed part of
    the farmstead’s wider rural surroundings, its present character, separation by
    mature vegetation and relationship with surrounding development mean that it
    makes no appreciable contribution to the significance of the listed buildings
    through their setting.
27. Having had special regard to the desirability of preserving listed buildings and their
    settings, the proposal would not diminish the ability to appreciate their significance.
    This accords with previous appeal findings2 for the site, and no substantive
    evidence justifies a different conclusion.
28. I therefore find that the proposal would preserve the setting of the Grade II listed
    buildings at Orchard Farm and would not harm their significance.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
29. In the absence of an appropriate mechanism securing the proposal as a self-build
    dwelling3, I attach no additional weight to its suggested self-build status.
    Nonetheless, the appeal scheme would provide socio-economic benefits
    associated with the construction and occupation of a dwelling in a broadly
    sustainable location and in an area with an undersupply of housing.
30. Compliance with development plan policies in respect of matters such as highway
    safety, the living conditions of neighbours and the character and appearance of the
    area are neutral matters in the planning balance.
31. The proposal conflicts with the development plan because of its inconsistency with
    the spatial strategy and the policies protecting habitat sites. However, I attach
    limited weight to the conflict with Local Plan Policies S2, S3 and D3 and Policy 1 of
    the Neighbourhood Plan. This is because the Council’s spatial strategy has not
2
    Appeal Reference: APP/J0405/W/21/3276552
3
    As per the Self-build and Custom Housebuilding Act 2015 (as amended by the Housing and Planning Act 2016)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                4
Appeal Decision 6010848


       delivered a sufficient supply of housing, the site is well related to Pitstone, and the
       policies do not fully reflect the support in current national policy for meeting
       identified housing needs in locations physically well related to existing settlements.
       By contrast, Local Plan Policy NE1 is consistent with the Framework in respect of
       protecting internationally designated habitat sites and the requirements of the
       Habitats Regulations. Accordingly, I attach significant weight to that conflict.
32. The Council cannot demonstrate a five-year housing land supply. The evidence
    before me indicates a supply of approximately 3.73 years, which represents a
    significant shortfall.
33. In line with Framework Policy HO7, I give substantial weight to the benefits of
    providing a home that will contribute towards meeting evidenced accommodation
    needs of the community. There are also likely to be some socio-economic benefits
    associated with its construction and subsequent occupation. The appeal site is
    also physically well related to an existing settlement, whilst existing infrastructure
    is also likely to be able to accommodate the scale of development proposed. As
    such, the appeal scheme also draws support from Policy S5(j)(i) of the Framework.
    Meanwhile, Policy S6 of the Framework does not weigh against the proposal due
    to the age of the Neighbourhood Plan.
34. Policy N6 of the Framework establishes that proposals affecting habitat sites
    should be refused unless an appropriate assessment concludes that the proposal
    would not adversely affect the integrity of the site. For the reasons given above,
    the appropriate assessment does not support that conclusion. The proposal
    therefore conflicts with Policy N6.
35. The requirements of the Habitats Regulations are determinative. As I cannot
    ascertain that the proposal would not adversely affect the integrity of the SAC, and
    as the derogation tests have not been met, permission must not be granted.
    Notwithstanding the substantial weight attributable to the provision of an additional
    dwelling and the other benefits identified, the Framework’s presumption in favour
    of sustainable development does not apply. The proposal would also conflict with
    Local Plan Policy S1.
36. The proposal conflicts with the development plan read as a whole. There are no
    material considerations, including the provisions of the Framework, that indicate a
    decision other than in accordance with it. The appeal is therefore dismissed.


Lewis Condé
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
