Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by G Bayliss BA (Hons) MA MA MRTPI IHBC
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010934
Land off Pickworth Road, Great Casterton, Rutland
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Mr A Woodhouse against the decision of Rutland County Council.
•      The application Ref is 2025/0400/FUL.
•      The development proposed is a Paragraph 84 dwelling, including a solar array and hard/soft
       landscaping.

Decision
1.      The appeal is dismissed.
Application for costs
2.      An application for an award of costs was made by Mr A Woodhouse against
        Rutland County Council. This application is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.      During the determination of the application the appellant sought to amend the
        scheme from an open market dwelling to a self-build dwelling. In this regard, the
        appellant submitted to the Council a self-build document and draft Unilateral
        Undertaking. The Council acknowledges that this matter was overlooked and
        accepts that the proposal is for a self-build dwelling. Consequently, the Council
        comments that in relation to Reason for Refusal No.4, reference should not have
        been made to biodiversity net gain (BNG). However, in relation to this refusal
        reason, the Council maintains its objection on ecological grounds. In view of the
        above, I have regarded the appeal proposal as a self-build dwelling and have
        omitted reference to BNG in the main issues.
4.      The appeal is accompanied by a vehicle tracking plan1 relating to Reason for
        Refusal No.3, which does not appear to have been part of the plans when the
        Council made its decision. This shows arrangements for delivery vehicles. The
        appeal is also accompanied by an Archaeological Evaluation Report (Allen
        Archaeology July 2025) relating to Reason for Refusal No.5. To my mind these do
        not fundamentally change the proposed development. I am content that no parties
        would be unfairly disadvantaged by my acceptance of these additional details.
5.      A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
        the 17th of August 2026. Both parties were given an opportunity to make
        comments as to whether or not the changes to the Framework had any

1
    Ref. JDA/2024/620/DELIVERY/001

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010934


       implications for this appeal. The revisions to the Framework and the comments
       made have been taken into account in this decision. Notably, in the revised
       Framework, the wording of Paragraph 84 has been transferred and modified to
       become National Decision-Making Policy HO11. Although I have retained the
       earlier Framework reference in the banner heading above, I have used the new
       policy reference in my decision.
Main Issues
6.     The main issues are:
       •        Whether or not the design is of exceptional quality so as to accord with
                national policy approach to the presumption against new homes in this
                location;
       •        The effect of the proposed access on highway safety;
       •        The effect of the proposal on ecology; and
       •        The effect of the proposal on archaeology, a non-designated heritage asset.
Reasons
Location
Policy context
7.     It is common ground between the main parties that the proposal is in the open
       countryside and does not meet with the local housing strategy requirements in the
       development plan, as outlined in Policy CS4 of the Core Strategy (2011) (CS),
       Policy SP6 of the Site Allocations and Policies Development Plan Document
       (2014) (DPD) and the Interim Position Statement for Housing Development.
       Therefore, the proposal would be in conflict with the development plan when taken
       as a whole. In such circumstances, the decision maker should refuse planning
       permission, unless material considerations indicate otherwise. The Framework is
       an important material consideration.
8.     Policy S5 of the Framework relates to development outside settlements and
       makes provision for certain forms of development to be approved. Part 3 relates to
       the development of isolated homes which should be determined in accordance
       with Framework Policy HO11. Accordingly, the appellant proposes the scheme on
       the basis of complying with Policy HO11, part (e), of the Framework. This permits
       isolated homes in the countryside where ‘the design is of exceptional quality, in
       that it: i) Is truly outstanding, reflecting the highest standards in architecture, and
       would help to raise standards of design more generally in rural areas; and ii)
       Would significantly enhance its immediate setting, and be sensitive to the defining
       characteristics of the local area.’
9.     Relevant also to this decision is Framework Policy DP3: Achieving Well Designed
       Places. Part 5 of this policy, advises that ‘substantial weight should be given to
       outstanding or innovative designs which promote high levels of sustainability, or
       which help raise the standard of design more generally in an area, so long as they
       are consistent with the overall form and layout of their surroundings.’ The Council
       also cites Policies CS19 and DPD SP15 which, amongst other things require
       development to meet high standards of design that make a positive contribution to


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010934


       the unique character of the area and reinforce the distinctiveness of the wider
       setting. The provisions of Framework Policies HO11(e) and DP3 are therefore
       material considerations in this appeal, as well as Policies CS19 and DPD SP15.
       The site and the proposal
10. The appeal site is a roughly triangular field lying alongside Pickworth Road, just to
    the north of the rural settlement of Great Casterton. To the south of Great
    Casterton is the much larger settlement of Stamford and the A1 trunk road lies a
    few fields to the west. There appears to be no dispute between the parties that the
    proposal would be an isolated dwelling in the countryside. Having seen the site
    and considered the evidence, I see little reason to conclude differently.
11. The appeal site is mainly enclosed by hedgerows, some incorporating dry-stone
    walling, apart from the eastern boundary which has a chain link fence and
    regularly spaced trees. It is part of a wider, gently undulating agricultural
    landscape characterised by mainly open arable fields with hedges.
12. The body of the site is largely grassland with a gated access towards its northern
    point. There are a few fruit trees in the southern corner adjoining the roadside and
    a storage area in the other corner which is surrounded by a planted bund. The site
    is largely flat but slopes gently in a southerly direction with a constructed earth
    bund at the lower side, in front of the hedgerow.
13. The proposed dwelling would be sited roughly centrally within the appeal site and
    would be an earth-sheltered dwelling arranged in an approximate U-shape with the
    front and rear elevations being partially visible and it would have a green roof. The
    building would be set within a constructed earth mound with tapering banks
    wrapping around both sides of the building leaving a level, open space to the front
    and rear. The main axis of the building would provide a living room and
    kitchen/utility with large, glazed doors opening out onto a courtyard, and additional
    glazed doors to the rear connecting with the access drive. Views from the dwelling
    would be mainly directed along the length of the plot. The bedrooms in the front
    limbs of the building would be single aspect facing into the courtyard.
14. The scheme is described by the appellant as being landscape-led to enable the
    dwelling and its surroundings to assimilate with its setting. New trees and a
    hedgerow would be planted along the eastern boundary, with a pond near to the
    front of the dwelling. The appellant comments that the focus of the landscaping
    across the site would be to allow the site to naturally ‘re-wild’.
15. The appellant comments that the scheme would be a high quality, innovative,
    single-storey, dual-aspect, earth sheltered dwelling. The front and rear elevations
    would be set within locally quarried limestone rubble walls whilst the body of the
    building would be a high thermal mass construction. It is mentioned that it would
    be a near-autonomous, post-hydrocarbon dwelling and would include features
    such as a solar array and ground source heat pump providing all on-site
    generation, triple glazed fenestration, potable water from a borehole and an
    electricity free sewage treatment plant.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010934


       Whether design of exceptional quality: Truly outstanding, reflecting the highest
       standards in architecture, and would help to raise standards of design more
       generally in rural areas
16. To be truly outstanding, this means that it should clearly be very much better than
    what is usual. A key part of the appellant’s submission is that the proposal would,
    in the appellant’s words, ‘intentionally replicate the exact parameters’ of a dwelling
    allowed at appeal in 2022 under a similar Framework provision relating to
    outstanding or innovative designs2 (Field House). The appellant comments that,
    based on this relatively local example, reproduced details would include the
    design, engineering, environmental autonomy and technical elements.
17. I have been provided with some details of Field House, including the appeal
    decision3, a photograph of it under construction and a comparison statement. It
    appears to be a similar structure, but it seems to be only partially earth-sheltered,
    with a wider stone frontage and flanking stone gabion baskets remaining visible in
    the landscape. In that appeal decision, the Inspector concluded that the earth
    sheltered typology possessed a distinct architectural character capable of
    positively raising the standard of design. The Inspector also described it as a ‘state
    of the art’ dwelling carefully and sensitively designed to the most exacting
    environmental standards.
18. I have no doubt that the appeal proposal before me takes its lead from Field
    House and that there are many shared features. However, I would question
    whether effectively transplanting an older scheme designed and built in another
    location means that it would remain a truly outstanding design if reproduced
    elsewhere. If that were to be the case, then this typology could be replicated on
    many other sites. To my mind this was not the intention of this provision within the
    earlier or current iterations of the Framework. Whilst there is a need for
    consistency in decision-making, it is not merely a case of rolling out a similar
    scheme onto another site and I understand the policy requirement to mean ‘one of
    a kind’ dwellings which reach the highest standards of architecture.
19. Whilst this appeal scheme may have been inspired by Field House, and has some
    design merit, there is little to suggest that it has been consciously re-designed or
    re-conceived with this site in mind. Other than providing more earth mounding
    around the building, minor design changes and a different landscaping scheme it
    appears essentially the same. Furthermore, there is an insufficient explanation of
    the proposal’s design journey from the Field House concept, including the choice
    of site, its siting and design evolution.
20. Looking at all the submitted documents and having seen the site, it is unclear why
    this location has been selected for an architecturally outstanding dwelling and why
    concealing the building in a vegetated, artificial mound would be appropriate in its
    context. Whilst the boundary vegetation, the earth-sheltering and landscaping
    would reduce the dwelling’s visual prominence, it would nevertheless be a large
    residential plot in the countryside. It would mainly comprise an uncharacteristic,
    and largely artificial, substantial earth mound in the centre of the field to screen the
    built form. The flat top and shaping of the two halves around the building would, to
    my mind, make it appear more contrived within this open, largely featureless field. I

2
  ‘Framework Paragraph 131 Outstanding or innovative designs which promote high levels of sustainability, or help raise the
standard of design more generally in an area, so long as they fit in with the overall form and layout of their surroundings’.
3
  Appeal Ref: APP/A2470/W/21/3282349


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  4
Appeal Decision 6010934


       therefore see little about the built form that would have any real or positive
       connection with this site and its surroundings.
21. Whilst the appellant suggests that the amenity land would transition from formal
    garden to naturalistic re-wilding, this is vaguely defined, and the residential plot
    would extend across the whole field. The proposed re-wilding of the wider site is
    also not fully explained or justified in this agricultural landscape. Therefore, in the
    absence of adequate detail and taking account of the scheme as a whole,
    including the central drive, parking areas, bin stores and other domestic
    paraphernalia that would most likely arise, I consider that the whole site would
    appear in domestic use. The artificial mound in the land and the domesticity of the
    site would be incongruous and unexpected in the countryside, strongly contrasting
    with the character of the surrounding land.
22. Given that this should be a very special proposal, there are few detailed drawings
    of the elevations or finer details such as might be expected when showcasing the
    highest standards in architecture. Consequently, I see little that might be
    considered exceptional about the overall design concept. There is also a lack of
    detailed imagery and modelling to illustrate the building in its surroundings.
23. It does not appear that the scheme has been submitted to an external design
    critique such as a Design Review Panel. This would have been helpful in drawing
    on other relevant professional’s views and in the cross-fertilizing of new ideas. In
    the absence of this process, the opportunity has been lost to explain to a wider
    audience how the proposal would be sufficiently innovative or groundbreaking in
    terms of its architectural quality or to gain other professional design endorsement.
    It would also have been helpful to use such a forum to develop a discussion about
    raising the standards of design more generally in rural areas, a specific
    requirement of this policy, and a matter not adequately addressed in this
    submission.
24. The building would have important and worthwhile environmental credentials. The
    energy efficiency measures proposed and aspirations for the dwelling to be ‘off
    grid’ chimes with some of the provisions of Framework Policy DP3. However,
    whilst it might promote high degrees of sustainability in these regards, the dwelling
    would still be separated from the nearby settlement, and occupants would be
    largely reliant on vehicle movements to access services and facilities. Also,
    because of my findings on the design and failure to reflect the form, layout and
    distinctive characteristics of its rural surroundings, it would not help raise the
    standard of design more generally in the area. The proposal would therefore not
    gain support from Policy DP3. The proposal may be inspired by Field House and
    other earth sheltered dwellings in the local area but whilst there are some positive
    transferable aspects, my attention has not been drawn to any especially new,
    unique or innovative technologies. However, even if this was the case, the
    innovation of the building is only one part of a much bigger design journey to justify
    such a proposal.
25. In the Field House case, the Inspector concluded that the dwelling would have a
    striking contemporary appearance that would add a new and architecturally distinct
    element to the local landscape that would be likely to generate considerable
    interest. He considered that it would have the ‘wow’ factor and would ‘help raise
    the standard of design’ in the area. Although this appeal scheme is inspired by
    Field House, and I have noted that the appellant cites other similar earth sheltered

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010934


       dwellings but with few details, I conclude that, for the above reasons, the proposed
       design as a standalone piece of architecture falls well short of being truly
       outstanding. It would not reflect the highest standards in architecture, and there is
       insufficient evidence to suggest that it would help to raise standards of design
       more generally in rural areas. It would therefore fail the first limb of Policy
       HO11(e).
       Whether design of exceptional quality: Significantly enhance its immediate setting
       and be sensitive to the defining characteristics of the local area.
26. In terms of this part of the policy, I understand this to mean that the proposal
    should be conspicuous to a degree and would incorporate an element of physical
    and/or visual improvement in the quality, value, or extent of the area which is
    directly adjacent to the proposed dwelling.
27. The appellant’s Landscape and Visual Appraisal (LVA) comments that the
    dwelling, along with its discrete garden, would be of a form consistent with the
    character of the locality. However, I see little before me to describe fully what the
    surrounding landscape character is and how the appeal proposal has been
    designed to take this into account. With an immediately surrounding landscape
    which is mainly characterised by largely flat or slightly sloping grassed fields, it is
    unclear how a house, centrally placed within a field and then wrapped around on
    two sides by a tapering earth mound, set within a rewilding area, would be
    reflective of or sensitive to the defining characteristics of the area around it.
28. The policy requirement is for the proposal to be seen, to some extent, in its
    surrounding context. Instead, it appears that the appellant is aiming for a high
    degree of physical and visual concealment of the development within the site given
    the earth sheltering, the surrounding planting and the construction of a southern
    bund. To this end, the LVA states that there would be few views from public
    receptors and it would have no impact on longer views as the dwelling would not
    break the skyline. Therefore, given the stated limited visibility of the proposal, I am
    not satisfied that it would fulfil the policy requirement of being adequately seen in
    its context.
29. Even though the visual impact on the immediate setting is not backed up by
    adequate modelling or illustrations to demonstrate this, from the evidence and
    from what I have seen, the proposal would be unlikely to be especially prominent
    in the wider area. However, there would inevitably be some seasonal views over
    the roadside hedge and from adjoining fields and to a sufficient extent to recognise
    that it would not be reflective of the surrounding character of the landscape.
30. Even had the proposal achieved a greater degree of visibility, the policy
    requirement is to ‘significantly enhance its immediate setting’. The LVA states that
    the landscape impacts would be negligible adverse with aspirations to create a
    slight beneficial effect in time through landscape mitigation and management. The
    proposed tree planting and re-wilding may have some enhancing effects, but this
    is not adequately explained, including why this would be appropriate in the area. In
    the absence of further details, the LVA and submitted evidence demonstrates that
    the proposal falls well short of the ambition to significantly enhance the immediate
    surroundings of the dwelling. Furthermore, given the shortcomings of the siting,
    design and landscaping that I have already highlighted, the proposal would harm
    rather than significantly enhance its immediate setting and would not integrate with


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6010934


       the surrounding topography or defining characteristics of the local area. The
       proposal would therefore also fail the second limb of Policy HO11(e).
       Conclusion on location
31. Whilst the Framework allows for isolated dwellings in the countryside, under Policy
    HO11(e) the design must be of exceptional quality and fulfil explicit requirements.
    Understandably, this is a high bar and is for dwellings which demonstrably would
    be something unique and very special. In this case, the quality of the proposed
    design would not be exceptional so as to accord with the national policy approach
    to the presumption against new homes in this location. As such it would conflict
    with Policy HO11(e). I have also found conflict with Framework Policy DP3, and
    CS Policy CS19 and DPD Policy SP15, as explained above.
32. In finding conflict with Framework Policy HO11, Part 4 of Framework Policy S5
    states that the proposal should only be approved in exceptional circumstances,
    where the benefits would substantially outweigh the adverse effects, including the
    character of the countryside and in relation to promoting sustainable patterns of
    movement. This is a matter that I address later in the planning balance.
Highways
33. The Council is concerned that the width of the access would be substandard and
    should be sufficiently wide to permit shared access. The Council also considers
    that vehicle visibility splays in accordance with the posted speed limit would be
    unachievable and would need to be redrawn and accompanied by a speed survey
    to justify the visibility splays rather than the posted speed limit.
34. Whilst I saw on site that the roadside access had a relatively wide concrete apron;
    the site access itself was relatively narrow. Given the limited details in the appeal
    documentation, it is unclear what range of vehicles would be using the access, and
    this may include agricultural and delivery vehicles. The access width therefore
    should be capable of accommodating a range of vehicle sizes and be sufficient for
    two vehicles to pass.
35. Although the appellant states that the required visibility splays could be achieved,
    the Highway Authority suggest that the northern splay would need to extend
    beyond the bend in the road to take account of the lower height of most domestic
    vehicles and comments that a significant length of hedgerow would need to be
    removed. This would appear to fall outside highway land or land in the applicant’s
    ownership. Given the third-party ownership, it would not appear possible to secure
    the visibility splays through condition, even if such a measure were appropriate.
    Although domestic-sized vehicles may be smaller and more manoeuvrable, drivers
    would be unable to see above the hedge unlike taller agricultural vehicles. From
    what I saw on site, drivers approaching on the road from the north would have little
    awareness of the site entrance until close to it. With limited space to react and
    brake if encountering a vehicle pulling out, a risk of collision could arise. Although
    during my visit on a weekday, late morning, I saw only a steady flow of vehicles on
    the road, vehicle speeds appeared erratic and unpredictable. Therefore, the
    visibility splays and the position and height of the hedge would be important to
    ensure highway safety.
36. I have considered the historic permission for the current site access. Although it is
    uncertain if this access was intended for domestic purposes, it was permitted

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6010934


       some time ago and the current proposal should be assessed against current
       highway standards and the nature of vehicles accessing the site. It does not
       convince me that this permission adds any weight to the appellant’s position.
37. The Council has concerns relating to the length of the drive and inadequate turning
    space for larger vehicles within the site. Although access to a fire engine may not
    be a standard requirement, expecting the appliance and crew to park on the road
    and trail a long hose into the site does not appear to be a practical solution. Even
    with a sprinkler system within the dwelling and a pedestrian gate in the hedge,
    given the design of the dwelling, the height of the mound, and the presence of the
    boundary hedge, I am not satisfied that all parts of the site and building could be
    safely accessed. It is also possible that the road would need to be closed to allow
    firefighters to safely access both sides of their appliance. Therefore, it appears
    inevitable that a fire engine would need to access the site in an emergency, and it
    has not been demonstrated that it could manoeuvre within the site and leave in a
    forward gear.
38. The amended plan showing a delivery bay provides few details as to the vehicle
    types that could be accommodated, nor does the tracking plan clearly explain the
    type and size of vehicle illustrated. Furthermore, with the bay location remote from
    the dwelling, this suggests that the arrangement would not be suitable for all types
    of delivery items, including larger goods. These proposed arrangements therefore
    appear inadequate for their purpose and does not assure me that adequate and
    safe access for delivery could be made without a risk to highway safety.
39. For the reasons set out above, I conclude that the development would give rise to
    an unacceptable risk to highway safety. It would therefore conflict with DPD Policy
    SP15 which amongst other things seeks to ensure that development makes
    provision for safe access by vehicles and avoids unacceptable adverse impacts on
    the highway network. It would also conflict with Framework Policy TR6 which
    states that development proposals should be refused where they have an
    unacceptable impact on highway safety.
Ecology
40. The Council’s Ecology Officer considers that the roadside verge on Pickworth
    Road is a Local Wildlife Site designated for its botanical value. The ecologist is
    concerned with the proposed widening of the access and potential for harm arising
    from materials or machinery stored on the verge during construction.
41. Whilst conditions could be used to protect the verge during construction works,
    and the development itself is largely separate from this roadside area, there is the
    potential for harm to be caused by the widening of the access and any visibility
    splays which may include hedgerow removal. The detail of works proposed at the
    site entrance appears limited and with some uncertainty, and the verge does not
    appear to have been evaluated as part of the appellant’s Habitat and Protected
    Species Report (2025). The proposal, therefore, has not adequately demonstrated
    that there would be no unacceptable harmful impact on ecology. There would be
    conflict with CS Policies CS 21, DPD Policy SP19 and Framework Policy N2 which
    together include requirements to conserve and enhance features of nature
    conservation value.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6010934




Archaeology
42. The consultation from the County Council Archaeologist (CCA) advised that the
    appeal site has the potential to yield Anglo-Saxon Remains which could be
    impacted by the proposal. Consequently, the archaeologist advised that an
    archaeological impact assessment including a geophysical survey and field
    evaluation/trial trenching was required prior to the determination of the application.
43. Although the appellant liaised directly with the CCA, the results of these
    discussions do not appear to have been clearly drawn to the attention of the
    Planning Officer before the application was determined, hence the reason for
    refusal. The Archaeological Evaluation Report submitted with the appeal focusses
    on a geophysical survey and identifies little of archaeological interest on the site.
    However, whilst the appellant suggests that the CCA agreed to a reduced area of
    site investigation to focus on the main areas of ground disturbance arising from the
    proposal, it is not clear whether this investigation should take place before the
    application was determined or later by pre-commencement condition.
44. The CCA commented that not all archaeology would show on geophysical
    surveys, citing that Anglo-Saxon archaeology, the type likely to be found here, is
    one such type. I have also taken account of the proposed method of construction,
    and the proposed trial trenching area which, although only part of the site, is still a
    considerable extent. Therefore, in the absence of adequate clarification, it seems
    likely that the site has the potential to yield archaeological remains which may be
    impacted by the development, and archaeological investigation should be required
    prior to the determination of the application. Furthermore, the CCA also raised
    questions regarding the raising of the ground as the importation of material could
    also impact archaeological remains. A matter which does not appear to have been
    adequately addressed. It therefore does not appear that the full requirements of
    the CCA have been satisfied, and I am not convinced that archaeological remains
    of significance would not be adversely affected by the development.
45. The proposal has not adequately demonstrated that it would not have a harmful
    effect on archaeology, on a non-designated heritage asset. It would therefore
    conflict with CS Policy CS22 and DPD Policy SP20. It would also conflict with
    Framework Policy HE5 requiring that in relation to heritage assets with
    archaeological interest, field evaluation may be necessary to inform the design,
    mitigation and implementation of the development.
Planning Balance
46. The Council accepts that it does not currently have a Framework compliant
    housing land supply. The development would provide one, self-build dwelling
    which would add to the overall stock and choice of residential dwellings and
    support the supply of homes. Framework Policy HO7 advocates that substantial
    weight should be given to the benefits of providing homes which will contribute
    towards meeting the evidenced accommodation needs of the community. People
    wishing to commission or build their own homes are identified in the Framework as
    a type of group for which provision should be made. Even though the appeal
    proposal would represent just one dwelling, this boost to housing supply is an
    important Framework consideration in favour of the development especially given
    the housing land supply position.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6010934


47. The development would support the vitality of the community, including local
    services and facilities, and would provide some construction jobs. Future
    occupants would also help sustain local businesses. Although both parties agree
    that this site is in an isolated location, the dwelling would be relatively accessible to
    services, facilities and transport links, although given the absence of a connecting
    footpath it is likely that these journeys would be mainly by motor vehicle. Given the
    size of the development proposed and its location, these benefits would be
    minimal in scale, and I attribute them limited weight.
48. Some weight should be attributed to the schedule of renewable assets and the
    energy efficiency measures to make the dwelling significantly ‘off-grid’. There
    would also be some benefits from the re-wilding of the site and the planting of
    trees. However, whilst I recognise these worthwhile benefits, given the isolated
    location of the dwelling and the overall harm I have found to the character and
    appearance of the area, these benefits attract limited weight.
49. In terms of adverse effects, the proposal would conflict with the Council’s spatial
    strategy and would not be of sufficient design quality to warrant the Framework’s
    special exception to allow a new dwelling in the countryside. It would represent a
    clear and permanent encroachment of domestic activity into an open, rural area
    and would harm the defining characteristics of the local area. I have also found
    that the proposal would have a harmful impact on highway safety and that there is
    insufficient evidence to show that ecology and non-designated heritage assets
    would not be harmed.
50. An overall planning balance is not a mathematical equation, and I am very aware
    of the high bar set by the requirements of Framework Policy HO11(e) which is the
    main focus of this decision. The significant adverse effects identified clearly conflict
    with national decision-making policies in the Framework. When all these harms are
    considered together, they form matters that should be attributed very substantial
    weight against the scheme.
51. Despite the Council’s housing shortage and the other worthwhile benefits that
    would flow from the proposed development, I conclude that the adverse effects,
    including to the character of the countryside, substantially outweigh the benefits of
    the proposal when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the
    Framework, including Policy S5. Therefore, exceptional circumstances have not
    been demonstrated. That harm would be very significant and permanent and such
    that the scheme would not be in accordance with the development plan when
    considered as a whole.
Conclusion
52. Planning law requires that applications for planning permission be determined in
    accordance with the development plan unless material considerations indicate
    otherwise. For the above reasons, and having taken all other matters raised into
    account, there are no material considerations that indicate that the proposal should
    be determined otherwise than in accordance with the development plan. I
    therefore conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

G Bayliss
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
