 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 28 August 2026
 by G Ellis BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 16 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010568
 7 Caledonia Road, Stanwell, Staines-upon-Thames, TW19 7TD
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by D Singh against the decision of Spelthorne Borough Council
 •   The application Ref is 26/00172/FUL.
 •   The development proposed is the change of use from Class C4 House in Multiple Occupation (up to
     6 residents) to Sui Generis House in Multiple Occupation for 8 residents.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural and Preliminary Matters
2. A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
   published on 17 August 2026. The changes to the Framework do not affect the
   merits of this case in a material way and I, therefore, have not consulted the parties
   with regard to these changes.
Main Issues
3. The main issues are the effect of the development on: -
          •    The living conditions for the occupiers;
          •    The character and appearance of the area, with particular regard to the
               proposed bin and cycle storage; and
          •    Parking.
Reasons
Living Conditions
4. No.7 is a mid-terrace property. It is part of a terraced row set back from Caledonia
   Road, fronting an open grass area. The property is currently used as a small House
   of Multiple Occupation (HMO). The proposal would increase the number of
   occupiers to 8 from the existing limit of up to 6.
5. The proposed layout has 5 bedrooms (3 double occupancy and 2 single
   occupancy) with the kitchen/Living/Dining room, as annotated on the plans, being
   the only internal communal space. At 18.5sqm the room is below the Council’s
   Environmental Health (EH) standards as set out in their guide for HMOs. This
   requires either: 10 m² for the kitchen and 14 m² for a separate living room or 24 m²

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6010568


     for a combined kitchen/living/dining space. Those standards are not planning
     policy, but they nonetheless provide a helpful guide to the space provisions likely to
     afford an appropriate living environment for the occupiers.
6. The appellant acknowledges the shortfall but emphasises that the proposal would
   increase the occupancy by only two people. The size of the communal room aligns
   with the space requirements for HMOs with three to five occupiers, as set out in the
   EH guide. Serving eight occupiers it would be used at a significantly higher
   capacity.
7. The bedroom sizes meet both the Council’s EH HMO standards and the Nationally
   Described Space Standards. Whilst some of the bedrooms are more generous, this
   space cannot be balanced overall with the communal space, as each room would
   be available only to its individual occupant(s). The single bedrooms are also close
   to the minimum size. Additionally, the communal space provides a different type of
   facility offering potential social interaction and supporting the health and wellbeing
   of the residents.
8. The property does have some garden space to the benefit of the occupiers, but this
   does not provide a direct alternative to a lounge or other internal communal space,
   which would be usable at all times and in all weather conditions.
9. Overall, therefore, I find that the quality of the communal space provided within the
   development would be deficient for the proposed level of occupancy. It would
   therefore fail to provide an adequate living environment for the occupiers, contrary
   to Policy PS2 of the Spelthorne Local Plan (SLP) and Framework which require a
   high standard of design.
Bin And Cycle Storage
10. The proposed bin and cycle storage facilities would be located to each side of the
    short front garden area extending up to the path that provides access to all of the
    properties in the terrace. I have not been provided with any information as to
    whether the bin provision indicated on the plans would be sufficient for the
    proposed occupancy, which would be above that of a family home. Notwithstanding
    this, the bin storage together with the 3 proposed cycle storage units would create
    significant paraphernalia to the front of the property.
11. Generally, and with particular regard to the properties sited around the green
    space, which is a Protected Urban Open Space, the properties maintain an open
    aspect to the frontage. The scale of the bin and cycle storage facility would
    therefore be out of keeping with the character and appearance of the area. This
    aspect therefore adds to the conflict with SLP policy PS2: Designing Places and
    Spaces and the Framework in terms of high-quality design.
Parking
12. The housing in the area was built at a time of lower levels of car ownership, and the
    layout, with houses set around open spaces, does not allow for on-site parking for
    many of the properties.
13. The appeal property has no off-street parking. Caledonia Road is relatively narrow,
    and on-street parking generally requires vehicles to park partially on the pavement
    to allow others to pass, causing potential obstructions for pedestrians.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision 6010568


14. When I visited the site, I also observed properties using front garden areas for
    parking where there are no dropped kerbs and some signage requesting motorists
    not to park. While only a snapshot in time, and during the day, when residents are
    less likely to be at home, these aspects indicate existing parking tensions in the
    area and reflect the comments made in third representations, including
    photographs.
15. The County Highway Authority (CHA) raise no objection to the proposal. Their
    comments indicate that this followed a site visit, consideration of the sustainability
    credentials, and confirms that the parking standards would be met, as there are no
    minimum requirements. Having regard to the existing situation, the increase in
    occupancy is unlikely to significantly increase safety risks on the highway
16. The CHA, however, also indicate the need for a condition to secure cycle storage
    for at least 8 bikes and charging points for e-bikes. The storage shown would only
    accommodate 6 bikes. Moreover, as set out above, the storage would have
    implications for the character of the area, which would be exacerbated if further
    capacity is required along with other provisions. Without this the development
    would fail to support alternative means of travel to the car. Consequently, this may
    lead to further demand for on-street parking where spare capacity has not been
    established, through a parking survey, so as not to impact on the existing residents.
17. Accordingly, there would be conflict with SLP policy P2 promoting high-quality
    design including meeting user needs, the relationship with the wider environment,
    transport infrastructure and public realm.
Other Matters
18. The appellant refers to the existing HMO (use class C4) as a fallback. This was
    established before the Article 4 Direction related to HMOs was introduced. While
    the continued operation of the property as an HMO of up to 6 occupiers provides a
    baseline, the concerns relate to the increase in occupancy, and the existing use
    would not be more harmful than the proposal. Therefore, whilst I have regard to the
    existing situation, I have not given it weight as a fallback.
19. The appellant has suggested a number of conditions including restricting the
    occupancy, submission of bin/cycle storage details and an HMO management plan.
    While these would provide further details of the HMO operation, they would not
    address the level of communal space and the impacts on the character of the area.
    As such they would not provide mitigation to enable the development to be allowed.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
20. The proposal would result in a more intensive HMO use. The level of communal
    space would be limited to support the proposed occupancy, and the required bin
    and cycle storage provision accommodated at the front of the property would be out
    of keeping with the open character of the area. The Framework does seek to make
    efficient use of land and buildings although this is dependent on maintaining
    acceptable living standards for residents.
21. Without cycle storage, the development would fail to support alternatives to car
    travel, and in that regard, it is not demonstrated that any parking demand could be
    accommodated. The various aspects are interlinked, and as a result the



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
 Appeal Decision 6010568


     development fails to achieve a high-quality design and appropriate living
     environment for the occupiers.
22. There are no other material considerations that outweigh the conflict with the
    development plan taken as a whole.
23. Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.


G Ellis
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       4
