 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 01 September 2026
 by Nicola Davies BA DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 14 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010917
 Triveni, Ascot Road, Maidenhead SL6 2HT
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Umar Nawab against the decision of Royal Borough of Windsor &
     Maidenhead.
 •   The application Ref is 25/03375.
 •   The development proposed is for a part two storey, part first floor side/rear extension, first floor rear
     extension, part garage conversion and alterations to fenestration.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a part two storey, part
   first floor side/rear extension, first floor rear extension, part garage conversion and
   alterations to fenestration at Triveni, Ascot Road, Maidenhead SL6 2HT in
   accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 25/03375, subject to the
   conditions set out in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matter
2. A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) has
   been published since the planning application was determined by the Council. I
   have had regard to the revised Framework in reaching my decision.
Main Issue
3. The main issue raised by this appeal is the effect of the proposed development on
   an English Oak tree that is protected by a Tree Preservation Order (TPO).
Reasons
4. The proposal would increase built development at the site. The large, mature
   English Oak tree within the rear garden is an attractive feature of the site and is of
   high visual amenity value for this reason. The TPO that is in place affords this tree
   protection. This makes it all the more important to protect the oak tree from harm
   to ensure its longevity is not undermined. The premature loss of this tree would
   have a negative and significant visual impact on the area.
5. The proposal would create two two-storey projections at the rear of the dwelling.
   These would flank an area of outdoor garden space at the rear of the dwelling.
   However, these projections are set apart a significant distance. As such, they
   would not significantly enclose the outdoor space between the projections such that
   would substantially reduce sunlight to the garden area at the rear of the dwelling
   that might increase the perception of shade.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6010917


6. The crown of the mature oak visually fills much of the space within the rear garden
   but from my observations there would be separation between the garden space
   immediately to the rear of the dwelling and the oak tree.
7. As part of internal reconfiguration an internal corridor would be removed and new
   bifold doors would open out onto the garden area. This will concentrate views out
   towards the tree and would potentially increase the use of the garden. In addition,
   a first floor landing and corridor windows would also have outlook toward the crown
   of the oak tree, however, these are areas whereby occupiers would pass through
   rather than linger.
8. The oak tree is to the east of the dwelling and will already cast a shadow over the
   dwelling for part of the day. Some overshadowing of the rear garden area from the
   proposed south first floor addition would take place. However, this would be limited
   to a relatively short period of the day and would have less impact when the sun is
   high in the sky or when it is cloudy. The dwelling already hosts outlook from the
   rear towards the tree, as does the rear garden area. As such, shading already
   takes place, as does any perceived dominance of the tree in outlook. There would
   already be leaf and other debris fall onto the existing garden area. Consequently, I
   do not find that the extensions to the dwelling and/or those alterations to
   fenestration to improve outlook from the dwelling would substantially increase
   pressure to excessively prune the tree or remove it.
9. There are ensuite bathrooms proposed in the first floor extensions. New connecting
   pipes for fresh and foul water are likely to be required. The local planning
   authority’s tree adviser comments that no plan details have been provided as to
   where any new pipes for fresh and foul water are to be positioned within the site.
   As such, there is concern excavation to provide pipework could cause damage to
   or severance of roots within the Root Protection Area (RPA) of the oak tree.
10. An Arboricultural Impact Assessment (AIA) supported the planning application.
    The AIA confirmed that services will be as existing and that there would be no need
    for new trenching outside of the dwelling footprint or within the RPA of any trees.
    On the evidence that is before me it does not appear that any excavations to
    provide pipes within the RPA of trees would take place.
11. For these reasons, I conclude that the proposed development would not be harmful
    to the English Oak tree that is protected by a TPO. The proposal would, therefore,
    not conflict with Policies QP3 and NR3 of the Royal Borough of Windsor &
    Maidenhead Borough Local Plan and the provisions of the Framework that seek,
    amongst other matters, development to protect trees worthy of retention.
Conditions
12. I have considered what planning conditions may be required having regard to DM6
    of the Framework and the Planning Practice Guidance. In addition to the standard
    time limit condition and in the interests of certainty it is appropriate that there is a
    condition requiring the development be carried out in accordance with the approved
    plans. In the visual interests of the locality a materials condition is necessary.
    Conditions relating to biodiversity enhancements and lighting are necessary in the
    interests of encouraging ecology and nature conservation and to accord with other
    development plan policies and as requested to be imposed by the Council’s
    ecological adviser.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision 6010917


Conclusion
13. For the reasons set out above, and subject to the conditions listed within the
    schedule, this appeal should be allowed.



Nicola Davies
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
 Appeal Decision 6010917




                                  SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS


    a) The development hereby permitted shall begin no later than 3 years from the
       date of this decision.

    b) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
       following approved plans: 2098/1A; 2098/2A; 2098/3A; 2098/4A; 2098/5A and
       Triveni TPP 06920/2025.

    c) The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
       development hereby permitted shall accord with those specified within the
       planning application form.

    d) Prior to the commencement of the development above slab level, details of
       biodiversity enhancements, to include but not limited to bat roosting
       opportunities (e.g. bat tiles, bricks, and/or boxes), shall be submitted to and
       approved in writing by the local planning authority. Details are to include: -

            •   A site plan showing the location of all enhancements

            •   Where relevant, elevation plans showing the locations of integrated
                enhancements to ensure correct placement in relation to windows, doors,
                balconies, light sources etc.

            •   Specifications for the type of boxes to be used.

        The biodiversity enhancements shall thereafter be installed as approved within 1
        year of the development having been completed.

    e) No external lighting shall be installed until a report detailing the external lighting
       scheme and how this will not adversely impact upon wildlife has been summited
       to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The report (if external
       lighting is to be installed) shall include the following figures and appendices: -
            •   A layout plan with beam orientation
            •   A schedule of equipment
            •   Measures to avoid glare
            •   Proposed lighting timings
            •   Locations of any bird and bat boxes
        The approved lighting plan shall thereafter be implemented as approved within 1
        year of the development having been completed.


End of schedule


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         4
