 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 14 August 2026
 by Mrs Chris Pipe BA(Hons), DipTP, MTP, MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 28 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010807
 Land Comprising Field At 444900 458692, Score Ray Lane, Whixley, North Yorkshire,
 YO26 8AY
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Thomas English against the decision of North Yorkshire Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/01027/FUL.
 •    The development proposed is described as Erection of a Barn Including Stables, Hard Standing and
      Landscaping

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. Since the determination of the application the National Planning Policy Framework
   (2024) has been superseded by the National Planning Policy Framework (2026)
   (the Framework). No party would be prejudiced or caused any injustice by me
   proceeding with the appeal in light of this change in policy.
Main Issue
3. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
   appearance of the area.
Reasons
4. The appeal site is a triangular field located within the open countryside, outside any
   settlement boundary. The site occupies rising ground between Score Ray Lane
   and the B6265. Although there is boundary hedging in places, the landform and
   openness of the surrounding landscape mean that the site is viewed as part of a
   broad, exposed rural setting.
5. The proposed barn would be sited towards the southern part of the field and would
   be served by a hard surfaced access track and hardstanding. Its scale, regular
   form and associated engineered surfacing would introduce a conspicuous built
   feature into a field which is presently undeveloped and pastoral in character.
6. A cricket pavilion lies directly to the north of the proposed development within a
   separate field with hedgerows and road separating it from the appeal proposal.
   Part of the roof of the pavilion is visible, when approaching from the north, in the
   context of the proposed development this would provide some visual relationship
   between the two buildings. However, the intervening separation and hedging would

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6010807


     retain a degree of visual and spatial detachment, such that the proposed barn
     would continue to appear as a separate and isolated feature within the open
     landscape.
7. Whilst there would be other views from which the pavilion and proposed barn would
   be more visible in combination, the separation between the two buildings would
   remain apparent. The pavilion does not provide a sufficient visual context to
   assimilate the proposed barn and associated track into the landscape. Nor would
   the proposed landscaping satisfactorily mitigate the resulting visual harm.
8. Equestrian development may, in principle, require a countryside location. However,
   that does not remove the need for the development to be of a scale and nature
   appropriate to its landscape setting. In this case, the elevated topography, the
   openness of the field and the absence of any built form within the site would cause
   the large barn and hardstanding to appear isolated and poorly related to the
   surroundings.
9. The proposed materials and rural appearance would lessen, but not remove, the
   harm. Notwithstanding this, in this highly visible countryside location, the barn and
   hardstanding would appear as an incongruous and visually intrusive form of
   development, detracting from the rural character and appearance of the area.
10. Accordingly, the proposal would conflict with Policies HP7, HP3 and NE4 of the
    Harrogate District Local Plan 2014-2035 (2020), which seek amongst other things
    to ensure that recreational development in the countryside is appropriate to its
    landscape setting, to protect local distinctiveness and to safeguard landscape
    character.
11. The proposed development would also fail to accord with the Council's Farm
    Buildings Design Guide (2020), which seeks amongst other things to ensure that
    rural buildings are carefully sited so as not to harm landscape character or visual
    amenity. The proposed development would also conflict with the design objectives
    of the Framework insofar as development should respond positively to local
    character and integrate successfully with its surroundings.
Conclusion
12. For the above reasons I conclude that this appeal should be dismissed.

Chris Pipe
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
