Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 1 September 2026 by S Manson DipTP MRTPI
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010702
28 Wychwood Close, Canons Park, Edgware HA8 6TE
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Murtaza Khimji against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
    Harrow.
•   The application Ref is PL/3354/25.
•   The development proposed is described as “single story rear extension; alterations to roof to form
    hipped roof and rear dormer to the existing house; single and two story side to rear extension to
    create new dwelling (1 x 3 beds); front porch; replacement of existing timber boundary fence with
    1.8M high brick wall; cycle / refuse storage; parking; sub division of garden (demolition of single story
    side extension and detached outbuilding)”.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. The Council adopted the Harrow Local Plan 2021-2041, 2026 (LP) after their
   decision on the planning application. The main parties were aware of what the
   emerging policies were at the time, and I have received confirmation that the policy
   relevant to the reasons for refusal has not materially changed to the adopted
   version. I have had regard to the most up to date development plan.
4. A Revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
   17 August 2026. I am however satisfied that, having reviewed the relevant
   changes, they do not have a material bearing on the substance of the main issues
   or indeed the arguments of the main parties thereon. Since they would not
   therefore be prejudiced, I have proceeded without further consultation.
Main Issues
5. The main issues are the effects of the proposed development on a) the living
   conditions of future occupiers with specific regard to internal floorspace; b) highway
   safety, specifically parking; and c) the character and appearance of the area with
   particular regard to the arrangements for the storage of refuse and waste.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010702


Reasons for the Recommendation
Living Conditions
6. Policy HO2 of the LP requires new development to comply with the minimum
   internal space standards of The London Plan, the Spatial Development Strategy for
   Greater London, 2021 (SDS). Amongst other things, these impose a minimum floor
   to ceiling height of 2.5 metres across at least 75% of the Gross Internal Area (GIA)
   of each dwelling.
7. Based on the sectional drawings submitted with the appeal evidence, the 2.5
   metres minimum standard would be met on the ground and second floors of both
   dwellings. Whilst the distribution of floorspace varies between the storeys and
   between the two dwellings, the first floor plainly represents a significant proportion
   of the overall GIA in each property. Given that the ceiling height across the entirety
   of that floor would be only 2.3 metres, I am satisfied that the proportion of non-
   compliant floorspace would comfortably exceed 25% of the GIA of each dwelling.
   Accordingly, the proposal would fail to achieve the minimum requirement for at
   least 75% of the GIA to have a floor-to-ceiling height of 2.5 metres or greater.
8. The minimum floor to ceiling heights prescribed by Policy HO2 are intended to
   secure a satisfactory standard of accommodation and a good quality living
   environment for future occupiers. In failing to meet those standards, both the
   proposed dwelling and the retained dwelling would provide accommodation of a
   lower quality than the expressed minimums sought by the development plan.
   Consequently, the proposal would fail to provide satisfactory living conditions for
   future occupiers, contrary to Policy HO2 of the LP, which seeks, amongst other
   things, to secure high-quality residential development and satisfactory living
   conditions for future occupants.
Highway Safety
9. The appeal site has a Public Transport Accessibility Level (PTAL) of 2, indicating a
   relatively low level of accessibility to such. Policy HO2 of the LP is clear that the
   conversion of family sized dwellings into smaller self-contained residential units will
   only be permitted where the site is located within a PTAL 3-6 area. The appeal site
   does not satisfy this requirement and thus conflicts with the policy in this regard.
10. A purpose of the PTAL criterion is to ensure that additional residential units are
    directed towards locations where occupiers have realistic opportunities to travel by
    modes other than the private car. In a location such as this, where public transport
    accessibility is comparatively limited, future occupiers are likely to be more reliant
    upon private vehicle use to meet day to day travel needs. The proposal would
    result in two separate three-bedroom dwellings, the size and type of which would
    be likely to attract households with a greater propensity to own more than one
    vehicle.
11. Whilst the provision of one parking space per dwelling would not exceed the
    maximum parking standards of the SDS, those standards are ceilings rather than
    minimum requirements and do not, of themselves, demonstrate that parking
    demand would be adequately met. In the absence of persuasive evidence to the
    contrary, and having regard to the limited public transport accessibility of the site
    and the prevalence of on-street parking in the surrounding area, I am not satisfied


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010702


     that the parking needs arising from the development could be accommodated
     without adding to existing pressure on local parking provision.
12. I noted on my morning site visit that on-street parking is already prevalent. No
    parking survey or similar evidence has been submitted to satisfactorily demonstrate
    that sufficient on-street parking capacity exists to accommodate any overspill
    parking demand generated by the proposed development. This is of particular
    concern given the appeal property's position at the head of a cul-de-sac, where
    available highway space and manoeuvring opportunities are more limited. I also
    have no firm details as to how there may or may not be a greater pressure to park
    on the street later of an average working day.
13. Given the low PTAL rating, the size of the proposed dwellings and the likelihood of
    continued reliance on private vehicles, and in the absence of any evidence to the
    contrary, I cannot be satisfied that the development would not result in additional
    parking demand being displaced onto the street. This would add to existing parking
    pressures where people might park indiscriminately, leading to constrained vehicle
    movements and reduced visibility for drivers entering and leaving driveways. The
    resulting restriction in manoeuvrability and visibility would impede the free flow of
    traffic and increase the potential for conflict between vehicles, pedestrians and
    cyclists, to the detriment of highway safety.
14. Consequently, the proposal would conflict with Policy HO2 of the LP which seeks to
    direct such forms of development to locations with higher levels of public transport
    accessibility. The proposal would also be contrary to Policy TR6 of the Framework
    as it has not been adequately demonstrated that there would not be an
    unacceptable impact on highway safety.
Character and Appearance
15. The appeal site occupies a prominent position with a public footpath alongside the
    southern side boundary, linking Wychwood Close and Wychwood Avenue. The
    footpath is unrestricted to pedestrian use and incorporates staggered metal barriers
    at either end designed to prevent access by larger vehicles and cycles.
16. The proposed refuse and recycling storage areas would be located within the
    respective rear gardens of the two dwellings. Access to the collection point would
    require bins to be wheeled through a rear garden gate onto the public footpath, and
    then manoeuvred along the footpath to the highway. Whilst such an arrangement is
    theoretically possible, the staggered barriers at either end of the footpath create a
    particularly narrow and constrained route. Consequently, the movement of full
    refuse and recycling bins to and from the collection point would be inconvenient
    and cumbersome for occupiers.
17. In these circumstances, there is a greater and more realistic likelihood that bins
    would instead be stored within the driveway for convenience, either on collection
    days or on a more permanent basis. This likelihood is reinforced by the existing
    presence of refuse bins within the driveway at the time of my site visit. As the
    proposals would create an additional dwelling the number of refuse and recycling
    bins requiring storage at the site would, at the very least, double.
18. The driveway would also accommodate off-street parking and pedestrian access to
    the dwellings. Given the limited space available, the presence of multiple refuse
    and recycling bins in this location would appear visually intrusive and cluttered.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010702


     Although areas of hardstanding and vehicle parking are characteristic features of
     the locality, extensive refuse storage to the front of dwellings is not, with most
     properties appearing to have a side access, or access through a garage, to enable
     bins to be brought from the back to the front of the property and vice versa.
19. The difficulties identified arise from the physical layout of the proposed
    development, specifically the location of the refuse and recycling storage areas to
    the rear of the site and their reliance on a constrained public footpath for access to
    the collection point. Overcoming these concerns would require a fundamental
    reconfiguration of the site's refuse storage arrangements and potentially the overall
    site layout. Such changes would materially alter the scheme. The appeal process is
    not intended to accommodate this and must be determined based on the proposal
    originally considered by the Council and made available for public consultation.
    Accordingly, the harm identified could not reasonably be addressed through the
    imposition of a planning condition or an amended plan.
20. Consequently, the proposal fails to satisfactorily demonstrate that refuse and
    recycling facilities would be accommodated in a convenient and satisfactory
    manner without unacceptably detracting from the character and appearance of the
    area. As such, it would conflict with Policy HO2 of the LP, which seeks, amongst
    other things, to ensure that adequate and functional waste and recycling facilities
    are provided without causing harm to the character and amenity of the area.
Other Matter
21. Despite the Council’s concerns over the accuracy of the submitted plans in regard
    to the proposed front porch, I have been able to make an assessment as to the
    effects of the appeal scheme in planning terms based on what appears to be the
    appellant’s intention and the parameters of the information shown.
Planning Balance, Conclusion and Recommendation
22. Policy S4 of the Framework indicates that development proposals within
    settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework.
23. Whilst adding housing in an apparent undersupply situation, the appeal scheme
    would provide only one additional unit in net terms. The benefits associated
    therewith would therefore be limited in their scope and scale. I would accordingly
    give the benefits of the proposals moderate weight. The proposal would result in
    harm to the living conditions of future occupiers, highway safety and the character
    and appearance of the area. These would be significant and enduring, and in the
    case of highway safety matters be potentially impactive to life. Consequently, it
    would conflict with Policies P3, DP3 and TR6 of the Framework, and their
    objectives of ensuring healthy living conditions, well designed places and a safe
    highway for users. Given the permanent and enduring nature of the harms, I would
    afford them substantial weight.
24. The limited benefits arising from the provision of one additional dwelling would be
    substantially outweighed by these adverse effects. Accordingly, the proposal fails to
    satisfy the requirements of Policy S4 which does not, in this case, indicate that
    planning permission should be granted.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010702


25. For the reasons given above, the appeal scheme would conflict with the
    development plan and material considerations, including the approach of the
    Framework, do not indicate a decision other than in accordance therewith. I
    therefore recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

S Manson
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
26. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
