Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 August 2026
by S.Burch BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18 September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6010501
111A Parchmore Road, Thornton Heath, Croydon CR7 8LZ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Elkay Ltd against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
     Croydon.
•    The application Ref is 26/00540/FUL.
•    The development proposed is the erection of first floor rear extension, rear dormer extension and
     front dormer extension, and conversion of existing 2-bedroom maisonette into 2 self-contained flats
     comprising 1 x studio flat and 1 x 1-bedroom flat.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The Council refers to the revised Croydon Local Plan 2024, which has been
       submitted for examination. I have not been supplied with a copy of the revised
       plan. However, the Council’s reasons for refusal do not identify any conflict with
       this plan and the Council outline that the policies carry limited weight, which would
       not outweigh current adopted policy. I have therefore based my decision on the
       current adopted development plan.
3.     During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
       (the Framework) was published. The main parties were provided with an
       opportunity to comment. I have had regard to the 2026 version of the Framework
       in my decision.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues in this appeal are:
           •    the effect of the proposed development on the supply of homes smaller
                than 130 square metres (sqm);
           •    whether the proposed development would provide acceptable cycle storage
                facilities;
           •    whether the proposed development would provide acceptable refuse
                storage facilities; and
           •    the effect of the proposed development on the highway network, with regard
                to parking demand.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010501


Reasons
Supply of homes smaller than 130 sqm
5.     The appeal site comprises a two-storey mid-terrace property with accommodation
       in the roof space, located on Parchmore Road. The property is currently in
       residential use. The surrounding area is characterised by a mix of residential and
       commercial development.
6.     The scheme seeks planning permission for extensions and the conversion of the
       existing two-bedroom maisonette on the upper floors of the property into one
       studio flat and a one-bedroom flat.
7.     Policy DM1 of the Croydon Local Plan 2018 (CLP) seeks to promote housing
       choice and support the delivery of balanced and sustainable communities.
       Amongst other matters, the policy permits the redevelopment of residential units
       provided that it does not result in the net loss of three-bedroom homes (as
       originally built) or the loss of dwellings with a floorspace of less than 130 square
       metres (sqm).
8.     The evidence before me indicates that the existing two-bedroom flat on the upper
       floors has a floorspace of 74.85sqm. The proposal would therefore result in the
       loss of a dwelling measuring less than 130sqm. As such, it would fail to accord
       with the requirements of Policy DM1.2 of the CLP.
9.     I acknowledge the appellant's reference to the Council's Authorities’ Monitoring
       Report 2023/24, which identifies a particular need for one-bedroom
       accommodation. However, the report also demonstrates a need for two-bedroom
       homes. In any event, Policy DM1.2 provides specific protection for dwellings with a
       floorspace of less than 130sqm.
10. Both main parties agree that the Council can demonstrate a five-year housing land
    supply. The appellant contends that this indicates there is no shortage of three-
    bedroom homes. However, the proposal would not result in the loss of a three-
    bedroom dwelling but of a two-bedroom dwelling measuring less than 130sqm. As
    set out above, dwellings of this size are afforded specific protection under the CLP.
    Therefore, irrespective of the Council's ability to demonstrate a five-year housing
    land supply, the proposal would nevertheless result in the loss of a home smaller
    than 130sqm, contrary to policy objectives.
11. To conclude, for the reasons set out above, the scheme would result in the loss of
    a home smaller than 130sqm. This would harm the supply of dwellings of this size
    and would be contrary to Policy DM1 of the CLP. It would also be contrary to
    Policy HO7 of the Framework which seeks to ensure that homes contribute
    towards meeting the needs of the community.
12. The Council’s refusal reason refers to the schemes noncompliance with Policies
    H1 and H2 of the London Plan 2021 (LP). Collectively, amongst other matters,
    these policies seek to increase housing supply and promote small sites as an
    important source of housing supply. I however do not find any conflict with these
    policies in this regard.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010501


Cycle storage
13. Concerns are raised regarding the location of the proposed cycle storage. Cycle
    storage for both flats would be provided to the rear of the site. Future occupiers
    would need to descend the internal stairs of the flats, exit the building onto
    Parchmore Road, walk to the end of the terrace, and then access the storage area
    via the rear alleyway. Given the distance and indirect route required to reach the
    cycle store, it would not provide a convenient or attractive facility for residents. As
    a result, the proposed arrangement may discourage future occupiers from using
    bicycles as a regular mode of transport.
14. The Council also raises concerns regarding the layout of the cycle stores, noting
    that bicycles would need to be moved in order to access other bicycles. I accept
    that the rear yard is of sufficient size to accommodate a cycle storage arrangement
    that would avoid this issue and that, should the appeal be allowed, the detailed
    design could be secured by condition. However, this would not overcome my
    concerns regarding the proposed location of the cycle storage, as set out above.
15. As such, the scheme would fail to provide acceptable cycle storage facilities. In
    this regard, it would fail to promote sustainable modes of transport, in particular,
    cycling. The scheme would therefore be contrary to Policy DM30 of the CLP and
    Policy T5 of the LP. Collectively, amongst other matters, these policies seek to
    promote cycling and ensure that developments provide adequate cycle storage. It
    would also be contrary to Policy TR4 and DP3 of the Framework which seek to
    prioritise sustainable modes of transport including cycling.
Refuse storage
16. Refuse storage for both flats would also be located to the rear of the site. Similar
    concerns arise in respect of its accessibility. Future occupiers would be required to
    descend the internal stairs of the flats carrying refuse, exit the building onto
    Parchmore Road, walk to the end of the terrace, and then access the storage area
    via the rear alleyway. Given the distance and indirect route involved, the refuse
    store would not provide a convenient or practical facility for residents. Whilst
    residents may choose to dispose of refuse when leaving their flats, this would not
    necessarily always be the case. As such, the proposed arrangement would be
    inconvenient and would not provide readily accessible refuse storage for future
    occupiers.
17. The appellant sets out that at present occupiers of the first and second floor
    maisonette must access the existing refuse storage facilities by leaving the
    building and walking to the end of the terrace and round to the back of the building.
    However, the fact that a similar arrangement may already exist for the existing
    dwelling does not justify extending that arrangement to serve an additional
    residential unit. In any case, I do not know the circumstances under which this
    property was constructed and such an arrangement was established or its status
    with regard to planning permission.
18. To conclude, the scheme would fail to provide acceptable refuse storage facilities.
    It would therefore be contrary to Policy DM13 of the CLP, which seeks to ensure
    appropriate refuse storage for developments.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010501


Parking demand
19. The proposal would not provide any off-street car parking. The surrounding area is
    not subject to parking controls. The Council's officer report indicates that the site
    has a Public Transport Accessibility Level (PTAL) of 3, where 1 represents the
    lowest level of accessibility and 6 the highest, although elsewhere in the report a
    PTAL of 4 is referred to. In either case, the site benefits from a moderate level of
    accessibility to public transport.
20. During my mid-morning site visit, I observed a degree of parking pressure within
    the surrounding streets, although a number of spaces remained available. I
    recognise, however, that such observations represent only a snapshot in time and
    may not fully reflect parking conditions at other times of the day.
21. At present, the existing maisonette could reasonably accommodate up to four
    people. It does not benefit from any off street car parking. The proposed scheme
    would comprise a one-bedroom flat and a studio flat. Whilst this would increase
    the number of residential units, the likely overall level of occupation would remain
    broadly comparable to the existing situation and could potentially be lower, given
    that the studio flat is intended for single-person occupation.
22. The Council notes that Table 10.3 of the LP indicates that the maximum parking
    provision generated by the proposal would be 1.5 spaces. However, the standards
    set out within that table represent maximum, rather than minimum, levels of
    provision. Furthermore, the table states that in more accessible locations and for
    higher-density developments, the lower standard should be applied as the
    maximum. If this were to be applied, the maximum provision could therefore be 1
    space.
23. Given that the existing dwelling already operates without off-street parking, the
    site's moderate accessibility to public transport, and the broadly comparable level
    of occupation likely to result from the proposal, I am not persuaded that the
    development would generate a level of parking demand that would materially
    exceed that arising from the existing use. In these circumstances, I do not consider
    that a parking stress survey, as referred to by the Council, would be necessary.
24. To conclude, the scheme would not result in harm to the highway network, with
    regard to increased parking demand. In this regard, I find no conflict with Policies
    DM29 and DM30 and Policy T6 of the LP. Collectively, amongst other matters,
    these policies seek to promote sustainable patterns of development and ensure
    that new development does not result in unacceptable parking or highway impacts.
Other Matters
25. The Council raises concerns regarding the proximity of the proposed refuse
    storage area to a window serving the ground-floor residential unit. However, the
    reason for refusal does not identify any resulting harm to the living conditions of
    the occupiers of that property. The Council's officer report also notes that the rear
    yard is in the exclusive use of the ground-floor unit and that this arrangement was
    approved pursuant to an application to discharge conditions attached to an earlier
    prior approval scheme. I note that the rear yard falls within the application site's
    red-line boundary and that Certificate A has been completed, confirming that the
    appellant is the sole owner of the land. In any event, as I am dismissing the appeal


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010501


       on other grounds, these matters are not determinative of my decision, and I have
       not considered them further.
26. The accommodation may ensure acceptable living conditions for future occupiers.
    There may be no harm to the character and appearance of the area, and the
    scheme would be complaint with various other policies. It may also not harm
    neighbouring living conditions, however as noted above, the Council has raised
    concerns regarding the proximity of the bins to a ground floor window.
    Nonetheless, even if there was no harm, these are considered neutral factors and
    do not weigh in favour, nor against, the appeal.
Planning Balance & Conclusion
27. Policy S4 of the Framework outlines that development proposals within
    settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework.
28. The proposal would provide one additional dwelling in a relatively accessible
    location, making a modest contribution to local and national housing supply. Both
    dwellings would be one bedroom and would exceed the internal space standards
    set out in the LP. However, given the limited scale of the development, I afford
    these benefits only limited weight in favour of the appeal.
29. On the other hand, I have identified that the proposal would have a harmful effect
    on the supply of homes smaller than 130sqm. It would also fail to provide
    acceptable cycle and refuse storage. This would be contrary to both local and
    national decision-making polices, as set out previously. I afford this conflict
    substantial weight.
30. As such, in the specific circumstances of this case, the benefits of the
    development would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects. For the
    reasons given above, I therefore conclude that the appeal is dismissed.



S.Burch
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
