Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 14 July 2026
by C Skelly BA (Hons) MSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 4 September 2026
Appeal A Ref: 6010844
Footpath outside 366 Gray’s Inn Road, London WC1X 8BE
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Group Plc against the decision of the Council of the
       London Borough of Camden.
•      The application Ref is 2025/5871/P.
•      The development proposed is installation of new BT Street Hub and associated display of
       advertisement panels on either side of the unit.
Appeal B Ref: 6010845
Footpath outside of 366 Gray’s Inn Road, London WC1X 8BE
• The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
        Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
        consent.
•       The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Group Plc against the decision of the Council of the
        London Borough of Camden.
•       The application Ref is 2026/0177/A.
•       The advertisement proposed is display of advertisement panels on either side of a street hub unit.

This decision is issued in accordance with section 56 (2) of the Planning and
Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 as amended and supersedes that issued on 17
August 2026.
Decision
1.       Appeal A is dismissed.
2.       Appeal B is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
3.       There are two appeals on this site. Appeal A relates to the refusal of planning
         permission for the provision of a new BT street hub. Appeal B is in respect of the
         refusal of advertisement consent for advertisement panels on each side of a street
         hub unit. The hub and the advertisement are integral to each other, and both are
         the subject of these appeals. I have dealt with each case on its individual merits,
         but to avoid duplication both proposals are considered together in this decision,
         unless otherwise indicated.
4.       The appeal site adjoins 356-364 Gray’s Inn Road1 (Willing House) which is a
         Grade II Listed Building and lies within the Kings Cross/St Pancras Conservation
         Area (CA). Accordingly in respect of Appeals A and B I have had regard to the
         duties set out in Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation
         Areas) Act 1990 (LBCAA) which requires that, with regard to buildings or land in a

1
    List Entry 1113190

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6010844 and 6010845


       conservation area, special regard is paid to the desirability of preserving or
       enhancing the character or appearance of the conservation area. In respect of
       Appeal A, I have also had regard to s66 (1) of the LBCAA which requires that, in
       considering whether to grant planning permission for development which affects a
       listed building, or its setting, special regard shall be had to the desirability of
       preserving the building or its setting or any features of special architectural or
       historic interest which it possesses.
5.     In respect of Appeal B, Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control
       of Advertisements (England) Regulations 2007 and the National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework), make it clear that advertisements are subject to
       control only in the interests of amenity and public safety. Factors relevant to
       amenity include the general characteristics of the locality, including the presence
       of any features of historic, architectural or similar interest.
6.     Concurrent appeals have also been submitted for similar schemes outside 297
       Pentonville Road and outside the Standard Hotel. Whilst I am the same Inspector
       for these appeals, I have considered each scheme independently.
Main Issues
7.     For Appeal A, the main issues are:
         • the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area,
           including whether it would preserve or enhance the significance of the Kings
           Cross /St Pancras Conservation Area and the Grade II Listed Building, 356-
           364 Gray’s Inn Road through development within its setting;
         • whether the proposal would achieve an appropriate level of community safety
           at the locality; and
         • the effect of the proposal on pedestrian safety.
8.     For Appeal B, the main issue is the effect of the advertisements on the visual
       amenity of the area.
Reasons
Character and appearance (Appeals A and B)
9.     The appeal site is an area of pavement located to the front of 366 Gray’s Inn
       Road. Gray’s Inn Road is a wide, busy street with three lanes of traffic and a bus
       lane. The section of pavement where the hub would be installed is triangular in
       shape and at the widest point there is a pedestrian crossing. There are two
       existing phone kiosks one of which would be removed as part of the scheme and
       replaced with the proposed BT Street Hub Unit. There is also a utility cabinet, an
       information board, electric pillar and a streetlamp within this section of the footway
       and therefore the pavement edge has a cluttered appearance. There are
       illuminated and digital displays along the side of the Scala building which is set at
       an angle to the appeal site, however there are no standalone advertisements in
       the immediate area.
10. The appeal site is located within the CA, the significance of which primarily derives
    from its architectural and historic interest, characterised by the prominent views of
    the two stations and the area’s function as a gateway to central London. The hub


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6010844 and 6010845


       would be located to the front of 366 Gray’s Inn Road, a three-storey building which
       is painted dark grey at ground floor level. This building is physically separated by
       the Grade II listed building of Willing House by the St Chad’s footpath. This
       building in French Baroque style is currently in use as a Travelodge hotel. Its
       significance lies with its architectural and historic interest.
11. The proposed hub would be positioned approximately 0.5m from the edge of the
    pavement, where it is set back from the pavement due to a manhole cover and
    would have illuminated digital advertisements on both sides. The screens would
    display content at 10-second intervals and automatically dim at night. Whilst I note
    that the height of the proposed hub is required from an ICNIRP perspective, it
    would also be wider than the existing kiosk and therefore encroach further into the
    pavement. Notwithstanding that the scheme would result in the removal of one of
    the kiosks and that it would have a reduced footprint, given the extensive street
    furniture, its encroachment into the pavement area and increased height, it would
    add to the visual clutter in this section of pavement. It would therefore be contrary
    to Policy D4 of the LP which seeks to resist advertisements that contribute to
    street clutter in the public realm.
12. As a result of its position within the pavement, when viewed from the direction of
    Kings Cross Station, the proposed hub would be a conspicuous feature when
    viewed against the backdrop of Willing House and draw the eye away from the
    historic building, detracting from its setting. Notwithstanding that the proposed
    luminance levels would accord with industry recommendations, the digital
    advertisement screens would further intensify its visual impact due to the size of
    the advertisements at approximately 1.67m in height, the internal illumination and
    moving images. Accordingly, the proposals would be harmful to the amenity of the
    area, would not preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the
    conservation area, nor preserve the setting of the listed building.
13. The appellant has referred me to the advertisements on bus shelters located
    around the busy the public transport hub area of Kings Cross Station, however the
    appeal site is in a different area to the appeal site which is devoid of such
    structures. I have also been referred to appeals for similar proposals in urban
    areas2. However, I have not been provided with the full details of these cases and
    therefore cannot be certain that the circumstances are directly comparable to the
    appeal case. In any event I have considered the appeal on its own merits based
    on the evidence before me.
14. In relation to Appeal A, I find that the proposal would result in unacceptable harm
    to the character and appearance of the area including the CA and the setting of
    Willing House. I find the harm to be less than substantial in this instance, and at
    the lower end of the spectrum, but nevertheless of considerable importance and
    weight. Paragraph 215 of the National Planning Policy Framework (the
    Framework) states that where harm is identified to the significance of designated
    heritage assets and their setting, it should be weighed against the public benefits
    of the proposal.
15. The proposal is part of a rollout of street hubs which would help to deliver a
    comprehensive network of connectivity across the Council area. The proposed hub

2
 APP/J2373/H/22/3304942, APP/J2373/W/22/3304943, APP/K5030/H/18/3211267, APP/K5030/W/22/3301224,
APP/K5030/H/22/3301225, APP/L5240/W/21/3285398, APP/L5240/H/21/3285399, APP/C3105/W/25/3366449,
APP/C3105/H/25/3366450, 6003955, 6003956, 6003952, 6003954, APP/D1835/W/25/3376719, APP/D1835/H/25/3376686


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
Appeal Decisions 6010844 and 6010845


       would provide ultrafast public and encrypted Wi-Fi, improved 4G and 5G coverage
       to local communities, be powered 100% by renewable carbon free energy, provide
       free phone calls, have a direct 999 call button, display community and emergency
       awareness messaging and would include sensors to measure air quality noise and
       traffic. Whilst I acknowledge these benefits, they occupy only a small part of the
       structure, with the dominant element being the advertisements. Moreover, I have
       not been provided with any evidence that these benefits could not be provided in a
       way which does not result in the harm I have identified. Therefore, taken together,
       the public benefits before me are not sufficient to outweigh the less than
       substantial harm to the CA and setting of the listed building.
16. I conclude that, on balance, appeal A would harm the character and appearance of
    the area and fail to preserve and enhance the significance of the Kings Cross /St
    Pancras Conservation Area and nearby listed building through development within
    its setting. Appeal A would fail to satisfy the requirements of the LBCAA, and
    paragraph 212 of the Framework and conflicts with Policies D1 and D2 of the
    Camden Local Plan 2017 (LP), which amongst other things seeks high-quality
    design that integrates well with surrounding streets and protects Camden’s historic
    environment.
17. With regard to Appeal B, for the above reasons, I conclude that the proposed
    advertisements would result in unacceptable harm to the visual amenity of the
    area.
Community safety (Appeal A)
18. Policy C5 of the Camden Local Plan seeks to make Camden a safer place through
    requiring developments to demonstrate that they incorporate design principles
    which contribute to community safety and security particularly in wards with
    relatively high levels of crime and promote the development of pedestrian friendly
    spaces.
19. The Metropolitan Police Crime has objected to the proposal on the basis that
    previous InLink devices have been associated with significant crime and anti-social
    behaviour, with the free to call function being used for drug related activity. Whilst
    not site specific, evidence has been submitted that shows that the ward suffers
    from high crime rates. Furthermore, the Council states that residents have
    reported an increase in anti-social behaviour and crime as a direct result of the
    installation of similar hubs. These activities include increased instances of loitering,
    as well as usage of the free calls facility to coordinate drug deals.
20. The proposed hub would be greater in scale than the existing structure, providing
    a larger physical barrier within the pavement which would provide opportunity for
    concealment, increasing the risk of potential theft. It is also in proximity to a hotel
    where travellers will be leaving their accommodation and are likely to be looking at
    their phone for directions or information making them vulnerable to phone theft. I
    also observed that there is limited natural surveillance of the area due to the
    obscured glazing and blank wall of the adjoining buildings. Whilst the proposal
    would replace an existing BT kiosk it would introduce a range of features not
    currently available which the Metropolitan Police have identified have led to
    increased criminal activity in the area.
21. The appellant contends that hubs can contribute to community safety through
    improved lighting, passive surveillance and emergency call functioning. The

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decisions 6010844 and 6010845


         appellant has also referred me to a case study in Camden where community
         messaging, included as part of the proposal has resulted in the reduction of crime
         in the borough, in particular item snatching. However no detailed figures have
         been provided, and this is not reflected in the concerns raised by the Metropolitan
         Police. The Anti-Social Behaviour Management Plan recognises that hubs have
         resulted in the misuse of the free call services for drug dealing and that BT have
         worked with the police in developing call restriction capabilities. However, I have
         no evidence that this has successfully addressed this issue. Moreover, the Anti-
         Social Behaviour Management Plan does not demonstrate how the site-specific
         concerns relating to risks of increased phone theft and drug related criminal
         activity would be addressed. Therefore, given the lack of any compelling evidence
         to the contrary, I cannot be satisfied that the proposed hub would not lead to
         increased criminal activity.
22. The appellant has also referred me to appeals3 for similar development elsewhere
    in urban areas, however I have not been provided with the full details of these
    cases and therefore cannot be certain that they have directly comparable site
    characteristics, levels and types of criminal activity as the appeal site. Therefore, in
    the absence of appropriate mitigation the proposal would fail to reduce and could
    perpetuate the conditions that support opportunism crime.
23. Based on the evidence before me I conclude that the proposal fails to provide an
    appropriate level of community safety at the locality. It is therefore contrary to
    Policy C5 of the LP which amongst other things seeks to ensure the safer streets
    and public areas and promote the development of pedestrian friendly spaces.
         Highway safety (Appeal A)
24. Policy T1 of the LP requires development to improve the pedestrian environment
    by supporting high-quality public realm improvement works. There is an array of
    existing street furniture in this section of the pavement. The proposed hub would
    project further into the pedestrian area but would retain a clear footway of
    approximately 5.83m which is significantly greater than 3m which is the minimum
    width for a busy pedestrian street set out in Camden’s Streetscape Design
    Manual.
25. The Council have also referred to the guidance set out in Appendix B of the
    Pedestrian Comfort Guidance for London (Transport for London) which indicates
    that footways in high flow areas should be at least 5.3m wide with a minimum
    effective footway width of 3.3m. However, this relates to areas of high pedestrian
    flow of greater than 1,200 people per hour. I have not been provided with any
    evidence of footfall and therefore whilst I acknowledge it is a busy area, I cannot
    be certain that it would meet the threshold for high flow of pedestrians.
    Furthermore, due to the placement of the existing street furniture the pedestrian
    flow is directed to the centre of the pavement and away from the edge of the road.
    Therefore, although the increased width of the proposed hub would encroach
    further into the pavement, as pedestrians already must move into the central part
    of the pavement it would not materially alter the pedestrian flow in comparison to
    the existing situation.



3
    APP/X5210/W/22/3297263, 6003065, 6003067, 600233, APP/X5210/Z/25/3376613, 6002191, 3376537



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            5
Appeal Decisions 6010844 and 6010845


26. I note that the Officer report stated that during a site visit a vehicle was parked on
    the pavement area, however there is no dropped kerb providing access to this
    area and I have no evidence to suggest that this would be a regular occurrence. In
    any event, given the presence of other street furniture the pedestrian area would
    still be restricted in the same way were this to occur.
27. Therefore, the proposal would not result in unacceptable harm to pedestrian safety
    and does not conflict with Policies G1, A1, C6 and T1 of the LP which seek
    amongst other things to avoid hindering pedestrian movement and unnecessary
    clutter and ensure footpaths and pavements are wide enough for the number of
    people expected to use them.
Other Matters
28. In light of my findings on the main issues, it is unnecessary to consider the need
    for a maintenance arrangement by way of a S106 legal agreement, as it would not
    be determinative.
Conclusion
29. In respect of Appeal A, the proposal would be detrimental to the character and
    appearance of the area, would harm the significance of the CA and the setting of
    nearby listed building and would not achieve an appropriate level of community
    safety at the locality. There are no considerations including the public benefits
    identified of sufficient weight to outweigh the conflict with the development plan.
    Accordingly, Appeal A is dismissed.
30. I conclude that in respect of Appeal B that the proposed advertisements would be
    harmful to visual amenity.
31. For the reasons given above, I conclude that both appeals should be dismissed.



C Skelly
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
