Appeal Decisions
Site visits made on 4 August 2026
by C McDonagh BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21 August 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6010163
13 Galena Road, London W6 0LT
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of
     the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as
     amended).
•    The appeal is made by Simon Phillips against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
     Hammersmith and Fulham.
•    The application Ref is 2025/02695/PMA56.
•    The development proposed is described as ‘creation of three one bedroom apartments with central
     access core.’

Appeal B Ref: 6010167
15 Galena Road, London W6 0LT
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of
     the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as
     amended).
•    The appeal is made by Simon Phillips against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
     Hammersmith and Fulham.
•    The application Ref is 2025/02696/PMA56.
•    The development proposed is described as ‘creation of three apartments with central access core’.

Decisions
1.     Appeal A is dismissed.
2.     Appeal B is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
3.     There are 2 appeals relating to the refusal to grant prior approval required under
       Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of the Town and Country Planning (General
       Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (the GPDO). The appeals are
       determined under the same legislation and relate to adjoining buildings. Therefore,
       for the sake of expediency, and to avoid duplication, I have dealt with both appeals
       in the same decision letter.
4.     Under Class MA, planning permission is granted for a change of use of a building
       and any land within its curtilage from a use falling within Class E (commercial,
       business and service) to a use falling within Class C3 (dwellinghouses), subject to
       limitations and conditions. There is no dispute that the proposed developments
       comply with the limitations and restrictions as set out in section MA.1(1) & (2), and
       I have no reason to take a different view.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6010163 & 6010167


5.       Section MA.2(1)-(6) relate to the conditions to which proposals must comply before
         beginning the development, and the developer must apply to the local planning
         authority for a determination as to whether their prior approval will be required in
         relation to specified matters.
6.       Section W.3 states that the local planning authority may refuse an application
         where, in the opinion of the authority the proposed development does not comply
         with, or the developer has provided insufficient information to enable the authority
         to establish whether the proposed development complies with, any of these
         conditions given in section MA.2. Accordingly, the Council refused the proposals
         on several of these prior approval matters due to insufficient supporting
         information in both cases.
7.       Amended plans were subsequently submitted with both appeals. For Appeal A this
         included changes to the ground floor to accommodate access to a refuse storage
         area, while Appeal B includes substantially reconfigured internal layouts for each
         flat. Both appeals also include updated reports relating to daylight provision,
         contamination, noise and flood risk.
8.       The Planning Appeals: Procedural Guide (the PG) sets out that the appeal process
         should not be used to evolve a scheme. It is important that what is considered by
         the Inspector at appeal is essentially the same scheme that was considered by the
         Local Planning Authority and by interested parties at the application stage. The PG
         goes on to state that in deciding whether to, exceptionally, accept the proposed
         amendment, as per the judgement in Holborn1, consideration must be given to the
         substantive and procedural tests.
9.       The substantive test is whether the proposed amendments involve a ‘substantial
         difference’ or a ‘fundamental change’ to the application that would ultimately result
         in a ‘different application.’ A substantial difference or a fundamental change could
         also be as a result of a series of small, incremental changes to a scheme. If it is
         concluded that the amendment would result in a different application, then it is
         unlikely that it could be considered as part of the appeal. The procedural test is
         whether, if accepted, the proposed amendment would cause unlawful procedural
         unfairness to anyone involved in the appeal and, if so, whether such unfairness
         could be resolved, for example by re-consultation.
10. On substantive grounds, the amended internal layouts for both appeals are
    fundamental changes which would make a large difference to the respective
    proposals given the scope of works which are allowed to facilitate the change of
    use under this class. Moreover, the updated and new technical reports are
    substantial in their scope and to my mind this would cause procedural unfairness
    to the relevant consultees on these matters as they cannot now comment on the
    new information.
11. As such, the revised drawings and new technical reports should not be accepted,
    and the appeal must be determined on the basis of the plans and documents
    originally submitted with both applications.
12. Planning obligations were also submitted with both appeals which would ensure
    both schemes remained car-free, excluding blue badge holders. I understand that
    during the application stage, the Council informed the applicant that it would be

1
    Holborn Studios Ltd v The Council of the London Borough of Hackney [2017] EWHC 2823 (Admin).


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                2
Appeal Decisions 6010163 & 6010167


       refusing both proposals and that a legal agreement would be unnecessary.
       However, this also necessitated an additional reason for refusal. On this matter,
       the Council was aware of the possible agreement being submitted and discussed
       this with the appellant. The appellant has submitted a completed Unilateral
       Undertaking (UU) for both appeals to secure the necessary restrictions. I will
       accept this agreement as it would not be a surprise to the Council, and it
       addresses those reasons for refusal as it relates to parking pressures.
13. The decision notice references several policies from the development plan.
    However, the principle of development is established by the GPDO and the
    provisions of Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA do not require me as decision maker to
    have regard to the development plan. That being said, the policies, along with the
    National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework), are material considerations
    where they are relevant to specific prior approval matters and I have therefore
    treated them accordingly while not determining the proposals against them.
Main Issues
14. Based on the above, the main issues in both appeals are whether prior approval
    should be granted based on the following matters:
         •    transport impacts of the developments, particularly to ensure safe access.
         •    contamination risks in relation to the buildings.
         •    flooding risks in relation to the buildings.
         •    impacts of noise from commercial premises on the intended occupiers of the
              developments.
         •    the provision of adequate natural light in all habitable rooms of the
              dwellinghouses.
Reasons
Transports Impacts
15. No’s 13 and 15 Galena Road are adjoining units at the end of a three-storey
    terrace. I understand that the buildings were most recently used as offices, which
    the proposals now seek to change to 3 flats in each building. No.13 would be
    formed of one-bed flats while No.15 would have two-bed flats. There would be
    shared accesses from street level which would utilise the existing entrances of
    both buildings.
16. Galena Road is part of a controlled parking zone which requires users to display a
    permit for the duration of the restrictions. Evidently, the area is within an area with
    a public transport access level (PTAL) score of 6a which is very high. As such, the
    Council advises that the developments would both be required to ensure residents
    do not apply for parking permits in order to not worsen existing traffic or parking
    pressures in the area.
17. I note the appellant was agreeable to this during the application and the Council’s
    highways team did not object to the proposals on the basis that restrictions were
    included on these matters. The submitted UUs for both appeals would secure
    these limitations for both developments and as such this is considered acceptable.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
Appeal Decisions 6010163 & 6010167


       The provision of cycle parking was considered acceptable to be secured via
       condition were the proposal to be approved at that time. Based on the plans before
       me this would likely have been my conclusion also and this arrangement would
       have been acceptable also.
18. However, the original plans for Appeal A do not show a refuse storage area while
    those shown on Appeal B are not clearly marked on the plans, albeit I gather that
    the area towards the rear of the building adjacent the communal staircase was
    proposed to be used for this purpose. The submitted Transport Assessment
    references only that servicing will remain as existing on the road, although it is not
    clear what the arrangement currently is.
19. In the absence of detailed information on the storage and collection of waste, it
    has not been demonstrated that either proposal could be implemented without the
    need for refuse storage to take place outside of the buildings thereby obstructing
    the public highway. This would be contrary to section MA.2(2)(a) of schedule 2,
    part 3, class MA of the GPDO.
Contamination
20. Appeal A included a Contamination Statement which identified no indicators of
    contamination within the appeal site. However, the statement did state that there
    were potential contaminants nearby, including two part A(2) and part B activities
    within a 250m radius. I have had regard to the comments of the Council’s
    consultee for this matter who expresses concern that the assessment does not
    appear to have been carried out by a suitably qualified person nor was the
    assessment detailed enough. This is particularly concerning given the proposed
    use is more vulnerable than the existing.
21. I note the Council advised that conditions could be attached to address these
    matters although given I am dismissing the appeal I have not considered this
    further. Furthermore, Appeal B did not include an assessment although given the
    respective buildings are adjoining it is reasonable to conclude that the same issues
    would require assessing in that scheme.
22. Overall, there is insufficient information before me as to whether contamination
    risks could be adequately mitigated for the change of use. This would be contrary
    to section MA.2(2)(b) of schedule 2, part 3, class MA of the GPDO
Flood Risk
23. I understand that both appeal sites are within flood zone 3. Both the Council’s
    appointed consultee and the Environment Agency objected to both schemes due
    to the submitted Flood Risk Assessment’s (FRA) lack of assessment of tidal
    flooding, which includes the risk of a breach in the Thames tidal flood defences. As
    I have rejected the updated assessment due to the attempted evolving of the
    proposals, I must have regard only to the initial FRA which was deemed
    inadequate by both technical experts for both appeals.
24. There is nothing before me to alleviate these concerns and as such I see no
    reason to dispute the concerns of the technical experts on this matter. As they
    cannot be consulted through the appeal process, I must conclude that the appeals
    have not demonstrated that the changes of use would be acceptable with respect



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decisions 6010163 & 6010167


         to flooding. This would be contrary to section MA.2(2)(c) of schedule 2, part 3,
         class MA of the GPDO.
Noise
25. The Noise Assessment submitted with the applications are both carried out after a
    walkover assessment and I note that the Council’s technical expert expresses
    concern regarding the proposals at No.13 although not at No.15. The assessments
    are essentially the same, so it is unclear why this was the case, albeit both
    responses recommended a suite of conditions are attached in the event of
    permission being granted.
26. As I am dismissing the appeals I have not considered conditions in either case.
    However, in both proposals the noise surveys lack detail. In particular, noise
    sources are identified as being possible from a gym, garage and a school nearby,
    although it is advised that no emissions were recorded during the assessor’s
    survey period. However, there is no methodology included for either assessment
    to indicate how this conclusion was reached or whether recording equipment was
    used.
27. As such, there is insufficient evidence before me to conclude that the proposals
    could be implemented without causing harmful living conditions to prospective
    future occupiers of both buildings with respect to noise. This would be contrary to
    section MA.2(2)(d) of schedule 2, part 3, class MA of the GPDO.
Adequate Light
28. The GPDO states in section W.(2A) that where the application relates to prior
    approval as to adequate natural light, the local planning authority must refuse prior
    approval if adequate natural light is not provided in all the habitable rooms of the
    dwellinghouses. I have had regard to the submitted Internal Daylight
    Assessments2 for both proposals which conclude that daylight levels within the
    proposed habitable rooms are adequate and surpass the target criteria outlined in
    BS EN 17037:2018 and the BRE publication ‘Site Layout Planning for Daylight &
    Sunlight – A Guide to Good Practice’.
29. However, as I have rejected the reconfigured layouts for both appeals, it is unclear
    as to whether the assessments would be adequate based on the existing layouts.
    This is particularly concerning given that there are seemingly significant changes
    required to facilitate other changes such as refuse storage areas.
30. As such, there is inadequate information before me to establish whether the
    proposals would both receive adequate natural light in all habitable rooms. This
    would be contrary to section MA.2(2)(f) of schedule 2, part 3, class MA of the
    GPDO.
Conclusion
31. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal is dismissed.

C McDonagh
INSPECTOR

2
    NRG Consulting – Report references: PP2856/13GR/DL/202509-AV & PP2856/15GR/DL/202509-AV.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            5
