Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 July 2026
by Graham Wraight BA(Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 08 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010086
Pilmore Farm, Old Cassop, Durham DH6 4QB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by B & S M Rutherford against the decision of Durham County Council.
•    The application Ref is DM/26/00471/FPA.
•    The development proposed is the erection of a livestock building.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the erection of a
       livestock building at Pilmore Farm, Old Cassop, Durham DH6 4QB in accordance
       with the terms of the application, Ref DM/26/00471/FPA, subject to the conditions
       in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matter
2.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
       August 2026. I am satisfied that this does not materially affect the assessment of
       the matters arising in this case, and therefore I have not sought comments from
       the parties.
Main Issue
3.     The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
       appearance of the landscape.
Reasons
4.     The appeal site is located within an Area of Higher Landscape Value (AHLV).
       However, the Council provides no substantive information as to what the special
       qualities of this area are and why they would be unduly compromised by the
       appeal proposal. Their concerns appear primarily to be related to the spread of
       development into the surrounding countryside, and to the erosion of the current
       perception of the field as open and undeveloped. There is an absence of evidence
       on their part to demonstrate whether this is in a way that compromises the special
       qualities of the AHLV, or whether it is more basically because there would be built
       development in an open countryside location where there is currently none.
5.     As far as I could ascertain from my visit to the site, the landscape closest to the
       appeal site is characterised by open fields in agricultural use, some of which are
       lined along their boundaries by vegetation, with an undulating topography notable
       in the vicinity and with the settlement of Old Cassop being sited on much higher
       land. There is a general absence of any significant built development in this area,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010086


       aside from the settlement itself, and the area has the character and appearance of
       a traditional rural landscape generally untouched by modern development or urban
       sprawl. The field in which the appeal proposal would be located is consistent with
       this in terms of its physical characteristics and because it too is devoid of any
       notable built structures.
6.     There is however a large complex of agricultural buildings and structures in the
       field adjacent to where the proposed development would be built. The proposal
       would be positioned broadly in line with those buildings and structures, albeit to the
       opposite side of the tree line which marks the boundary of the field, and on higher
       land. The Council accepts that public vantage points of the proposed development
       are limited. Their concern at planning application stage related primarily to the
       impact from the A181, but that is a busy main road which lacks pavements and
       from which views would at best be fleeting. The appellant further suggests that
       there would be some visibility from public footpaths close to that road, but these
       are some distance from the appeal site.
7.     There would be an impact on the landscape by virtue of introducing built
       development where there is currently none. However, this would be minimised
       because agricultural buildings are expected sights in rural countryside locations
       and especially because the appeal proposal would be very close to existing
       agricultural buildings. In this case the harm would be localised, and it would be
       limited in its scope because of what already exists immediately to where it is
       proposed that the building would be constructed. The level of harm to the intrinsic
       character, beauty and tranquillity of the countryside would not be unacceptable.
8.     With further respect to Policy 10 of the County Durham Plan 2020 (CDP), the
       proposal would be well related to the associated farmstead. It would be
       immediately adjacent to it, albeit in a different field. I do not consider therefore that
       there is an onus on the appellant in policy terms to put forward alternative
       locations, but it would seem to me that even if located immediately adjacent to the
       existing buildings that the proposal would still have a considerable visual impact. In
       particular, the building would be the same size and would equally increase the built
       form present in the countryside and in the AHLV.
9.     Policy 29 of the CDP requires that development contributes positively to an area’s
       character, and Policy 39 states that development affecting an AHLV will only be
       permitted where it conserves, and where appropriate enhances, the special
       qualities of the landscape. There would be a conflict with the aims of both of those
       policies, as it cannot be said that the proposal would contribute positively to the
       area’s character, or that it would conserve or enhance the landscape. Whilst there
       is also reference to the Framework in the reason for refusal, the policies of the
       development plan are of more assistance in assessing local landscape impact.
Other Considerations
10. It is reasonable to accept that the appellant is best placed to know where the
    optimum location for the proposed building would be, in operational terms. It would
    seem unlikely that they would choose to make what would be a significant
    investment in the proposed building if it was to be in a place that would not best
    meet their operational needs. In this case, they have stated that location is
    constrained by considerations relating to surface water flows. The Council
    engaged with the appellant to explore alternative locations, but the appellant did


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010086


       not put any forward for consideration. In any event, as I have noted above, I have
       strong reservations that the impact on the AHLV would be materially different in
       another location.
11. It is common ground between the main parties that the agricultural business
    should be supported, and it would appear that the farm is the sole operational farm
    that now remains in Old Cassop. The Old Cassop Conservation Area Appraisal
    2009 (CAA) notes the important contribution that working farms make to the
    character of the settlement. The appellant points also to economic benefits arising
    from the operation of the business, both directly and indirectly, alongside an
    increase in animal welfare standards that would result from the animals having
    sheltered and dry accommodation. It is proposed that manure from the cattle
    would be kept in a dedicated holding tank under the proposed building and would
    thus not be allowed to be washed downslope under harsh rainfall. These
    considerations collectively carry significant weight in favour of the proposed
    development.
12. The submissions made show that Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG) of 31.69% would be
    delivered, utilising land close to the appeal site which is under the appellant’s
    ownership. This consideration carries moderate weight in favour of the proposed
    development.
Other Matter
13. The proposed building would be sited within the Old Cassop Conservation Area
    (CA). The CAA sets out that the combination of working farms and houses within a
    relatively small area gives the village a character that is distinct from many other
    villages in the area. It notes that it is the very simple layout and the small scale of
    the area which is in itself relatively rare and worth preserving, and that unlike other
    nearby places the settlement is untouched by mining. These factors form the
    significance of the CA.
14. The CAA acknowledges that the continuation of working farms within the village is
    central to its character and it is understood that Pilmore Farm is the last working
    farm here. The CAA also acknowledges that there is a potential conflict between
    maintaining the traditional appearance of the village and the visual impact of
    modern farm buildings and associated storage areas and that it is intended to
    encourage the careful choice of locations for such activities, noting that agricultural
    buildings are expected sights on a working farm.
15. The fields to the north of the settlement are included in the CA as they form part of
    its setting. The proposed building would be located well away from the settlement
    itself, and at a much lower ground level. It would sit next to the buildings which
    form the existing complex of agricultural buildings, and I find no reason to disagree
    with the Council’s conclusion that there would be no harm to the significance of the
    CA from the appeal development, or harm to its character and appearance.
Planning Balance
16. The proposed development would not meet with the thresholds I have identified
    that are found within Policies 29 and 39 of the CDP, in particular in relation to the
    AHLV. However, Policy 39 of the CDP does allow for the permitting of
    development which harms the AHLV if the benefits in that location clearly outweigh
    the harm.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010086


17. I have afforded significant and moderate weight to the benefits of the proposed
    development. Whilst those benefits could also be realised in an alternative
    location, I am not convinced that a viable alternative location exists, and even if it
    does, the impact on the AHLV would not be likely to be materially different.
18. I find that the benefits clearly outweigh the harm to the AHLV and therefore that
    the proposal accords with Policy 39 of the CDP. This leaves only a conflict with
    Policy 29 of the CDP, and this too is outweighed by the benefits. Therefore,
    material considerations indicate that a determination should be made otherwise
    than in accordance with the development plan.
Conditions
19. Conditions setting out the time period to commence development and the
    approved plans are needed to provide certainty.
20. The appellant’s submissions indicate that surface water would be retained to dilute
    manure from cattle which would pass through slats in the floor into a holding tank. I
    agree with the appellant that this means that it is not appropriate to impose a
    standard surface water drainage condition, but the details provided are imprecise
    as to whether all surface water that falls on the building can, or would, be retained
    within the tank. It is therefore reasonable and necessary to impose a condition
    requiring details of the provision that would be made for surface water.
21. In accordance with the advice of the Planning Practice Guidance, it is not
    necessary to impose a condition requiring the submission of a Biodiversity Gain
    Plan (BGP), as that is secured via legislation.
22. A Habitat Management and Monitoring Plan (HMMP) has been submitted. This
    sets out the works that would be done with regard to habitat creation and
    enhancement, when those works would be implemented, how they would be
    managed and maintained for a period of 30 years, and a monitoring schedule.
    Whilst the Council suggests a number of further conditions relating to BNG
    matters, these would for the most part replicate what is contained in the HMMP. It
    is reasonable and proportionate in this instance to impose a condition requiring
    that the habitat creation and enhancement works be undertaken in accordance
    with the HMMP that has already been provided, alongside a condition requiring the
    BGP be prepared in accordance with the details submitted.
Conclusion
23. For the reasons given above, the appeal should be allowed.

Graham Wraight
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010086


SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS

     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: OS Map, Proposed Site Plan drawing no.
              BSMRU-PSP Rev A, Floor Plan drawing no. BSMRU-FP and Elevations
              drawing no. BSMRU-ELE.
     3)       The building hereby permitted shall not be brought into use until provision for
              surface water management/drainage has been put in place in accordance
              with details that have first been submitted to and approved in writing by the
              local planning authority. The approved provision shall thereafter be retained
              and maintained throughout the lifetime of the development.
     4)       The Biodiversity Gain Plan shall be prepared in accordance with the
              Biodiversity Net Gain Report; dated February 2026; and prepared by True
              North Ecology.
     5)       The habitat creation and enhancement works approved via the Biodiversity
              Gain Plan shall be implemented, managed, maintained and monitored in
              accordance with the submitted Habitat Management and Monitoring Plan
              V1.0 dated 25/02/2026 (HMMP). The monitoring surveys and reports set out
              in the HMMP shall be provided to the local planning authority on request.

----------------------------------------------End of Conditions----------------------------------------------




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        5
