 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 6 July 2026
 by P B Jarvis DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date:24 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010567
 Castleton, Days Lane, Doddinghurst, Essex CM15 9SL
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
     to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr Chris Brown against the decision of Brentwood Borough Council.
 •   The application Ref. is 26/00233/HHA.
 •   The proposed development is erection of detached outbuilding to provide a home gym and shower
     facilities incidental to the main dwelling house.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2. A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
   August 2026. The policies relevant to this appeal have not materially changed
   therefore further comments have not been invited from the parties and it is not
   considered that any prejudice arises as a result. The decision below refers to the
   decision-making policies of the new Framework.
Main Issues
3. The main issues are
     •   Whether the proposal is inappropriate development in the Green Belt having
         regard to the Framework and relevant development plan policies.
     •   Effect on Green Belt openness
     •   The effect on the setting of the Grade II listed Days Farmhouse
     •   Whether any harm by reason of inappropriateness and any other harm would be
         outweighed by other considerations as so to amount to the very special
         circumstances necessary to justify the development
Reasons
4. The appeal site lies in a rural location to the south of the built-up area of
   Doddinghurst village and north of Pilgrims Hatch within the Metropolitan Green
   Belt. It is a large roughly triangular shaped plot with established trees and hedges
   to boundaries with a woodland area to the south. It lies at the southern end of a row
   of large, detached properties of varying age and design set in similarly deep plots.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
    Appeal Decision 6010567


Whether inappropriate development
5. Policy MG02 of the of the Brentwood Local Plan 2016-2033 (2022) (LP) seeks to
   preserve the openness and key functions of the Green Belt by preventing
   inappropriate development except in very special circumstances. It states that
   proposals will be considered and assessed in accordance with the provisions of
   national planning policy. Framework Policy GB7 states that development in the
   Green Belt is inappropriate unless within one of the listed categories. These do not
   include new detached outbuildings.
6. However, category (b) of GB7 states that the extension or alteration of an existing
   building, provided it is of permanent and substantial construction, is lawful in
   planning terms and will not result in a disproportionate increase in size compared to
   the original building, will not be inappropriate. The existing dwelling is of permanent
   and substantial construction and the Council does not suggest that it is not lawful in
   planning terms.
7. Case law has established that extensions to an existing building will not be
   confined to physically attached structures but can include structures which are
   physically detached from the building of which they are an extension1. Whether a
   detached structure would amount to an extension of the existing building is a matter
   of fact and degree.
8. Case law has also established that it would be reasonable to take into account
   whether the proposal was a ‘normal domestic adjunct’.2 In addition, consideration
   could be given to its purpose and use, its relationship with the original building and
   its size. In this case, the proposed outbuilding would be a ‘normal domestic adjunct’
   and it would be sited close to and used for purposes incidental to the existing
   dwelling. Therefore, it can be considered to comprise an extension to the dwelling.
9. However, the original dwelling has been previously extended resulting in an
   approximate doubling of its size in respect of floorspace. The proposal would add a
   further 30 sqm. resulting in a dwelling around 140% larger than the original. Whilst
   the proposed building itself would be of subservient scale and size compared to the
   existing dwelling and would be sited close to it within its curtilage, given the
   increase in floorspace compared to the original dwelling, it would nevertheless
   result in a disproportionate increase in its size. As such, the proposal would not
   satisfy policy GB7(b) of the Framework and constitutes inappropriate development
   in the Green Belt.
10. I note that the Council has referred to a previously existing garage on the site but
    there was no such building at the time of my site visit and the proposal cannot
    therefore be considered as the replacement of an existing building.
Effect on green belt openness
11. The Framework states that the government attaches great importance to Green
    Belts the essential features of which are their openness and permanence.
    Openness is the absence of development notwithstanding the degree of visibility of
    the land in question from the public realm. Openness has both visual and spatial
    aspects.

1
    Warwick DC v SSLUHC, Mr J Storer Y Mrs A Lowe [2022] EWHC 2145 (Admin)
2
    Sevenoaks DC v SSE & Dawe [1997]


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 2
 Appeal Decision 6010567


12. The proposed single storey building would occupy a relatively discrete location to
    the side of the existing dwelling behind a fence that marks the boundary between
    the front and side areas of the curtilage of the property. Whilst it would be
    screened to an extent from public views along the main road the roof would be
    visible above the fence. However, it would be viewed in the context of the much
    larger and higher existing dwelling and would not be viewed as an isolated building.
    As such it would have a limited visual impact on the openness of the Green Belt.
13. In spatial terms the building would be significantly smaller than the existing building
    on the site but would nevertheless introduce an outbuilding that would reduce the
    spatial aspect of the openness of the Green Belt; however, this would only be to a
    very limited degree.
14. Overall, having regard to the existing context of the site and its location within a
    group of existing dwellings, Green Belt openness would be preserved.
Effect on setting of the nearby heritage asset
15. Days Farmhouse, a Grade II listed property lies opposite the site on the eastern
    side of Days Lane. It is of 16th century origin, with 17th and 20th century elements,
    comprising a timber framed, two-storey dwelling of part rendered, part
    weatherboarded elevations with peg tiled roof. It occupies a large plot with
    outbuildings to the north and further farm and other buildings to the north-east and
    east beyond which are open fields. There is an existing vehicular entrance just to
    the north-west of the dwelling marked by timber gates with high hedge along the
    remainder of the lane frontage. The significance of the asset is derived mainly from
    its architectural quality and historical associations with its rural and agricultural
    context.
16. The proposed outbuilding would be sited some distance from the listed building on
    the opposite side of the lane, located to the south side of the existing dwelling,
    Castleton, set back from the road frontage which is also partly marked by mature
    vegetation. The Council acknowledges that the proposed outbuilding would only be
    partly intervisible with the listed farmhouse and that would only be from limited
    viewpoints along Days Lane quite close to the appeal site frontage where only the
    upper part and roof of the proposed outbuilding would be seen above the fence.
17. During the determination of the application, the previously proposed flat roof was
    replaced with a hipped, tiled roof, not dissimilar to the roof forms of the outbuildings
    to the north of the listed farmhouse. Given these design changes, its discrete
    position, taken together with the acknowledged limited intervisibility, the outbuilding
    would have a neutral effect on the significance of the heritage asset and, as such,
    its setting would be preserved. The duty under S66 of the Planning (Listed
    Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 would therefore be satisfied. There
    would be compliance with LP Policy BE16, which seeks to preserve designated
    heritage assets and their setting, and with policies HE4 and HE6 of the Framework
    which seek to ensure that heritage assets are conserved in a manner appropriate
    to their significance.
Whether harm outweighed by other considerations
18. As found above, the proposed development comprises inappropriate development
    in the Green Belt which is by definition harmful. Substantial weight is to be given to
    this harm in accordance with Framework policy GB6. Very special circumstances

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
 Appeal Decision 6010567


     will not exist unless the harm by reason of inappropriateness and any other harm is
     clearly outweighed by other considerations.
19. The appellant contends that the proposed outbuilding would be modest in size,
    contained within the residential curtilage, not result in encroachment of the
    countryside, would be of suitable design and subservient in scale compared to the
    existing dwelling, nor result in harm to green belt openness or the character and
    appearance of the site and surroundings. However, these factors are of neutral
    weight and do not alter my findings above in respect of inappropriateness having
    regard to the factors that are relevant to that assessment as set out.
20. The appellant also suggests that the harm arising from inappropriateness, should
    that be found, would be limited. However, that conflicts with the Framework which
    directs that any Green Belt harm is to be given substantial weight.
21. The appellant agrees that there is no relevant fall-back position as permitted
    development rights have been removed by virtue of a condition on an earlier
    permission.
22. Overall, these factors do not clearly outweigh the harm by reason of
    inappropriateness. Therefore, very special circumstances have not been
    demonstrated. The proposal would fail to accord with LP Policy MG02 and with the
    development plan as a whole. It would also fail to comply with the policies of the
    Framework. There are no other material considerations that indicate a decision
    other than in accordance with the development plan.
Conclusion
23. The appeal is therefore dismissed.

P B Jarvis
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       4
