Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 20 July 2026
by C Cooper-Young MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 20 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010409
Land at Berry Cross, Road from Berry Cross to the Old Post Office, Peters
Marland, Devon EX38 8NT
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Fuller against the decision of Torridge District Council.
•      The application reference is 1/0031/2026/AGMB.
•      The development proposed is prior notification for the change of use of agricultural building to 1no.
       dwellinghouse and associated building operations under Class Q.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Application for costs
2.       An application for costs was made by Mr and Mrs Fuller against Torridge District
         Council. This application is the subject of a separate decision.
    Preliminary Matters
3.       Upon review of the submissions, I noted a planning condition imposed through the
         grant of the original planning permission 1 restricting the use of the building to
         agriculture. I sought the views of the main parties concerning the implications of
         this condition on the appeal before me. I have had regard to the responses I
         received in determining this appeal. Accordingly, I have elevated this point to the
         main issue.
4.       The appellant introduced new evidence through their response to the Council’s
         costs comments, I have disregarded this information in both decisions.
5.       A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
         17 August 2026. Having regard to the main issue in this appeal as set out below,
         the Framework does not raise any new matters which are determinative to the
         outcome of this appeal.
Background and Main Issue
6.       The appeal proposal relates to a prior approval notification made under Article
         3(1), Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the Town and Country Planning (General
         Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) (the GPDO).
         Development plan policies and the National Planning Policy Framework the
         Framework can be considered relevant to prior approval cases, but only insofar as

1
    Reference: 1/1407/97/34/0017, dated 6 November 1997

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010409


       they relate to the development and prior approval matters. I have proceeded on
       that basis.
7.     Class Q of Part 3 of Schedule 2 to the GPDO states that the change of use of a
       building that is part of an established agricultural unit or a former agricultural
       building and any land within that building’s curtilage to a residential use, together
       with reasonably necessary building operations, is permitted development.
8.     Paragraphs Q1.(a) to (p) also set out the circumstances where development is not
       permitted.
9.     However, given the existence of the planning condition, therefore, the main issue
       is whether the proposal would be permitted development under Schedule 2, Part
       3, Class Q of the GPDO, having particular regard the original planning permission
       reference 1/1407/97/34/0017.
Reasons
10. Article 3(4) states that nothing in the Order permits development contrary to any
    condition imposed by any planning permission granted or deemed to be granted
    under Part 3 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 otherwise than by the
    Order. In this case, the appeal building was granted full planning permission
    subject to the following condition:
         ‘The proposed building shall be used for agricultural purposes only and for no
         other purpose.’
       The reason given for the condition was:
         ‘In the interests of residential and visual amenity.’
11. As indicated by the evidence, the condition was imposed to restrict the use of the
    barn to agricultural storage only. The condition ensures that any future
    development of the building would be required to be determined via a full planning
    application so that the particular circumstances of that submission and its impact
    on neighbouring residential occupiers and the countryside location are fully
    understood.
12. A grant of planning permission cannot in itself exclude the application of the Order.
    To do that, something more would be required which explicitly or implicitly restricts
    the operation of the Order. In this case the condition includes the words ‘only and
    for no other purpose’ which provides a wider restriction on any future use of the
    building. The use of ‘only’ effectively evinced an intention to identify an acceptable
    use, whilst prohibiting unacceptable uses.
13. Whilst the condition does not expressly disapply permitted development rights it is
    implied in the terms of the use of the building for agricultural purposes only. As
    outlined at Article 3(4) of the Order, permitted development rights cannot be
    exercised where doing so would be contrary to a condition attached to an existing
    planning permission.
14. I therefore conclude that the operation of the Order is restricted by the existing
    planning condition attached to the original permission. Consequently, it is not
    necessary for me to undertake an assessment of the proposal against the specific
    requirements and restrictions of Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the GPDO.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010409


Other matters
15. My attention has been drawn to a nearby barn that has been converted from
    agricultural to a residential use. Notwithstanding the lack of detail on this scheme,
    as it relates to a full planning permission it is not materially comparable to this
    appeal.
16. I acknowledge the appellants comment relating to the lack of any formal
    enforcement action, breach of condition notice or lawful development certificate
    being issued in regard to the use of the agricultural barn, for any non-agricultural
    use. However, for the reasons given, this has had no bearing on my consideration
    of the appeal.
Conclusion
17. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.



C Cooper-Young
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
