Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 9 September 2026
by Stewart Glassar BSc (Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010268
Priory Field Barn, Monastery Lane, Storrington, West Sussex RH20 4LN
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a grant of planning permission subject to conditions.
•   The appeal is made by Philip Orpwood against the decision of Horsham District Council.
•   The application Ref DC/25/1329 was approved on 6 February 2026 and planning permission was
    granted subject to conditions.
•   The development permitted is change of use of volunteers agricultural storage barn to 1 no.
    residential unit.
•   The conditions in dispute are Nos 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16 and 18 which state that:
    3.    No development shall commence until the following
          components of a scheme to deal with the risks associated with contamination, (including
          asbestos contamination), of the site be submitted to and approved, in writing, by the local
          planning authority:
          (a) A preliminary risk assessment which has identified:
                  - all previous uses
                  - potential contaminants associated with those uses
                  - a conceptual model Of the site indicating sources, pathways and receptors
                  - potentially unacceptable risks arising from contamination at the site.
          (b) An site investigation scheme, based on (a) to provide information for a detailed
          assessment of the risk to all receptors that may be affected, including those off site.
          (c) The site investigation results and the detailed risk assessment (b) and based on these, an
          options appraisal and remediation strategy giving full details of the remediation measures
          required and how they are to be undertaken.
          The development shall thereafter be carried out in accordance with the approved details. Any
          changes to these components require the consent of the local planning authority.
    4.    No development shall Commence until a drainage strategy detailing the proposed means
          of foul and surface water disposal has been submitted to and approved in writing by the
          Local Planning Authority. The development shall be carried out in accordance with the
          approved scheme.
    5.    Prior to the commencement of the development above slab level, a Biodiversity Enhancement
          Strategy for Protected and Priority Species shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the
          Local Planning Authority.
          The content of the Biodiversity Enhancement Strategy shall include the following:
          a. Purpose and conservation Objectives for the proposed enhancement measures;
          b. detailed designs to achieve stated objectives;
          c. locations of proposed enhancement measures by appropriate maps and plans;
          d. persons responsible for implementing the enhancement measures;
          e. details of initial aftercare and long-term maintenance (where relevant).
          The works shall be implemented in accordance with the approved details and shall be retained
          in that manner thereafter.
    7.    The dwelling hereby permitted shall not be occupied until a plan showing the layout of the
          proposed development and the provision of car parking spaces (including garages where
          applicable) for vehicles has been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
          Authority. The dwelling shall not be Occupied until the parking spaces associated with it have
          been provided in accordance with the approved details. The areas of land so provided shall
          thereafter be retained for the parking of vehicles.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010268



     8.  Prior to the first occupation (or use) of any part of the development hereby permitted, a
         Contamination verification plan shall be submitted to and approved, in writing, by the Local
         Planning Authority. The verification plan shall provide details of the data collected in order to
         demonstrate that the works set out in Condition [3] are complete and identifying any
         requirements for longer-term monitoring of pollutant linkages, maintenance and arrangements
         for contingency action where required.
    11. The dwelling shall not be first occupied until covered and secure cycle parking spaces have
         been provided in accordance with plans and details to be submitted to and approved by the
         Local Planning Authority. The cycle parking facilities shall be retained thereafter.
    12. All mitigation and enhancement measures and/or works shall be carried out in accordance with
         the details contained in the Preliminary Ecological Appraisal (Art)tech Consulting Ltd., October
         2024) as already submitted with the planning application and agreed in principle with the local
         planning authority prior to determination.
         This may include the appointment of an appropriately competent person e.g. an ecological clerk
         of works (ECOW) to provide on-site ecological expertise during construction. The appointed
         person shall undertake all activities, and works shall be carried out, in accordance with the
         approved details.
    14. Notwithstanding the provisions Of the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted
         Development) (England) Order 2015 (and/or any Order revoking and/or re- 15 16 17 18
         enacting that Order, no development falling within Classes A, AA, B, C, E, or F of part 1, Class
         A of Part 2. or Class AD of part 20 of Schedule 2 of the order shall be erected, constructed or
         placed within the curtilage of the development hereby permitted without express planning
         consent from the Local Planning Authority first being obtained.
    15. The development hereby approved shall be implemented strictly in accordance with the
         recommendations/measures stated on pages 8/9 of the supporting document Great Crested
         Newt eDNA sampling (Arbtech, April 2025).
    16. If, during development. contamination not previously identified is found to be present at the site
         then no further development (unless otherwise agreed in writing with the local planning
         authority) shall be carried out until the developer has submitted a remediation strategy to the
         local planning authority detailing how this unsuspected contamination shall be dealt with and
         obtained written approval from the local planning authority. The remediation strategy shall be
         implemented as approved.
    18. The dwelling hereby permitted shall meet the optional requirement of building regulation G2 to
         limit the water usage of the dwelling to no more than 110 litres per person per day. The
         subsequently installed water limiting measures shall thereafter be retained.
•   The reasons given for the conditions are:
    3.   As this matter is fundamental to ensure that no unacceptable risks are caused to humans,
         controlled waters or the wider environment during and following the development works and to
         ensure that any pollution is dealt with in accordance with Policies 24 and 33 of the Horsham
         District Planning Framework (2015).
    4.   As this matter is fundamental to ensure that the development is properly drained and
         to comply with policy 38 of the Horsham District Planning Framework (2015).
    5.   To enhance protected and Priority species & habitats and allow the Local Planning
         Authority to discharge its duties under the s40 of the NERC Act 2006 (Priority habitats &
         species).
    7.   To ensure that adequate and satisfactory provision is made for the parking of vehicles clear of
         all highways in accordance with Policy 40 of the Horsham District Planning Framework (2015).
    8.   As this matter is fundamental to ensure that no unacceptable risks are caused to humans,
         controlled waters or the wider environment during and following the development works and to
         ensure that any pollution is dealt with in accordance with Policies 24 and 33 of the Horsham
         District Planning Framework (2015).
    11. To provide alterative travel options to the use of the car in accordance with current sustainable
         transport policies and policy 40 Of the Horsham District Planning Framework (2015).
    12. To conserve and enhance protected and Priority species and allow the Local Planning Authority
         to discharge its duties under the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as
         amended). the Wildlife & Countryside Act 1981 as amended and s40 of the NERC Act 2006
         (Priority habitats & species) and policy 31 of the Horsham Development Framework.
    14. In the interest of visual amenity and due to control the development in accordance with policy
         33 of the Horsham District Planning Framework (2015).




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      2
Appeal Decision 6010268


     15.    To minimise the impacts of development on biodiversity, in accordance with National Planning
            Policy Framework (2023), Circular 06/2005 and the Natural Environment and Rural
            Communities Act 2006.
     16.    To ensure that no unacceptable risks are caused to humans. controlled waters or the wider
            environment during and following the development works and to ensure that any pollution is
            dealt with in accordance with the National Planning policy Framework.
     18.    To limit water use in order to improve the Sustainability of the development in accordance with
            Policy 37 of the Horsham District Planning Framework (2015), and to avoid an adverse impact
            on the Arun Valley SACSPA and Ramsar sites in accordance with Policy 31 of the Horsham
            District Planning Framework (2015), Paragraph 193 Of the National Planning Policy Framework
            (2024), and to allow the Local Planning Authority to discharge its duties under the Conservation
            of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended), and s40 Of the NERC Act 2006
            (Priority habitats & species).

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and the planning permission Ref DC/25/1329 for a change
       of use of volunteers agricultural storage barn to 1 no. residential unit at Priory Field
       Barn, Monastery Lane, Storrington, RH20 4LN granted on 6 February 2026 by
       Horsham District Council, is varied by deleting conditions 3 and 8 and substituting
       new conditions 5 and 16 as follows:
           5.      The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until a scheme
                   for the enhancement of biodiversity on the site has been submitted to and
                   approved in writing by the local planning authority. The development shall
                   be implemented in accordance with the approved details prior to first
                   occupation of the approved dwelling and all features shall be maintained
                   and retained thereafter.
           16.     Any contamination that is found during the course of construction of the
                   approved development that was not previously identified shall be reported
                   immediately to the local planning authority. Development on the part of
                   the site affected shall be suspended and a risk assessment carried out
                   and submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority.
                   Where unacceptable risks are found remediation and verification
                   schemes shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local
                   planning authority. These approved schemes shall be carried out before
                   the development [or relevant phase of development] is resumed or
                   continued.
Preliminary Matters
2.     This appeal is made to a number of conditions attached to a recent planning
       permission granted by the Council. Section 79(1) of the Town and Country
       Planning Act 1990 allows me to allow or dismiss the appeal or reverse or vary any
       part of the decision (whether the appeal relates to that part or not) and I may deal
       with the proposal as if it had been made to me in the first instance. This means
       that if I vary one or more of the conditions, even if the alteration does not address
       the appellant’s key concerns, I must allow the appeal.
3.     The appeal submission considers some of the conditions to be reasonable but
       unnecessary. As necessity is one of the core tests of a condition, where this has
       been queried I have treated it as a challenge to the condition.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
Appeal Decision 6010268


Main Issue
4.     The main issue is whether conditions 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16 and 18 as
       imposed are reasonable and necessary having regard to the nature of the
       proposed development and the site’s context.
Reasons
5.     The planning permission entails some external works to the building and the
       erection of a new porch. As such the building works are limited but the permission
       encompasses a material change in the use of the land. Thus, the site will be
       occupied permanently, with comings and goings, noise, light, activity etc. which is
       different from the profile of the current use. It may also entail additional works such
       as hardstanding for car parking. As such, the proposal must be assessed on that
       basis and not just as being for the erection of a 1m² porch.
       Conditions 3, 8 and 16 – Contamination
6.     The building has previously been constructed and has a solid concrete base. The
       extent of the ground works proposed as part of this application are limited to the
       new porch although there may be some associated works to the use, such as
       hardstanding for parking or installing infrastructure such as drainage. The Council
       has taken a precautionary approach in relation to contamination noting that the
       building has not previously been used as residential accommodation although that
       does not mean the site is contaminated. Similarly, the Environmental Health Team
       note the building is an agricultural building, but it is not evident that they possess
       any direct knowledge of the building, the site or its history.
7.     Therefore, the Council has not provided any substantive information or evidence to
       indicate that the previous use of the site or the lawful use of the building has in
       some way contaminated the land. Conversely, given the range of work that could
       have been undertaken and the materials that may have been used on the site, I
       cannot be entirely certain that the site is completely free from contamination.
8.     Given the scale of any ground works and likelihood of past contamination,
       conditions 3 and 8 appear to be excessive. However, a condition requiring the
       reporting of unexpected contamination would provide sufficient protection if
       contamination were to be found on the site. If no contamination is found during any
       construction works, then the condition would remain dormant, requiring no action
       from the appellant. I have therefore deleted conditions 3 and 8 and reworded
       condition 16.
       Condition 4 – Drainage
9.     The building has been used for storage, and I have not been provided with any
       information to suggest there may have been previous problems regarding site
       drainage. However, the building has not been used as a dwellinghouse and so
       does not appear to benefit from the required foul and surface water connections.
10. It is not uncommon for planning permissions to require such drainage details to be
    provided, whether for a new build or change of use, when no previous
    infrastructure exists. This ensures, amongst other things, that the works will not
    have consequential effects to the network; cause flooding or pollution; require
    ground works or additional infrastructure which may themselves be unacceptable.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010268


11. Given that there is no information before me to indicate the extent of the works or
    that they would not have any knock-on implications I find the condition to be
    reasonable and necessary.
       Conditions 5, 12 and 15 – Biodiversity
12. The Officer Report accepts that the development is exempt from the statutory 10%
    bio-diversity net gain (BNG) requirements. Notwithstanding the BNG requirement,
    Policy 31 of the Horsham District Planning Framework (HDPF) separately requires
    that, amongst other things, development proposals must contribute to the
    enhancement of existing biodiversity. I therefore see no reason why this issue
    should not be addressed by the proposal and indeed, I understand that a previous
    proposal was dismissed at appeal due to a lack of information on the matter.
13. A Preliminary Ecological Assessment (PEA) was prepared in support of the
    proposal. Generally, the PEA indicated that the proposal would be unlikely to affect
    any nearby designated sites, bats, invertebrates, reptiles, badgers or other
    mammals. The PEA raised a query regarding the effect of the development on
    Great Crested Newts (GCNs) given the presence of a pond within 100m of the
    site. It recommended further environmental DNA testing.
14. It is evident from the decision notice that this testing was undertaken, and that
    subject to complying with the report’s recommendations no likely impact on GCNs
    or their habitats would occur. I therefore do not find a condition (15) which requires
    the appellant to adhere to the findings in their own consultant’s report to be
    unreasonable.
15. In order to minimise any risks that had been identified in the PEA, it also set out
    recommendations to which the development should adhere. It is therefore perfectly
    reasonable that the development adopts these recommendations, which were
    proffered in support of the development. Planning condition number 12 provides
    an appropriate mechanism to ensure that this occurs and so should be retained.
16. The PEA therefore largely sets out measures to avoid harm. It does not explicitly
    set out how the development will enhance existing biodiversity, as required by the
    development plan. Given the existing use and activities that take place on site, the
    proposed residential use and porch might make little overall difference to the
    biodiversity of the site, in which case only moderate measures would be necessary
    to achieve an overall enhancement. Therefore, whilst it is still important that there
    is a condition in place to ensure that this can happen, given the site’s context and
    scale of development it is appropriate that condition number 5 is modified and is
    made a pre-occupation condition.
       Condition 7 – Provision of car parking
17. The HDPF requires developments to provide adequate parking. Condition number
    7 requires a drawing showing the provision of on-site car parking, prior to the
    occupation of the dwelling. The application was not accompanied by a site layout
    drawing and thus it is not clear where cars would be parked on site. It was evident
    from my site visit that there would be adequate space for a car to park within the
    confines of the dwelling’s curtilage but it is not clear exactly where it would be or
    how much space it would take up. Given that the area given over to car parking
    may also have implications for the level of biodiversity enhancement required for


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010268


       the site, I do not see the need to confirm such details as being unnecessary or
       unreasonable.
       Condition 11 – Cycle Parking
18. It is suggested that the condition is unnecessary given the proximity of local
    facilities. However, both local and national planning policies encourage the use of
    cycling and the provision of cycle parking in conjunction with new dwellings is an
    important element in achieving these objectives. Furthermore, such provision is
    not dependent upon the proximity of a new house to local shops as this would
    ignore cycling for other reasons. Thus, the condition is reasonable and necessary.
       Condition 14 – Permitted Development
19. The condition seeks to prevent the extension of the dwelling via permitted
    development, including through the creation of an additional storey or through
    works to the roof. The condition also prevents the erection of outbuildings within
    the dwelling’s curtilage.
20. The appeal property is positioned in the corner of the wider field and is relatively
    secluded. Boundary planting also helps shield the building from wider views. From
    the submitted drawings it appears that the curtilage serving the dwelling would not
    be extensive. Nonetheless, the building would, in line with the current proposal,
    appear more domestic in character than at present, and with a new curtilage, the
    site as a whole would become more distinct from the surrounding field in which it
    sits and which at present forms part of the wider undeveloped countryside. Thus,
    further additional works to the dwelling, particularly in the form of upward
    extensions or outbuildings would have the potential to cause harm to the wider
    character of the area.
21. Whilst the Planning Practice Guidance generally cautions against conditions that
    remove permitted development rights, I find that the condition would be reasonable
    and necessary in this instance to ensure a satisfactory appearance and to
    maintain the generally verdant, spacious character and appearance of the locality.
    I am also mindful that the removal of permitted development rights does not seek
    to prevent development. It simply gives the Council control over the further
    expansion of the dwellinghouse. In the circumstances, I do not see this as an
    undue burden to the appellant.
       Condition 18 – Water Consumption
22. Policy 37 of the HDPF sets out the Council’s requirements in relation to
    sustainable construction and requires, amongst other things, a water limit of 110
    litres/person/day.
23. Whilst the Building Regulations regime does impose a limit on water consumption,
    Councils in water stressed areas can impose the lower optional standard through
    planning permissions, especially when there is an accompanying planning policy
    to this effect. This approach to water efficiency is reinforced in the recently
    updated National Planning Policy Framework.
24. There is no evidence before me to indicate that this established policy requirement
    should not be applied to this dwelling. Consequently, in these circumstances I find
    the condition to be both reasonable and necessary.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6010268


Other Matters
25. The appellant notes that conditions 9 (landscaping) and 17 (external materials) are
    reasonable and so I have not considered them as having been challenged. The
    appellant does though suggest that they are not consistent with other decisions. I
    have been referred to other developments in the area, which it is said have been
    subject to fewer or less stringent conditions. However, I do not know what
    information may have been submitted with those proposals or the consultation
    responses. Thus, I do not know the extent to which these factors may have
    influenced the need or otherwise for certain planning conditions. In the
    circumstances, I cannot be sure that the context of these other planning
    permissions are directly comparable to the situation before me.
26. I have not had further regard in this decision to concerns over how the Council
    handled the application, previous submissions or how it approached the allocation
    of land during the Local Plan process. Such matters are beyond the remit of this
    appeal and so are best addressed directly with the Council.
Conclusion
27. For the reasons I have given, I have not found conditions 3 and 8 to be reasonable
    or necessary and so they can be deleted. Conditions 5 and 16 are deleted and
    amended conditions are imposed in their place which better reflect the scale of
    development and level of control that is required.
28. However, I have found conditions 4, 7, 11,12, 14, 15 and 18 to be reasonable and
    necessary in the circumstances of the case. I therefore make no changes to them.
29. All other aspects of planning permission DC/25/1329 remain unaltered. The appeal
    is therefore allowed on this basis.

Stewart Glassar
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
