 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 29 July 2026
 by Philip Willmer BSc Dip Arch RIBA
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 19 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010130
 291 Albert Drive, Sheerwater, Surrey, GU21 5TU.
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mrs Shaida Khan against the decision of Woking Borough Council
 •   The application Ref is PLAN/2026/0093
 •   The development proposed is described as rear garden outbuilding with flat roof and a maximum
     eaves height of 2.5m and for use as an office, storage and gym space.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a rear garden
   outbuilding with flat roof and a maximum eaves height of 2.5m and for use as an
   office, storage and gym space at 291 Albert Drive, Sheerwater, Surrey, GU21
   5TU.in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref PLAN/2026/0093, subject
   to the following conditions:
     1)      The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
             date of this decision.
     2)      The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
             development hereby permitted shall match those used in the existing
             building.
     3)      The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
             the following approved unnumbered drawings: Location and Block Plan scale
             1:200 and 1:1250, Site Plan scale 1:100, Proposed Floor Plan scale 1:50 and
             Elevations scale 1:50.
     4)      The outbuilding hereby permitted shall not be used other than for purposes
             incidental to the dwelling known as 291 Albert Drive, Sheerwater, Woking
             Surrey, GU21 5TU.
Main Issue
2. I consider the main issue to be weather the proposed outbuilding would be
   occupied as ancillary accommodation the main house.
Reasons
3. The appeal property, 291 Albert Drive (No 291) is a two-storey semi-detached
   house. It has a deep, rectangular shaped and enclosed rear garden which backs
   on to the Basingstoke Canal. There is access to the rear of the property from the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6010130


     towpath that runs alongside the canal through a wooded area, separating the rear
     garden of No 291 and those of the neighbouring dwellings from the canal.
4. The appellant proposes a detached single storey garden building ancillary to the
   main dwelling house. It would be located towards the end of the rear garden
   furthest from the house. It would have an internal floor area of approximately 36
   square metres and be subdivided into three separate rooms. The plans indicate
   that the largest room would be used as gym/office. In addition to a separate
   shower room/toilet a third room is noted to be for storage.
5. As I observed several neighbouring properties also have relatively large, detached
   garden outbuildings, set away from the rear of the houses.
6. The Council has raised no concerns in respect of design, character and
   appearance of the area, residential living conditions, transport, flood risk and
   drainage, or Biodiversity Net Gain. However, it is concerned given the proposed
   floor area of the structure and the potential for pedestrian access from the towpath
   to the proposed garden building, that it could be occupied other than as ancillary
   accommodation to the main house. It considers that if the structure was to be
   occupied other than as ancillary to the main house its occupation would be likely to
   conflict with the development plan as a whole.
7. Notwithstanding the Council’s concern about the possible occupation as an
   independent dwelling, the appellant has not sought permission for the use of the
   outbuilding as a self-contained annexe. The outbuilding would, as shown remain
   within the curtilage of the main dwelling, and as there is no kitchen facility those
   using the building would remain dependent upon the main dwelling for everyday
   living.
8. Further, from the Council’s evidence I see that the internal floor area of 36 square
   meters is 1 square meter less than that required to meet its standard for a single
   storey one-person, one bedroom dwelling. Accordingly, the building would not, as
   designed, meet the Council’s own design requirements and therefore would not be
   suitable for occupation as a self-contained dwelling.
9. I note there is a possible separate access from the towpath, but from my site visit I
   saw that this is over undulating ground, unmade paths and through the trees. I do
   not consider that this would provide an attractive or particularly practical point of
   access to the outbuilding for any potential residential occupier. On balance
   therefore I am not persuaded that if I were to allow the building a condition to close
   access from the towpath would be appropriate.
10. I appreciate that the building, like many other ancillary garden outbuildings has the
    potential to be occupied other than as ancillary accommodation to the main house.
    However, if a change of use occurred this would be contrary to any conditional
    planning permission granted and in addition subject to Building Regulation consent.
    In my experience, given the surrounding residential development, if the building
    were to be unlawfully occupied it would very quickly be drawn to the Council’s
    attention and appropriate enforcement action could be taken. Accordingly, I do not
    agree that a condition restricting the use of the outbuilding only to purposes
    incidental to No 91, thereby precluding occupation as an independent unit of
    accommodation, could not be enforced.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
 Appeal Decision 6010130


11. On balance therefore I consider that there is no justification for concluding, based
    on the limited evidence to the contrary, that just because it might, that the building
    would be likely to be occupied unlawfully. Nevertheless, if I were to allow the
    appeal I would for the avoidance of doubt and in the interests of the character and
    appearance of the area and neighbouring residential occupiers living conditions,
    condition the buildings future use for purposes incidental to the main dwelling
    house only.
12. For the reasons set out above I conclude in respect of the main issue that the
    proposed outbuilding would, subject to condition be occupied as ancillary
    accommodation the main house. To allow it would therefore accord with the
    objectives of the ancillary accommodation element of Policy DM9 of the Woking
    Development Management Policies Development Plan Document DPD (Adopted
    October 2016) - Flats above shops and ancillary accommodation as they seek to
    allow only genuine facilities ancillary to the occupation of the main house or its
    curtilage.
Conditions
13. I have considered the conditions suggested by the Council in light of the advice in
    the Framework and the Planning Practice Guidance. In the interests of precision
    and enforceability, I have amended the Council’s suggested wording where
    appropriate.
14. To protect the visual amenity of the host property, the character and appearance of
    the area and the living conditions of neighbouring residential occupiers I shall
    restrict the use of the outbuilding to purposes incidental to the enjoyment of the
    dwelling house.
15. I shall include a condition about the materials to be used in the construction of the
    external surfaces of the building, and in the interests of certainty, I will impose a
    condition requiring the development to be undertaken in accordance with the
    approved plans.
Conclusions
16. For the reasons given above and having regard to all other matters raised, I
    conclude that the appeal should be allowed.



Philip Willmer
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
