Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 20 July 2026
by K Craddock BA (Hons) MAUD MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010508
60 Langdale Road, Nottingham NG3 7FB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Mohammed Saleh against the decision of Nottingham City Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01876/PFUL3.
•    The development proposed was originally described as “separate the single storey rear wing to
     provide two dwellings. Parking and private amenity space for both dwellings within each curtilage”.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     Subsequent to the Council’s decision on the application, the Government
       published a new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) dated
       17 August 2026, which replaces the previous Framework published in December
       2024, and all other iterations. Both the appellant and the Council were given the
       opportunity to comment on any changes relevant to the main issue in this appeal.
3.     The description of development in the banner above is taken from the application
       form. The decision notice uses different wording but there is nothing before me to
       show that this has been formally agreed between the parties. The proposal would
       be more accurately described as the subdivision of the existing house to provide
       two dwellings with separate parking and amenity space to serve each dwelling.
       I have dealt with the appeal on this basis.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the provision of family housing in
       the area.
Reasons
5.     The appeal site is a three-bedroom semi-detached dwelling. It is located on a
       corner plot at the junction of Langdale Road and Chester Road within an
       established suburban area. The original dwelling is two-storey with a large flat roof
       single storey rear extension. The proposed development would subdivide the
       property into a two-bedroom house and a one-bedroom ground floor flat.
6.     Policy 8 of the Greater Nottingham Aligned Core Strategies (Part 1 Local Plan)
       (2014) (ACS) places an emphasis on providing family housing within the Nottingham
       City area. This is further defined by Policy HO1 of the Nottingham City Land and
       Planning Policies Development Plan Document (Local Plan Part 2) (2020) (LAPP),

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010508


       which describes family housing, amongst other things, as containing three or more
       bedrooms. The proposed development would result in the loss of a three-bedroom
       dwelling suitable for housing a family, contrary to these policies.
7.     I have had regard to the argument that the proposal would create benefits
       identified by the appellant, including that the proposed development would create
       smaller residential units more suitable for single people or couples. However, I
       have been provided with no substantive evidence to demonstrate that there is an
       unmet need for smaller units sufficient to justify the loss of a family dwelling, a type
       of housing protected under Policy HO2 of the LAPP. As such, the proposed
       housing mix is not supported with the evidence of local need and demand. I
       apportion little weight to the appellant’s contention that three bedrooms would be
       retained across the whole site, as the evidence suggests the appeal intends the
       proposed dwellings to be under separate ownership and occupied independently.
8.     With regard to the main issue, the proposal would result in the loss of a family
       dwelling, which would have a harmful effect on the type and availability of
       residential accommodation available in this area. It would, therefore, conflict with
       Policy 8 of the ACS and Policies HO1 and HO2 of the LAPP. Together, these
       policies seek, amongst other things, to protect against the loss of dwellinghouses
       with three or more bedrooms suitable for family occupation.
Other Matters
9.     The appellant has referred to the proposed one-bedroom property being suitable
       for a family member of the main house’s resident. This appears to be describing
       an annex and is not the proposed development I have in front of me. Amending it
       to reflect this would amount to evolving the scheme. Such a proposal would need
       to be the subject of a new planning application. I also note that the current
       arrangement and layout of the house would not prevent a family member from
       residing there semi-independently of the house’s main resident.
10. There is no dispute that the scheme would provide internal space compliant with
    the Nationally Described Space Standard (NDSS) and adequate private external
    space and within-curtilage car parking for both dwellings. However, the absence of
    harm is neutral in the planning balance.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
11. The proposed development would create two smaller individual properties with
    their own amenity space. However, the proposal would result in the loss of family
    housing where there is an identified need for it and a presumption to prevent the
    loss of such housing. It therefore conflicts with the development plan as a whole.
12. Policy S4 of the Framework sets out that development proposals within
    settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework. One such circumstance where
    the benefits of approving development are likely to be substantially outweighed by
    adverse effects includes the safeguarding of buildings for particular uses in the
    development plan. The Council has identified a need for family housing within the
    city area.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010508


13. Policy HO7 of the Framework states that substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community as identified through needs assessments
    prepared for the area of the local planning authority and other relevant evidence.
    The evidence base for the development plan highlights a shortage of homes
    suitable for families in the Council area. Accordingly, I attach substantial weight to
    the conflict with Policy 8 of the ACS and Policies HO1 and HO2 of the LAPP.
14. Taken together, I find the benefits of the proposal would be substantially
    outweighed by the adverse effect when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies of the Framework. As such, Policy S4 does not point to permission
    being granted in this instance.
15. In the final balance, material considerations in the proposal’s favour are not of
    sufficient weight to suggest the decision should be made other than in accordance
    with the development plan. Therefore, for the reasons given, and having regard to
    all other matters raised, the appeal is dismissed.



K Craddock
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
