Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 13 August 2026
by C Butcher BSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21st September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010393
Mulberry House, Middle Street, East Lambrook, South Petherton, Somerset,
TA13 5HH
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Chris and Christine Howard against the decision of Somerset Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/00931/OUT.
•    The development proposed is one single storey custom build dwelling, new tree and hedgerow
     planting, and an upgrade to the existing foul water system.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     An updated version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework)
       was published on 17th August 2026. In the interests of fairness, I provided the main
       parties with an opportunity to provide comments on the new Framework as part of
       the appeal process. I have taken account of those comments when making my
       decision.
3.     The appeal relates to an application for outline planning permission with all matters
       reserved. As such, where the proposed site plans show any information relating to
       those reserved matters, I have treated this as illustrative for the purposes of
       making my decision.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is whether the proposed development would be in a suitable
       location, taking account of development plan policies and the effect of the proposal
       on the character and appearance of the area.
Reasons
5.     The appeal site forms part of the rear garden space of the dwelling known as
       Mulberry House on the edge of the small settlement of East Lambrook. Policy SS1
       of the South Somerset Local Plan, March 2015 (the LP) sets out the settlement
       strategy for the wider area. East Lambrook is regarded as a ‘rural settlement’ as
       part of this hierarchy. LP Policy SS2 then sets out that, in such areas,
       development that meets identified housing needs is considered to be appropriate
       where it would be commensurate with the scale and character of the settlement.
6.     The proposal is for a self build or custom build house. The land supply figure for
       this part of Somerset is just 2.22 years, and while I have little evidence before me

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010393


       with regards to the need for self build or custom build homes in the wider area, the
       significant deficit in housing land supply more generally is a strong indicator that
       there would also be an unmet need for the type of home proposed, including
       dwellings that would incorporate accessibility features for elderly residents. As
       such, the first part of Policy SS2 is likely to be met. Policy SS2 also sets out that
       rural settlements should include two or more key services. East Lambrook appears
       to benefit from an existing public house and church and so this clause is also
       satisfied. I therefore turn to the required analysis of the impact of the proposal on
       the character and appearance of the area.
7.     During my site visit I walked westward along Middle Street towards the appeal site.
       In doing so, there was a very clear perception of moving away from the core of the
       small settlement towards the open countryside beyond. Indeed, in the immediate
       area around Mulberry House itself, development becomes more sporadic and
       loosely knit and there is therefore a sense of transition and connection to the
       surrounding landscape. It also appeared to me during my visit that backland style
       developments do not form part of the predominant character of the settlement.
       Indeed, the vast majority of homes seem to have a frontage onto a road, even if
       they are set back within their plots.
8.     I note that the appellant has provided a Landscape and Visual Appraisal (the LVA,
       March 2025) which concludes that the proposed development is unlikely to result
       in harm to landscape character or visual amenity. However, I am of the view that
       this underplays the potential impacts to a significant degree.
9.     As the proposal is in outline form, the scale, layout and design of the dwelling is
       currently unknown. However, a key aspect of the proposal is the provision of an
       unusually long access track. In whatever form it takes, this would appear as an
       obvious and somewhat incongruous feature which would provide a strong
       impression of an intensification of development. Moreover, the LVA provides an
       analysis of the proposal from different viewpoints. It suggests that even a single
       storey dwelling would be partially visible during the winter months from the access
       point, and from the public rights of way to the south west, north and north west of
       the appeal site.
10. Even if only partially visible, the backland style of development would be readily
    apparent to passers-by for large parts of the year. This would give the settlement a
    harsher edge and would significantly erode the sense of transition that currently
    exists from the core of the settlement to the surrounding countryside. Moreover,
    the backland nature of the proposed dwelling, which is more akin to a suburban
    area, would seem highly out of place given the predominant character of the
    surroundings. As a result of the siting of the proposed dwelling and the incongruity
    of the access track, it is clear to me that the proposal would result in a
    considerable level of harm.
11. On that basis, the proposed development would not be in a suitable location,
    taking account of development plan policies and the effect of the proposal on the
    character and appearance of the area. It would therefore conflict with LP Policies
    SS1, SS2 and EQ2, the relevant aspects of which seek to ensure that
    development is suitably located, including by preserving character and
    appearance. I do not however find conflict with LP Policy HG5 which seeks to
    ensure that there is a mix of market housing. Indeed, I do not consider that the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010393


       provision of a single self build or custom build dwelling would result in an
       unacceptable housing mix in this area.
Other Matters
12. While not included on the Council’s decision notice as a reason for refusal, I do
    note that the officer report suggests that the proposal could also result in harm to
    the setting of the adjacent East Lambrook Conservation Area. However, the
    significance of the Conservation Area, in so far as it is relevant to this appeal,
    appears to derive primarily from the appearance of some of the historic buildings
    that form the core of the small settlement. It appears to me that there is very
    limited, if any, visibility between the appeal site and the historic core. As such, I am
    satisfied that the harm I have identified to the wider character and appearance of
    the area would not extend to the setting or significance of the Conservation Area.
13. I am also satisfied that the siting of the proposed dwelling would not have a
    negative impact upon the setting of nearby listed buildings, which are all primarily
    appreciated from close range.
14. The proposal has the potential to affect the integrity of the Somerset Levels and
    Moors Special Protection Area in relation to phosphates. I acknowledge that
    mitigation has been proposed through a unilateral undertaking. However, as I am
    dismissing the appeal for other reasons there is no need for me to undertake an
    appropriate assessment.
15. The appellant has provided several application references for proposals that they
    consider to be similar to the appeal scheme. However, there is little in the way of
    detail, and it is not clear to me whether those schemes would be directly
    comparable to the proposal before me, including the backland style of
    development and the lengthy access track. Moreover, the existence of these
    schemes would not justify allowing an appeal where I have found considerable
    harm in relation to character and appearance.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
16. I have found that the proposal would not be in a suitable location as a result of the
    identified harm to the character and appearance of the area. The proposal would
    therefore conflict with the development plan when read as a whole.
17. The proposal would provide one new self build or custom build dwelling which
    would contribute to meeting local need. There would also be economic benefits,
    both during the construction phase and post occupation. In addition, there is the
    potential for increased biodiversity on site.
18. I note that the appellants have stated that they are elderly and wish to downsize
    while remaining in the village. The dwelling would incorporate accessibility features
    and there is a stated desire for it to be single storey. However, it is not clear to me
    why the proposed dwelling is the only way of enabling the appellants to downsize
    while staying in the area. Moreover, while the appellants are committed to
    maintaining and managing the orchard, this could be achieved without the
    proposed development, including by any future owners of Mulberry House. As
    such, when considered in combination, the benefits of the proposal would be
    limited.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010393


19. The site is well connected to existing built form, and given that it is part of an
    existing rear garden, it is likely that the site can be considered to form part of the
    settlement. Policy S4 of the Framework notes that development proposals within
    settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects. Policy HO7 requires that
    substantial weight be given to the benefits of providing homes which will contribute
    towards evidenced needs. That could be said to be in play here. Meanwhile, Policy
    W4 states that substantial weight should also be given to proposals that would
    improve water quality and reduce water borne pollution. Given the proposal
    includes the replacement of an existing septic tank, this policy would also be
    triggered.
20. Policy L2(d) opines that substantial weight should be given to the principle of
    providing additional units within residential curtilages. However, it goes on to
    states that such proposals should be consistent with the overall street scene,
    unless the development would not be visible from the street frontage. I have set
    out why the provision of a backland style of development and a long access track
    would not be consistent with the predominant character of the street scene in this
    instance. Furthermore, while the track in front of Mulberry House is unmade, it is
    still publicly accessible and provides access, both to the host property and the
    appeal site. The appellant’s own evidence, in the form of the LVA, confirms that
    the proposal would be visible from the site access, if only partially. It is also the
    case that the lengthy driveway, which forms a key part of the proposed
    development, would also be easily visible.
21. As such, it is reasonable to conclude that the requirements of Policy L2(d)(i) of the
    Framework would not be met. I am also keenly aware that Policy DP3(1) of the
    Framework says that development proposals should respond to their context, and
    that DP3(3) states that such schemes should be refused if they conflict with part 1
    of the policy. That would certainly be the case in this instance, and I am of the view
    that this is a key determinative feature of this appeal.
22. As a result, having considered all of these matters, I conclude that the identified
    level of harm would substantially outweigh the benefits of the proposal, even when
    affording substantial weight with regards to Policy HO7 and W4.
23. Moreover, in light of the Council’s land supply position, even if the site were
    considered to be outside of the settlement, and therefore that Policy S5(j) of the
    Framework was in play, the appeal would still fail on the basis that the identified
    harm substantially outweighs the benefits for the reasons already provided.
24. Accordingly, there are no material considerations, either individually or in
    combination, that outweigh the identified harm and associated development plan
    conflict. The appeal is therefore dismissed.



C Butcher
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
