Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 26 August 2026
by B Pattison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25th September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010709
 3, Nursery Hoe Lane, Nazeing, EN9 2RJ
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by CHS Truck and Trailer against the decision of Epping Forest District Council.
 •    The application Ref is EPF/0353/26.
 •    The development proposed is Retrospective consent for storage of vehicles on land at No. 3 Nursery
      (Formerly known as Presdale Farm).

 Decision
 1.     The appeal is dismissed.
 Preliminary Matter
 2.     On 17 August 2026, Government published a revised National Planning Policy
        Framework (the Framework). This included revisions to policies that are pertinent
        to the appeal, such as those relating to development in the Green Belt. During the
        appeal the main parties were invited to comment on the relevance of the revised
        Framework to the appeal proposal. In my decision, I have had regard to the written
        responses.
 3.     The Council’s description of development differs to that within the planning
        application form. However, as the appellant has confirmed no objection to the
        revised wording, and as it more clearly describes the proposal, I have used this
        wording for the appeal decision.
 Main Issues
 4.     The main issues are:
       •    whether or not the development is inappropriate development within the Green
            Belt having regard to the Framework and any other relevant development plan
            policies;
       •    the effect of the development on the openness of the Green Belt; and
       •    if the appeal scheme is found to be inappropriate development, whether the
            harm by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm, is clearly
            outweighed by other considerations so as to amount to the very special
            circumstances needed to justify the development.




 https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010709


Reasons
Whether or not inappropriate development in the Green Belt
       - Limited infilling
5.       The appeal site lies within the Metropolitan Green Belt. Policy DM4 of the Epping
         Forest District Local Plan 2011-2033 Part One (2023) (LP) sets out that within the
         Green Belt, planning permission will not be granted for inappropriate development,
         except in very special circumstances, in accordance with national policy. The
         policy sets out certain exceptions where development would not be inappropriate
         development. One exception within Policy DM4 C (v) is the limited infilling in rural
         communities and limited affordable homes, in locations that are in accordance with
         Policy H3 of the LP.
6.       Chapter 13 of the Framework identifies that the fundamental aim of Green Belt
         policy is to prevent urban sprawl by keeping land permanently open. The essential
         characteristics of Green Belts are their openness and their permanence. Policy
         GB6.2. of the Framework states that inappropriate development is, by definition,
         harmful to the Green Belt and should not be approved except in very special
         circumstances.
7.       Policy GB7.1 of the Framework similarly outlines a number of categories of
         development which are not inappropriate development in the Green Belt. Of
         relevance to the proposal, within Policy GB7.1.c. is limited infilling in villages lying
         within the Green Belt. Whilst the wording within Policy DM4 C (v) and GB7.1.c
         differ somewhat, they broadly conform in terms of identifying that limited infilling in
         rural communities/villages would not be inappropriate development.
8.       The appellant indicates that the appeal site is located outside any identified
         settlement boundary for Nazeing, which the submitted evidence confirms is some
         distance from the appeal site. Case law1 and an appeal decision2 submitted by the
         appellant has established that limited infilling is applicable to all villages and not
         restricted to sites that fall within identified settlement boundaries in local plans. It is
         necessary for decision makers to have regard to the situation ‘on the ground’ to
         consider the factors which may determine whether a site can be considered to be
         within a village.
9.       I have not been directed to definitions within the Framework or LP, however, the
         Oxford English Dictionary definitions of both ‘village’ and ‘community’ refer to some
         aspect of people living, or having a group of houses. Whilst the appeal site is close
         to the boundary of the Birchwood Industrial Estate and associated built form, it is
         distinct from any significant grouping of residential properties. Consequently, when
         viewed ‘from the ground’ the nearest residential properties are significantly
         dispersed and there is not a discernible group of closely associated residential
         buildings, which would be expected within a village or rural community.
10. The term ‘limited infilling’ is not defined in the Framework. The supporting text to
    Policy DM4, identifies that for the purposes of the policy, ‘limited infilling’ means
    the development of a small gap in an otherwise continuous built up frontage, or the
    small-scale redevelopment of existing properties within such a frontage. I find this


1
    Julian Wood v SSCLG and Gravesham Borough Council [2015] EWCA Civ 195
2
    PINS Ref: APP/P1940/W/17/3183388


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            2
Appeal Decision 6010709


        to be a common interpretation of the term ‘limited infilling’, which is a reasonable
        consideration in this case.
11. The appeal site is 1.3 hectares and can accommodate 120 parked vehicles. Given
    its significant size and potential to accommodate a significant number of light
    goods and public carrier vehicles, in my view, the proposal cannot be considered
    to constitute limited infilling.
12. As the development does not constitute limited infilling and is not within a village, I
    find that the proposal does not fall within any of the categories of development
    which are not inappropriate development outlined within Policy GB7.1 of the
    Framework.
       - Grey Belt
13. In determining a previous appeal3 at the site, the Inspector found that the appeal
    site does not constitute previously developed land. The appellant does not dispute
    this, but indicates that the appeal site is grey belt land. The Framework defines
    grey belt land as either previously developed land or any other land that, in either
    case, does not strongly contribute to any of purposes (a), (b), or (d) in policy GB2
    of the Framework.
14. The Council does not dispute that the appeal site would not strongly contribute to
    any of the purposes (a), (b), or (d) in policy GB2 of the Framework. In my view, the
    appeal site is not located close to a large built-up area; would not merge towns;
    nor does it affect the setting and special character of a historic town.
    Consequently, the appeal site can be considered ‘grey belt’ land.
15. Under Policy GB7.g of the Framework, development should not be regarded as
    inappropriate in the Green Belt if four criteria are met. Of these criteria, the Council
    indicate that the appellant has not demonstrated that there is an evidenced unmet
    need for the type of development proposed, as required by criteria GB7.g.ii. The
    description of development for the previous appeal referred to the proposal as B8
    open storage. The main parties have not disputed that description and, therefore, I
    will focus my assessment of Policy GB7.g.ii on the unmet need for B8 storage.
16. During my site visit I saw the appellant’s headquarters at Charlton Mead Lane,
    Hoddesdon (HQ site). The business specialises in the repair of vehicles. Due to
    the limitations of the HQ site there is insufficient space for the necesarry storage of
    vehicles before they undergo repair works. Therefore, the appeal site is used for
    safe, secure storage of vehicles awaiting repair, collection, parts or workshop
    availability at the HQ site. Vehicles are collected on trailers and taken to the HQ
    site daily. The appellant indicates that any site used for the storage of vehicles
    needs to be relatively well located to the HQ site, and needs to avoid as far as is
    practicable, heavily trafficked areas.
17. The submitted evidence outlines the appellant’s extensive search for a suitable
    site for vehicle storage. This included engaging with a number of property agents
    and utilising online property searches, as detailed in two supporting statements
    prepared by members of staff involved in identifying and assessing potential sites
    for vehicle storage.


3
    PINS REF: APP/J1535/W/25/3376265


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010709


18. The submitted evidence identifies a number of potential sites that were discounted
    by the appellant for various reasons, including insufficient size, being in an
    unsuitable location for the business, or excessive cost.
19. Policy E2.2 of the Framework states that, where a development proposal is
    required to demonstrate whether an unmet need exists, consideration should be
    given to whether market signals indicate an undersupply of specific types of
    business land or premises, taking into account the anticipated catchment area for
    the type of development proposed.
20. The appellant contends that existing employment land designated within the LP is
    either too small or located too far from the HQ site. However, no substantive
    evidence has been provided regarding the size, availability, or distance of
    designated sites which contain B8 land within the LP area. While the submitted
    evidence may demonstrate that the appellant has been unable to secure
    alternative B8 premises for a variety of reasons, it largely relates to the appellant’s
    particular operational circumstances rather than providing evidence of a wider
    unmet need. In my view, Policy GB7.g.ii requires an assessment of the need for
    the specific type of development proposed, rather than whether it is required at this
    particular location.
21. The submitted evidence does not, for example, include information on occupancy
    rates or identifiable demand for B8 storage within the area. I note that Table 3.1 of
    the LP identifies a number of employment site allocations, some of which would
    include B8 floor area. Furthermore, Policy E1 of the LP states that the Council will
    meet identified employment land needs through the site allocations summarised in
    that table. However, the evidence before me does not explain the progress made
    in delivering those allocations, nor whether there is existing or forthcoming B8 land
    that has recently entered, or is expected to enter, the market. Consequently, there
    is no robust assessment of the supply of, or demand for, B8 land.
22. I recognise that the sites identified in the submitted evidence do not meet the
    appellant’s specific requirements. However, when considering whether there is a
    general unmet need, there is no substantive evidence to demonstrate that the
    overall supply of B8 land is insufficient to meet current demand. Equally, there is
    no robust evidence to suggest that the development plan is failing to meet existing
    needs. Accordingly, I find that there is no demonstrable unmet need for the type of
    development proposed.
23. As a result, the proposal conflicts with criteria GB7.g.ii of the Framework.
    Consequently, the proposal is inappropriate development in the Green Belt.
Openness
24. Chapter 13 of the Framework identifies that the fundamental aim of Green Belt
    policy is to prevent urban sprawl by keeping land permanently open. The essential
    characteristics of Green Belts are their openness and their permanence.
    Openness has both a visual and spatial dimension.
25. In determining the previous appeal, the Inspector found that the proposal had a
    moderate effect on the visual and spatial openness of the Green Belt. From the
    submitted evidence, and my observations on site, I have no reason to disagree
    with this. In coming to this view, I have taken into consideration that the large
    numbers of vehicles stored within the site, collectively present a solid mass in

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010709


       contrast to the previous undeveloped site. However, views of the appeal site from
       Hoe Lane are heavily filtered by boundary treatments and roadside vegetation.
       While users of the adjacent greenhouses and commercial area will be aware of the
       site and its use, wider public views are limited. I understand that there are no
       buildings on the site, the existing access is adequate for the proposed use, and
       vehicle movements are limited. Nevertheless, the proposal would conflict with the
       provisions within the Framework which seek to preserve the openness of the
       Green Belt.
Other considerations
26. I have found that the appeal proposal represents inappropriate development in the
    Green Belt, which is harmful by definition. The Framework states that
    inappropriate development should not be approved except in very special
    circumstances.
27. The business employs 34 people and has a significant annual turnover. I
    understand that the appellant’s HQ site is too small and constrained to effectively
    serve the business, and that additional off-site storage space for vehicles is
    essential to the operation of the business. The appellant indicates that the effects
    of Brexit have negatively impacted the shipping of parts from the European Union
    and therefore vehicles need to be stored for longer periods than previously.
28. Whilst I am sympathetic to the difficulties that the appellant has experienced in the
    search for an appropriate site, I have found that the submitted evidence does not
    indicate that there is a demonstrable unmet need for B8 premises. Accordingly, it
    seems unlikely the provision of employment and associated economic benefits
    would be lost, as there is potential for the business to seek alternative premises.
    Nonetheless, the Framework states that to support business growth, substantial
    weight should be given to the economic benefits of proposals for commercial
    development which allow businesses to expand.
29. The appeal site is well located for the efficient operation of the business as it is not
    too far from the HQ site, and avoids heavily trafficked town centre locations. It is
    also safe and secure. Given my findings in relation to the demonstrable unmet
    need for the B8 premises, I afford this limited weight.
30. I note that designated employment land is located within very close proximity to
    the appeal site. However, as I have found that the development is inappropriate
    development in the Green Belt, this is not a factor that carries positive weight.
Other Matters
31. One of the Council’s reasons for refusal related to the effect of the development on
    the integrity of the Epping Forest Special Area of Conservation (SAC). The Council
    indicate that the development results in a net increase in traffic. As traffic is a key
    contributor to atmospheric pollution, likely significant effects on the qualifying
    features of the SAC cannot be ruled out. The appellant has indicated a willingness
    to enter into an agreement to address any mitigation required to address concerns
    related to the SAC.
32. However, Regulation 63(1) of The Conservation of Species and Habitats
    Regulations 2017 (as amended) indicates that the requirement for an appropriate
    assessment is only necessary where the competent authority is minded to give


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010709


       consent. As the appeal is being dismissed on other grounds it is not necessary for
       me to consider this matter further.
33. The concerns expressed regarding the Council’s conduct during the processing of
    the planning application fall outside of the remit of this decision.
Green Belt Balance and Conclusion
34. The development constitutes inappropriate development in the Green Belt which
    should not be approved except in very special circumstances. It also does not
    preserve, and has a harmful effect on, the openness of the Green Belt. Therefore,
    the development is contrary to Policy DM4 and the principles of the Framework
    that seek to protect the Green Belt from inappropriate development.
35. The Framework states that very special circumstances will not exist unless the
    potential harm to the Green Belt by reason of inappropriateness and any other
    harm resulting from the proposed development, is clearly outweighed by other
    considerations. The benefits as presented to me are worthy of positive weight,
    which would be substantial overall. Against this, I must give the harm to the Green
    Belt by way of inappropriateness substantial weight as per policy GB6 of the
    Framework. I have found that the proposal causes moderate harm to the
    openness of the Green Belt, and this is also afforded substantial weight as per
    Policy GB6 of the Framework. Consequently, the other considerations in relation to
    the proposal do not clearly outweigh the harm that I have identified. Consequently,
    the very special circumstances necessary to justify the development do not exist.
36. The proposal would be contrary to the development plan and the Framework taken
    as a whole. There are no other material considerations which indicate that the
    decision should be determined other than in accordance with the development
    plan. Therefore, for the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be
    dismissed.

B Pattison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
