Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 16 June 2026 by Elizabeth Davies BSc (Hons) MISEP, CEnv
Decision by A M Nilsson BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010153
62 Bryony Way, Sunbury TW16 7RH
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by S Matyniak against the decision of Spelthorne Borough Council.
•   The application Ref is 25/01541/HOU.
•   The proposed development is described as ‘roof extension to dwellinghouse’.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. The Planning application was made by Mr and Mrs S Matyniak, the appeal has
   been made by S Matyniak only.
4. The determination of the planning application was made on 9 March 2026.
   Following this, on the 17 March 2026, the Spelthorne Local Plan 2024-2039/40
   (March 2026) (the Local Plan) and Spelthorne Design Code (November 2025) (the
   Design Code) were adopted by the Council. Planning decisions must be made in
   accordance with the latest development plan, so I have referred to the March 2026
   version of the Local Plan and Design Code in this decision. As the Local Plan and
   Design Code were adopted prior to the submission of the appeal, it was a matter
   that was reasonably foreseeable and available to all parties at the outset of the
   appeal process. In this instance, the issues most relevant to the appeal remain
   unaffected by the adoption of the Local Plan and Design Code and I am therefore
   satisfied that there is no requirement to seek further submissions and that no party
   would be disadvantaged by such a course of action.
Main Issue
5. The main issue in the appeal is the effect of the proposed development on the
   character and appearance of the appeal property and the local area.
Reasons for the Recommendation
6. The appeal property is a two storey, mid terrace dwelling. The main roof of the
   dwelling is pitched, and it also has a modest outrigger at the rear with a pitched

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010153


     roof. There is a primary school located opposite the front of the appeal property, but
     generally the area is residential, typified by short terraces and semi-detached
     dwellings with pitched roofs, some with outriggers similar in style and design to the
     appeal property. The roofs of the majority of the dwellings along Bryony Way
     appeared unaltered and generally consistent in appearance.
7. The proposal is for the construction of a rear dormer on the main roof. The Design
   Code provides guidelines for achieving a well-designed dormer. It states that
   dormers should be located centrally or symmetrically on a roof, set-in a minimum of
   1 metre from the roof edge, down 0.5 metres from the ridge and up 1 metre from
   the eaves, incorporate a roof which is compatible with the main roof and not be
   over-dominant or out of proportion.
8. Whilst the proposed dormer is located centrally on the roof and the flat roof design
   is not in itself incompatible, the proposal does not meet the other criteria set out in
   the Design Code. The proposed dormer will span the full width of the roof and the
   set back from the ridge and eaves will be minimal, the appearance would be overly
   bulky and the dormer would dominate the roofscape and appeal property.
9. The rear roof of the appeal property is highly visible when entering Bryony Way
   from Vicarage Road and from the cul-de-sac and properties located behind the
   appeal property. The bulky and discordant dormer would appear out of keeping
   with the appearance of the existing dwelling and the unaltered roofs of the
   neighbouring properties on the terrace. Whilst the appellant highlights the setback
   of the dormer behind the outrigger at the rear, this setback would not sufficiently
   mitigate the conspicuous and incongruous nature of the roof extension.
10. I note that the appellant engaged with the Council and a revised scheme was
    prepared, reducing the size of the dormer. It is not clear if this reduced scheme is
    the appeal proposal before me, but I have found the current scale and design of the
    dormer would be harmful to the character and appearance of the area.
11. The appellant makes reference to the Council allowing other roof extensions that
    comply with the Design Code. However, as set out above, the appeal proposal
    does not comply with the Design Code.
12. On this basis, the proposed development would harm the character and
    appearance of the appeal property and the local area. It would therefore be
    contrary to Policy EN1 of the Local Plan, The National Planning Policy Framework
    and the Design Code.
Other Matters
13. The appellant’s wish to provide more space and improve their living conditions are
    understood, however any limited weight that these considerations would attract do
    not outweigh the harm identified.
14. It is noted that permitted development rights at the appeal property were removed
    by condition on grant of the original housing scheme. This has no bearing on the
    appeal decision.
Conclusion and Recommendation
15. The proposal would conflict with the development plan as a whole and there are no
    other considerations, including the provisions of the Framework, which outweigh

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010153


     this finding. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters
     raised, I recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

Elizabeth Davies
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
16. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

A M Nilsson
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
