 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 14 August 2026
 by Jonathan Price BA(Hons) DipTP DMS MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 2 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010861
 59 Luncies Road, Basildon, Essex SS14 1SB
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mrs Doyin Azeez against the decision of Basildon Borough Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00230/FULL.
 •    The development proposed is change of use from a residential dwelling (Use Class C3) to a
      children’s home (Use Class C2) for up to two children between the ages of 10-17 years.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the change of use
   from a residential dwelling (Use Class C3) to a children’s home (Use Class C2) for
   up to two children between the ages of 10-17 years, at 59 Luncies Road, Basildon,
   Essex SS14 1SB, in accordance with the terms of the application 26/00230/FULL
   and subject to the conditions set out in the Schedule at the end of this decision.
Preliminary Matter
2. My decision reflects the revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) published on 17 August 2026, after this appeal was made. I sought
   and considered the views of the main parties over this, prior to determining this
   appeal. Whilst substantially amended, the revised Framework maintains the
   Government’s policy thrust over boosting the supply of homes and meeting varying
   groups’ housing needs, which are factors central to this case.
Main Issue
3. Whether the change of use proposed is appropriate in the context of Government’s
   objectives to support the delivery of a substantial increase in the supply of homes
   and address the needs of groups with specific housing requirements.
Reasons
4. The proposal relates to a mid-terrace, two-storey dwelling within a residential
   suburb in urban Basildon. The physical alterations are primarily internal. Off-street
   parking is provided in a hard-surfaced front garden and cycle storage within the
   back garden. The Council accepts the principle of a home caring for up to two
   children, based on this generating a similar level of activity to the current use and
   having good connectivity to services and facilities. The refusal of planning
   permission relates to an alleged lack of local need for an additional C2 children’s
   home and this failing to outweigh the harmful reduction in the Borough’s general
   housing stock caused by the change of use from a family dwelling.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6010861


5. The refusal was not based on conflict with any of the saved policies of the Basildon
   District Local Plan (BDLP). Instead, it rested on the proposal being contrary to
   previous Framework paragraphs 61 and 63. The current Framework does not
   provide direct replacements of these paragraphs. In policy HO1.2 it states that at
   the most appropriate level, development plans should take into account an
   assessment of the size, type and tenure of housing or other accommodation
   needed for different groups. These groups include looked after children. It should
   be noted that HO1.2 is a plan-making rather than a decision-making policy.
   However, it does carry forward the advice from footnote 26 to paragraph 63 in the
   previous Framework. This is over evidence of need for looked after children being
   found in the relevant local authority’s Children’s Social Care Sufficiency Strategy.
   Consequently, the consultation response from Essex County Council (ECC)
   Children and Families Commissioning Manager, dated 11 March 2026, is especially
   relevant.
6. In the County Council’s response, the Commissioning Manager notes that the
   proposal is specifically for a change of use to a children’s home for up to two
   children, male or female between the ages of 10-17 years, including those with
   emotional and behavioural difficulties. It notes that this aligns well with the
   requirements of Essex’s sufficiency strategy. This identifies a need for additional
   specialist residential provision (emergency placement, short term and long-term
   placements), particularly for children and young people (CYP) with highly complex
   needs, which this proposal seeks to meet.
7. In meeting the need for homes, Framework policy HO7.1 states that in applying the
   policies in this Framework, substantial weight should be given to the benefits of
   providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced
   accommodation needs of the community, as identified through needs assessments
   prepared for the area of the local planning authority and other relevant evidence.
   This includes, but is not limited to, homes needed for different groups assessed
   under policy HO1.
8. Regarding specialist forms of accommodation, Framework policy HO9.1 states that
   development proposals to address specialist housing needs should provide living
   conditions and access to services which are appropriate to the needs of their
   residents and users. There is no conflict with this national decision-making policy,
   as the Council’s report finds no fault in the internal accommodation proposed and
   considers the site well-connected to local services.
9. Despite the ECC advice over this proposal meeting a specific sufficiency
   requirement, the Council’s refusal is based partly on a lack of need for additional
   C2 children's home accommodation within the Borough. It cites planning
   permissions amounting to 63 children’s home placements having been granted in
   the last five years, exceeding the projected Basildon requirement of an additional
   10 by 2029. Whilst acknowledging that not all planning permissions necessarily
   materialise, the Council finds a lack of need for the proposed two child C2
   accommodation failing to justify the loss of a C3 family dwelling.
10. ECC has referred to this proposal meeting a specific sufficiency need for
    accommodating CYP with complex needs. The Council’s supply and demand
    evidence fails to account for such specific placements. It thus fails to attribute
    sufficient weight to the particular social benefit this proposal would provide in this
    respect.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          2
 Appeal Decision 6010861


11. Based on the latest Housing Delivery Tests1, there is a substantial unmet need for
    general housing stock in Basildon. However, this proposal involves the loss of just
    one family C3 dwelling. In the context of the overall housing supply picture in
    Basildon, it is reasonable to conclude that the harm deriving from the loss of one
    such dwelling would be relatively small. The supply and demand for
    accommodation for CYP with complex needs will clearly involve much smaller
    numbers, with the relative benefits of this proposal being correspondingly much
    greater.
12. The Framework continues to require Council’s development plans to boost housing
    supply and meet the needs of groups with specific requirements. Neither the
    revised or previous Framework impose a ceiling on housing provision or require
    individual planning applications to demonstrate a need for the sort of housing
    proposed. Furthermore, the Council’s decision does not rest on conflict with any
    BDLP policy. None are provided which either resist the loss through change of use
    of existing C3 residential dwellings or require evidence to demonstrate an identified
    and immediate need for the proposed children’s home accommodation. Neither the
    previous nor current Framework provide decision-making policy support in either of
    these regards.
13. The additional specialist residential provision for CYP with highly complex needs
    would provide benefits to which Framework Policy HO7 requires substantial weight
    be given. This would outweigh any harm arising from a loss by change of use of a
    single C3 house. The building itself would remain in place to potentially fulfil a C3
    use at some future date. In the absence of conflict with either the development plan
    or the Framework, I find the proposal appropriate in the context of the
    Government’s objectives to support the delivery of a substantial increase in the
    supply of homes and address the needs of groups with specific housing
    requirements.
Other Matters
14. The objections from neighbours, covered in the Council’s report, raise further
    matters. There is recourse to separate action to address any noise nuisance and
    other sorts of anti-social behaviour, so these are not concerns which weigh against
    the principle of the change of use proposed. The children’s home would not change
    levels and times of activity as to materially harm neighbouring living conditions.
    Sufficient on-site parking and only a slight increase in vehicular movements would
    not have adverse highway safety implications. The small children’s home would be
    appropriately located in an existing housing suburb with a good level of services
    and facilities within easy reach and not lead to a harmful over concentration of such
    uses.
Conditions and Conclusion
15. The planning conditions recommended by the Council have been assessed against
    the revised tests set out in Framework Policy DM6. In addition to a condition
    imposing the standard three-year time limit for commencement, another is
    necessary in the interests of certainty which sets out the drawings approved. On
    the evidence before me, there is no particular child whose best interests would be
    prejudiced by this proposal. Any future issues of this nature would fall under

1 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/housing-delivery-test-2025-measurement




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                    3
 Appeal Decision 6010861


    separate legislation, which planning conditions should not duplicate. Therefore, a
    condition requiring Ofsted registration is unnecessary, given this is a requirement
    under the Care Standards Act 2000.
16. A condition requiring the site be restored to its former C3 use on the cessation of
    the approved C2 use for a minimum period of six months would not meet the tests
    of reasonableness. A condition giving responsibility and allocations to Essex
    County Council strays into matters governed by separate legislation and therefore
    is neither necessary nor reasonable. However, a condition is necessary restricting
    the use to that applied for, and not for further uses including those within the C2
    Class. This is to retain control over other uses that might be less compatible in this
    location. Security measures would be addressed by the Ofsted registration
    process. Whilst a condition duplicating these would not be justified, one that
    secures the operational and noise management plans submitted would be
    necessary, particularly in the interests of safeguarding neighbours’ living conditions.
    For the reasons given, and subject to the conditions discussed above, I conclude
    that the appeal succeeds.

Jonathan Price
INSPECTOR
Schedule of Conditions
   1) The development hereby permitted shall begin no later than three years from the
      date of this decision.

   2) The development hereby permitted shall accord with the following drawings:
      100 existing floor plans, 101 ground floor 3d, 102 first floor 3d, 103 roof view 3d,
      104 front and side elevation, 106 section a-a, 108 rear elevation, 109 rear
      elevation 3d, 107 front elevation 3d, 110 proposed floor plans, 111 ground floor
      3d, 112 first floor 3d, 113 roof area 3d, 114 front and side elevation, 115 rear
      and side elevation, 116 section a-a, 117 front elevation 3d, 118 rear elevation,
      119 rear elevation 3d and 051 site location.

   3) The premises shall be used as a children’s home (Use Class C2) for up to two
      children between the ages of 10-17 years and for no other purpose, including
      any other purpose in Class C2 of the Schedule to the Town and Country
      Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended) or in any provision equivalent
      to that Class in any statutory instrument revoking and re-enacting that Order with
      or without modification.

   4) The use hereby permitted shall be carried out and operated at all times in
      accordance with the Operational and Noise Management Plans, both by Dion
      Care Services Limited and dated 26 March 2026.
                                            ---




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          4
