Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 13 August 2026
by C Butcher BSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010090
Idson Farm, Idson Lane, Stogursey, Bridgwater, Somerset, TA5 1TR
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Robert and Julie Pocock against the decision of Somerset Council.
•    The application Ref is 3/32/25/001.
•    The development proposed is the siting of 1 No. caravan for occupation as temporary HPC worker
     accommodation (retention of works already undertaken).

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     An updated version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework)
       was published on 17th August 2026. In the interests of fairness, I provided the main
       parties with an opportunity to submit comments on the new Framework as part of
       the appeal process. I have taken account of those comments when making my
       decision.
3.     The appellant has provided evidence to show that the description of development
       was amended during the course of the application. I have therefore used the
       updated description.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are: (i) whether the development is in a suitable location, taking
       account of relevant development plan policies; and (ii) the effect of the proposal on
       highway safety.
Reasons
Location
5.     The appeal site is located outside of any defined settlement and is therefore
       considered to be within the open countryside for planning purposes. Policy OC1 of
       the West Somerset Local Plan, November 2016 (the LP) sets out the types of
       development that might be acceptable in such areas. The Council has suggested
       that the siting of a static caravan would not accord with any aspect of the policy.
6.     The third bullet point of LP Policy OC1 states that a new build development to
       benefit existing employment activity already established in the area may be
       appropriate if it could not be easily accommodated within, or adjacent to, nearby
       settlements. The caravan in this instance could perhaps be regarded as ‘new build’

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010090


       in the sense that it was not there before. The appellant’s evidence also suggests
       that the purpose of the caravan is to accommodate a worker at Hinkley Point,
       which is of course an established employment activity in the area. However, there
       is nothing substantive before me to indicate why the accommodation could not be
       provided within a defined settlement.
7.     The opening paragraph of the policy notes that in exceptional circumstances,
       development may be permitted where this is beneficial for the community or local
       economy. The appellant has suggested that the provision of a temporary
       residential unit adjacent to the operational sphere of Hinkley would represent an
       exceptional circumstance in line with the policy. The appellant has also provided
       some comments with regards to the existing challenges of accommodating Hinkley
       Point workers, including a lack of capacity and high rental charges. However, this
       is rather anecdotal and there is nothing substantive to suggest that the worker
       could not be accommodated in a more sustainable location.
8.     Indeed, the Council has noted that as part of a detailed Development Consent
       Order, the Council and EDF Energy have an objective of finding ‘appropriate and
       policy compliant ways’ of providing sufficient accommodation for workers, and that
       while some sites are almost reaching capacity, there is a level of turnover of
       workers, and other accommodation options are being provided.
9.     The Council has also set out that park and ride buses have been provided to offer
       sustainable transport between accommodation sites, pick up points and the power
       station. Indeed, when travelling to and from my site visit, I saw an abundance of
       such bus services. It therefore does not appear that there are particular benefits
       for the economy or community that would constitute an exceptional circumstance
       for allowing the continued provision of the caravan, even on a temporary basis or
       by imposing a condition to limit occupancy to Hinkley workers.
10. The overarching purpose of the Council’s spatial strategy is to facilitate
    development in sustainable locations, including by reducing the need to travel by
    private car. I acknowledge that the current occupier of the caravan may well walk
    or cycle to Hinkley for employment purposes. However, this cannot be guaranteed
    or secured by condition. Moreover, they are still heavily reliant on the private car to
    access other services and facilities needed for everyday life such as
    supermarkets. As such, the location of the appeal site does not weigh in favour of
    the scheme, even having regard to LP Policy TR2 which seeks to reduce reliance
    on the private car.
11. Having carefully considered all of the matters raised in relation to this issue, I
    conclude that the development conflicts with the Council’s spatial strategy and is
    therefore not in a suitable location. As such, it does not accord with LP Policies
    OC1, SC1 and SD1. Taken together, the relevant aspects of these policies seek to
    locate development in sustainable areas, including by limiting such schemes within
    the open countryside unless particular criteria are met, or exceptional
    circumstances are demonstrated. The development is also in conflict with LP
    Policy EN1, the relevant aspects of which seek to reduce the environmental
    impacts of Hinkley Point.
Highway Safety
12. The site utilises an existing access which the appellant states has been in use for
    some time by heavy, slow moving agricultural machinery and vehicles for livestock

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010090


       management. I have no reason to doubt this assertion. However, it was clear on
       my site visit that the farm also has a larger access point immediately to the east of
       the appeal site. Given the presence of this other access, and a lack of substantive
       information before me in relation to vehicle movements, it seems likely to me that
       the siting of the caravan for residential purposes could lead to more regular use of
       the appeal site access.
13. The appellant states that the access now has suitable visibility splays as a result of
    works to trim the adjacent hedgerow. However, I do not have any plans before me
    that show a suitable visibility splay. Moreover, it was clear on my site visit that the
    existing access is not sufficient. Indeed, when I drove off the site, I did not gain
    sufficient visibility in either direction until my vehicle was quite far onto the narrow
    carriageway. I acknowledge that traffic is likely to be limited on the lane, and that
    vehicles may have to move at relatively slow speeds to navigate the narrow route.
    However, the potential for collisions, and therefore harm in relation to highway
    safety, is apparent. The lack of any previous records of such incidents at this
    junction does not alter this position.
14. Indeed, in the absence of any substantive evidence to the contrary, it is likely that
    it would only be through the removal of some of the hedgerow that sufficient
    visibility could be achieved. Doing so would result in harm to the character and
    appearance of the area, both in terms of eroding the verdancy of the surroundings
    and also by ensuring that the caravan would be more visible.
15. As a result, I conclude that the appeal site does not have a suitable access and
    that there is the potential for harm in relation to highway safety. The development
    therefore conflicts with LP Policy NH13, the relevant aspects of which seek to
    ensure that development is well designed. While not referenced on the Council’s
    decision notice, the development would also conflict with Policy TR6(4) of the
    Framework which states that proposals should be refused if they would have an
    unacceptable impact on highway safety. I do not find conflict with LP Policy TR2
    which does not appear to relate to the provision of safe accesses to the highway.
Other Matters
16. The appellant has suggested that the caravan could in future be used to
    accommodate an agricultural worker. However, the application was not submitted
    on that basis, and such a proposal would only be acceptable if there was evidence
    of essential need. There is no such evidence before me and so this matter carries
    very little weight.
Conclusion
17. The development results in harm in relation to its location and its potential effect
    on highway safety. The proposal would therefore conflict with the development
    plan when considered as a whole. The provision of a single dwelling adds to local
    housing stock in an area that enables sustainable travel to Hinkley. There may
    also be some economic benefits in relation to supporting local services and
    facilities. However, given the small scale nature of the development, the benefits
    are very limited. As such, the harm associated with the development plan conflict
    substantially outweighs the benefits in this case.
18. Policy S5 of the Framework relates to development proposals outside of
    settlements. I note that the Council cannot currently demonstrate a five year

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010090


       supply of sites for housing. However, the requirements of Policy S5(j) are not met
       on the basis that the development is not physically well related to an existing
       settlement. Moreover, part 3 of the policy seeks to avoid the provision of isolated
       homes, other than in accordance with Policy HO11. None of the clauses in Policy
       HO11 would be met by the development in this instance.
19. Policy HO7 notes that substantial weight should be afforded to the benefits of
    providing homes which contribute to meeting accommodation needs. This could be
    considered to be relevant here in light of the shortfall in housing land supply.
    However, Policy S5(4) notes that development proposals which do not fall within
    one of the categories set out by that policy should only be approved in exceptional
    circumstances, where the benefits of the proposal would substantially outweigh the
    adverse effects. This would clearly not be the case here, even when taking
    account of Policy HO7.
20. Accordingly, there are no material considerations, either individually or in
    combination, that outweigh the identified harm and associated development plan
    conflict. The appeal is therefore dismissed.



C Butcher
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
