Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 1 September 2026 by S Manson DipTP MRTPI
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010817
30 Lady Aylesford Avenue, Stanmore HA7 4FH
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Keval Shah against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
    Harrow.
•   The application Ref is PL/0231/26.
•   The development proposed is the conversion of garage to habitable room, replace garage door with
    window in front elevation.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters and Main Issue
3. Following the determination of the planning application, the Council adopted the
   Harrow Local Plan 2021-2041, 2026 (LP). The main parties were aware of what the
   emerging policies were at the time of the Council's decision. I received confirmation
   that the policy relevant to the reason for refusal has not materially changed to the
   adopted version. I have had regard to the most up to date development plan.
4. Having reviewed the most recent changes to the National Planning Policy
   Framework, I am satisfied that they do not affect the substance of the main issue in
   the appeal. Since they would not therefore be prejudiced, I have proceeded without
   further consultation with the main parties on the scheme, the main issue for which
   is its effect on the character and appearance of the area.
Reasons for the Recommendation
5. The appeal property is a mid-terraced, three storey dwelling, with the uppermost
   floor set within the roof space. It is situated in a short row of four dwellings. The
   terrace displays a strong degree of uniformity, characterised by consistent building
   widths, material palette and integral ground-floor garages. A notable feature of
   which is the regular arrangement of the garage doors, which provide a clear visual
   anchor to the frontage and reinforce the symmetry and rhythm of the development.
   These elements, which are replicated within a similar larger terrace within the
   immediate street scene, contribute positively to the visual coherence and planned
   architectural appearance of the terrace and surrounding area.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010817


6. By replacing the garage door with brickwork and a window, the proposal would
   remove one of the defining components of the terrace frontage. The alteration
   would result in a noticeably different form and appearance at ground-floor level. As
   a consequence, the proposal would interrupt the established rhythm and uniformity
   of the terrace, unacceptably diminishing the strong visual consistency that is
   presently derived from the repeated arrangement of garage openings, entrance
   doors and fenestration.
7. Of the cited examples, only limited information has been provided. With the
   exception of a couple of properties within the street, most examples appear to be
   located elsewhere within the housing estate (Goodhall Close) and therefore do not
   form part of the immediate context of the appeal site. I have not been provided with
   the planning history or circumstances surrounding those developments and cannot
   therefore determine whether they were authorised or what site-specific
   considerations influenced their acceptability if they were deemed so. In any event,
   altered properties elsewhere does not change my findings relating to the prevailing
   character of the street.
8. Consequently, the proposal would unacceptably harm the character and
   appearance of the terrace and wider street scene. Accordingly, it would fail to
   comply with Policy GR1 of the LP, Policy D3 of The London Plan, the Spatial
   Development Strategy for Greater London, 2021 and the Supplementary Planning
   Document: Residential Design Guide, 2010. Amongst other things, these seek to
   secure high-quality design that responds positively to local character and respects
   the architectural features that contribute to the appearance of an area.
Conclusion and Recommendation
9. The proposals would conflict with the development plan and there are no
   sufficiently weighty material considerations to indicate a decision other than in
   accordance therewith. I therefore recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

S Manson
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
10. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
