Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 6 August 2026
by Andrew Fulford BSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 27 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010993
9 Birkin Avenue, Ruddington, Nottingham, Nottinghamshire NG11 6BJ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
     planning permission
•    The appeal is made by Mr David Pearson against Rushcliffe Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00224/FUL.
•    The development proposed is the erection of detached garage and garden room.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The appeal is against a failure of the Council to give notice of its decision on the
       planning application Ref 26/00224/FUL within the prescribed period. As such,
       there is no decision notice. However, the Council’s Officer Report sets out that the
       recommendation would have been to refuse permission, had the Council
       determined the planning application.
3.     In the banner heading I have set out a truncated form of the description of
       proposed works in the application form, omitting that which is unnecessary to
       concisely describe the scheme.
4.     I am aware that during the lifetime of the application amended plans were
       submitted with on 29th March 2026 (Ref: DC\PLAN\002 Revision F (pages 1 and
       2)). However, within their Officer Report the Council chose to assess the scheme
       against an earlier version of the plans, Revision E. As the Revision F plans were
       submitted over two months before the appeal against non-determination, the
       appeal will be assessed against the Revision F plans. Given that the Council had
       the opportunity to consider the Revision F plans they are not prejudiced by my
       consideration of these amended plans. Furthermore, as the Revision F plans
       propose a smaller outbuilding, I am satisfied no third parties are prejudiced by my
       consideration of these plans.
5.     I observed on my site visit that an outbuilding had been partially constructed with
       significant sections of brick work completed. The partially constructed building has
       a larger footprint than what is now proposed. However, the appeal will be
       determined on the basis of the submitted plans (Ref: DC\PLAN\002 Revision F
       (pages 1 and 2)).
6.     On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published. Those parts of the Framework most relevant to this

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010993


         appeal have not been significantly amended. As a result, I have not sought further
         submissions. I have referred to the latest version of the Framework where relevant
         in this appeal.
Main Issues
7.       The main issues are:
     •    the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of Nos 8 Birkin
          Avenue and 13 Bradmore Avenue with regards to outlook; and
     •    the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of the
          host dwelling and surrounding area.
Reasons
Living Conditions
8.       The appeal site is located within a cul-de-sac surrounded by residential dwellings
         which generally sit on relatively modest plots, although the appeal property is
         located on a notably larger plot. The adjacent dwelling, No 8 is an end-of-terrace
         property which backs onto terraced dwellings within Bradmore Avenue. Due to the
         larger plot size of the appeal property, its eastern side boundary directly adjoins
         the rear gardens of both No 8 Birkin Avenue and No 13 Bradmore Avenue.
9.       Consent is sought for a detached outbuilding in the south-eastern corner of the
         site. The outbuilding would extend along almost the full length of the side boundary
         of the rear garden of No 13 and would be significantly taller than the existing
         boundary treatment. Given the scale and massing of the building and its close
         proximity to the boundary, this would be oppressive and overbearing for the
         occupiers of No 13 when they utilise their private garden.
10. I am aware that consent has previously been granted by the Council for a
    detached outbuilding in the south-east corner of the appeal site under reference
    21/01997/FUL. However, this outbuilding was of a notably smaller scale being 4m
    shorter in its depth and thereby would not have such a significant impact on the
    occupiers of No 13.
11. Concerns have also been raised over the impact on the living conditions of No 8.
    However, the proposed garage would not directly adjoin the boundary with this
    property. Given the level of separation, I am satisfied that the proposal would not
    impact on the outlook experienced by the occupiers of No 8 however, this does not
    overcome the harm that I have identified to the occupiers of No 13.
12. In conclusion, the proposal would have a significant adverse impact on the living
    conditions of the occupiers of No 13. The proposal would therefore conflict with
    Policy 10 of the Rushcliffe Local Plan Part 1: Core Strategy (December 2014)
    (RLPP1) and Policy 1 of the Rushcliffe Local Plan Part 2: Land and Planning
    Policies (October 2019) (RLPP2). Amongst other matters, the policies set out that
    development proposals will be assessed against their impact on the amenity of
    nearby residents and sets out that development should not have an overbearing
    impact on neighbouring properties.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010993


Character and Appearance
13. The appeal site is located within a residential area with dwellings that are
    comprised of a mix of semi-detached and terraced two-storey properties. The
    appeal property is located within the south-west corner of a modest cul-de-sac and
    sits on a notably larger plot than surrounding dwellings. The dwelling has been
    previously extended with single and two storey extensions at the rear.
14. The proposed outbuilding would be located in the south-east corner of the rear
    garden set back behind the host property. Taking into account the size of the plot
    and host dwelling, the outbuilding would not appear excessive in terms of its scale
    or massing. There would also be sufficient undeveloped garden area retained to
    the rear of the dwelling so the outbuilding would not appear cramped within its plot.
    Furthermore, given its size and location the outbuilding would appear subservient
    to the host dwelling.
15. Views of the outbuilding would be limited from the public highway given both the
    set back location and the positioning of the dwelling within the corner of a cul-de-
    sac. In this context the appeal proposal would not appear dominant within the
    street scene.
16. I conclude that the proposal would maintain the character and appearance of the
    host dwelling and surrounding area. It would be in accordance with relevant
    sections of Policy 10 of the RLPP1 and Policy 1 of the RLPP2. Amongst other
    matters, these policies require development to be of an appropriate scale, density,
    height, massing, design, layout and materials so that is sympathetic to the
    character and appearance of the area.
Other Matters
17. The appeal scheme would have no adverse impact on biodiversity, highway safety
    or flood risk. However, the lack of harm is a neutral factor in the planning balance.
Conclusion
18. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the proposal would conflict with the
    development plan and material considerations do not indicate that the appeal
    should be decided other than in accordance with the development plan. Therefore,
    the appeal is dismissed.



Andrew Fulford
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
