Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 20 August 2026
by N Bowden BA(Hons) Dip TP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010198
Rusper, Nottingham Road, Heronsgate, Hertfordshire WD3 5DN
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Mark and Alexandra Bettridge against the decision of Three
       Rivers District Council.
•      The application Ref is 26/0236/FUL.
•      The development proposed is demolition of existing dwelling and construction of a replacement
       dwelling. (Self Build).

Decision
1.       The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for demolition of existing
         dwelling and construction of a replacement dwelling at Rusper, Nottingham Road,
         Heronsgate, Hertfordshire WD3 5DN in accordance with the terms of the
         application, Ref 26/0236/FUL, and the plans submitted with it, subject to the
         conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.       A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
         published on 17 August 2026. The changes to the Framework could affect the
         merits of this case in a material way and I, therefore, consulted the parties with
         regard to these changes. I have taken account of these comments, where made,
         in my decision.
3.       In allowing the appeal I have removed reference to “self build” as was stated on
         the application form and in the Council’s decision notice. Whilst I accept that the
         proposal was put forward as a form of Self Build and Custom Housebuilding1
         (SBCH) and this is addressed in my decision below; this is not an act of
         development and I have therefore removed it from the description.
Main Issues
4.       The main issues are:
              •   whether the proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt
                  having regard to the Framework and relevant development plan policies
                  and including the effect of the proposal on the openness and purposes of
                  the Green Belt, and
              •   the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the
                  Heronsgate Conservation Area (CA).

1
    The Self-Build and Custom Housebuilding Act 2015 & The Self-build and Custom Housebuilding Regulations 2016

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010198


Reasons
       Effect on Green Belt
5.     The appeal site is located within the Metropolitan Green Belt where, under policy
       GB6 of the Framework most forms of development are considered inappropriate
       unless it falls within one of the categories in policy GB7. Policy GB7 explains that
       certain categories of development are not inappropriate in the Green Belt and
       therefore should not be regarded as harmful to it or be required to demonstrate
       very special circumstances.
6.     These categories include (in summary) those listed at paragraphs 1. b. and e. of
       policy GB7 Namely, the reuse, extension, alteration or replacement of an existing
       building, provided that the existing building is of permanent and substantial
       construction, and; the redevelopment of previously developed land, which would
       not cause substantial harm to the openness of the Green Belt.
7.     Policy DM2 of the Three Rivers Local Plan Development Management Policies
       Local Development Document (TRLDD) sets out the local approach to
       development in the Green Belt. This policy pre-dates the current Framework but is,
       broadly, not materially inconsistent with national decision-making policies in the
       Framework. The policy explains that replacement dwellings should not materially
       exceed the size of the original dwelling and not be more harmful to the visual
       amenity and openness of the Green Belt.
8.     The appellant has put forward the proposal having regard to paragraphs 154 d)
       and 154 g) of the earlier version of the Framework which was applicable at the
       time of both the application and appeal. Whilst the wording of the more recent
       version of the Framework is different, I find the policy intent – insofar as it relates
       to this proposal – is not dissimilar. Specifically, and paraphrasing here, considering
       paragraph 154 d), the requirements of the current iteration of the Framework at
       paragraph 1. b. of policy GB7 remain that the replacement of an existing building
       should not be materially larger than the one it replaces. Taking paragraph 154 g)
       of the earlier version of the Framework; paragraph 1. e. of policy GB7 of the more
       recent version continues to explain that the redevelopment of previously
       developed land should not cause substantial harm to the openness of the Green
       Belt.
9.     The existing site comprises a mid-20th century, detached, chalet style bungalow.
       The dwelling is set back from the road to the rear of both neighbouring homes and
       off set slightly towards the south-eastern boundary. The site has an open aspect to
       the front and is visible from the road although this aspect is limited due to the more
       established boundary screening at the properties to either side. The bungalow is
       broadly in a chalet style with most living accommodation set over the ground floor,
       however upper floor accommodation is available, and this is set under the slope of
       the roof.
10. The proposed dwelling would be larger in terms of floorspace, overall bulk and
    height. It would feature a two storey element with transverse gable and slightly
    lower wing to the north-western side with rooms in the roof space and dormer
    windows to the front and rear. It is quite apparent that, when considered in relation
    to the requirements of policy DM2 of the TRLDD and paragraph 1. b. of policy GB7
    of the Framework; the proposal would well exceed the size of the original and/or


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010198


       existing building and would be materially larger than the one it replaces. In relation
       to these policies, I must therefore conclude that there is a conflict.
11. Turning to policy paragraph 1. e. of GB7 of the Framework, the Council considers
    that the site does not comprise previously developed land. It argues that the site is
    within a built-up area and the definition at annex B of the Framework excludes land
    in built-up areas such as residential gardens. However, in this case, I note that the
    site is within the Green Belt. This differs to the designation of more densely built-
    up areas within nearby Rickmansworth and the like which are excluded from the
    Green Belt.
12. I must also have regard to the character of the area which, although clearly
    exhibiting signs of development in the form of various detached and semi-
    detached homes, is not built-up in character. The prevailing impression of the area
    is as a verdant and very low-density residential neighbourhood. It does not have
    the attributes of a built-up area including a lack of street lighting, pedestrian
    footways or any apparent or well-defined building lines. Roads are narrow and
    have more in common with country lanes than a suburban setting and the
    impression of buildings is typically fleeting and glanced only amongst the
    surrounding vegetation. Indeed, the original design ethos for Heronsgate was for a
    low density setting with opportunities for subsistence farming. I must therefore
    conclude that the site is not within a built-up area.
13. Nevertheless, the site is previously developed land. Rusper comprises a long
    established, and lawful, dwelling along with its curtilage. The siting of the proposed
    dwelling would be very similar to the location of the existing one and is clearly set
    well within the previously developed part of the curtilage which incorporates parts
    of the garden, patio and driveway.
14. Therefore, as I have found that the site is not within a built-up area and is
    previously developed land, the provisions of paragraph 1. e. to policy GB7 of the
    Framework apply. I have found that the proposed dwelling would be materially
    larger than the one it replaces. However, this is not the test of this element of the
    policy of the Framework which requires that a proposal should not cause
    substantial harm to the openness of the Green Belt.
15. The dwelling is larger in terms of floorspace, volume height and general
    appearance. However, it is set within the context of similarly sized dwellings in an
    area that is well screened by surrounding well-established vegetation. The
    increase in size and scale over the existing building is notable but I do not find it to
    be so significant that it would cause harm to the openness of the Green Belt in a
    visual or spatial dimension.
16. A such, I conclude that the proposal complies with the requirements of paragraph
    1. e. to policy GB7 of the Framework and is therefore also in accordance with
    policy CP11 of the Three Rivers Core Strategy (TRCS) and policy DM2 of the
    TRLDD.
       Effect on CA
17. The site is set within the CA which is tightly drawn around the cluster of homes in
    Heronsgate. The area is residential in nature and features a mix of detached and
    semi-detached homes in a low density, sylvan setting. The CA derives its
    significance from its Chartist origins and the laying out of large 2 to 4 acre plots

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010198


       available to factory workers through a lottery. The area is laid out with narrow
       roads which have, in recent years, been planted out with boundary screening.
18. Buildings in the CA reflect the era in which they developed. These range from
    some surviving and often much altered original homes, through to later examples
    including Georgian, arts and crafts styles and more recent 20th century examples.
    The appeal site being an example of a mid-20th century addition. Despite the many
    changes to the environment, the overall layout of the original plots remains largely
    intact, albeit there are areas where some plots have been more recently
    subdivided.
19. S72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
    requires that special attention shall be paid to the desirability of preserving or
    enhancing the character or appearance of that area. Paragraph 1 of policy HE6 of
    the Framework further sets out that when considering the potential effect of a
    development proposal on the significance of a designated heritage asset,
    substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation.
20. This proposal seeks to replace the existing mid-20th century dwelling that exists on
    the site at present. This existing home is a clearly modern addition and sits on
    what is part of a subdivided plot from the neighbouring Laburnums. Despite its
    notably more modern origin, it is a discrete addition that is set back from the road
    and does not markedly usurp the layout of the plots throughout Heronsgate as a
    whole. Equally, it does not intrude upon the appearance or setting of the more
    significant buildings within the CA due to its separation from them.
21. Paragraph 2 of policy HE9 of the Framework notes that not all elements of a
    conservation area will necessarily contribute to its significance. Where a
    development proposal would result in the loss of a building or other element which
    contributes to the character or appearance of a conservation area that is desirable
    to conserve, the assessment of impact should take into account the relative
    significance of the element affected and its contribution to the significance of the
    conservation area as a whole.
22. I have found that the significance of the CA is derived from its setting and the
    arrangement and layout of buildings and their large plots. The proposed
    replacement dwelling would be larger, but it would remain a muted addition to the
    CA. It would not alter the plot sizes in anyway or detract from the layout of the
    area. I accept the comments of the Council’s conservation officer in this regard
    and agree that the proposed dwelling would be larger. Nevertheless, the increase
    in size is far from excessive and I am unable to find that it would harm the
    character or appearance of the CA. As with the existing dwelling, it would make a
    neutral contribution.
23. As such, I conclude that the proposal complies with policies CP1 and CP12 of the
    TRCS, policies DM1, DM3 and Appendix 2 of the TRLDD and Framework in that
    the proposal is of a design and scale that preserves or enhances the character or
    appearance of the conservation area.
Other Matters
24. The proposal has been put forward as SBCH although the parties have provided
    limited information on the Council’s supply and delivery of this form of housing.
    Planning authorities must give development permission in respect of enough

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010198


         serviced plots of land to meet the demand for SBCH in the authority's area arising
         in each base period. However, as I have found the proposal to be acceptable on
         its own merits, I do not need to weigh this in any overall planning balance.
25. Nevertheless, SBCH is exempted from providing a 10% net increase in
    biodiversity2. It is, therefore, a requirement to ensure that the proposal is delivered
    as this form of housing such that the biodiversity net gain exemption can still apply.
    The Council has indicated that it is satisfied that this can be secured by way of
    condition. As such, I have imposed a condition to this effect as set out below.
Conditions
26. The Council has provided a schedule of conditions in the event the appeal were to
    be allowed. I have imposed the suggested conditions with modifications and edits
    as discussed below having regard to the Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) and
    policy DM6 of the Framework.
27. Condition 6 is a pre-commencement condition and, therefore, having regard to the
    Town and Country Planning (Pre-commencement Conditions) Regulations 2018
    the appellant has been consulted with regard to this condition.
28. I have imposed a time limit condition to comply with the provisions of the Act and a
    plans condition in the interests of certainty.
29. The Council requested the submission of materials to be used in the construction
    of the proposed dwelling however a comprehensive palate of materials was
    provided with the appeal. I find these to be satisfactory and therefore no further
    details need to be submitted to the Council, and I have adjusted the condition
    accordingly.
30. I have further required a landscaping scheme to be provided in order to ensure the
    development integrates with its surroundings being mindful of the site’s location
    within the CA. In this condition I have removed references to hard landscaping as
    these details are set out in the materials plan.
31. I have imposed the Council’s suggested condition relating to energy efficiency in
    order to promote sustainable development.
32. A condition is imposed relating to a Construction Method Statement being mindful
    of the site’s location in a residential area and accessed by way of very narrow
    lanes.
33. I have imposed a requirement for tree protection measures to secure retention of
    important trees which contribute to the CA.
34. I have imposed a condition requiring the development to be constructed and
    subsequently occupied as SBCH. This is because the development is exempted
    from biodiversity net gain provision which would otherwise have been a
    requirement.
35. The Council have suggested the removal of various permitted development rights,
    i.e. works that may be undertaken with deemed planning permission. In this
    regard, I am mindful of the advice in the PPG3 which sets out that conditions

2
    The Biodiversity Gain Requirements (Exemptions) Regulations 2024
3
    Paragraph: 017 Reference ID: 21a-017-20190723


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                5
Appeal Decision 6010198


       restricting the future use of permitted development rights may not pass the test of
       reasonableness or necessity. Moreover, I am further mindful that the site is within
       a conservation area. It is thus Article 2(3) land where such works are already
       restricted. I therefore do not find it to be reasonable or necessary to impose further
       restrictions.
Conclusion
36. The proposed development would not cause substantial harm to the openness of
    the Green Belt and would preserve the character and appearance of the CA. The
    proposal therefore complies with the development plan and the material
    considerations do not indicate that a decision should be made other than in
    accordance with it.
37. The appeal is allowed.



N Bowden
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6010198


Schedule of Conditions
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans:
                   •    3-0-0 EX & PROP EX SITE PLANS
                   •    3-0-1 EX & PROP PROP SITE PLANS
                   •    3-0-2 EX & PROP PARKING PLANS
                   •    3-0-3 EX & PROP REFUSE PLAN
                   •    3-0-4 PROP LANDSCAPE PLAN
                   •    3-1-0 Rev A EX & PROP GF PLANS
                   •    3-1-1 Rev A EX & FF LOFT PLAN
                   •    3-1-2 Rev A EX & PROP LOFT PLAN
                   •    3-1-3 Rev A EX & PROP RF PLANS
                   •    3-1-4 Rev A EX & PROP AREA PLANS
                   •    3-2-0 EX & PROP ELEVATIONS
                   •    3-2-1 Rev A EX & PROP ELEVATIONS
                   •    3-2-2 Rev A EX & PROP ELEVATIONS
                   •    3-2-3 Rev A EX & PROP ELEVATIONS
                   •    3-2-4 Rev A EX & PROP ELEVS & SECTS
                   •    3-2-5 EX & PROP ELEVS STREET 100
     3)       The external materials to be used in the construction of the dwelling and
              surrounding hard landscaping and boundary features shall be those specified
              on the scheduled marked MATERIALS PLAN.
     4)       Prior to works above ground level scheme of soft landscaping shall be
              submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority, which
              shall include the location of all existing trees and hedgerows affected by the
              proposed development, and details of those to be retained, together with a
              scheme detailing measures for their protection in the course of development.
              All hard landscaping works required by the approved scheme shall be carried
              out and completed prior to the first occupation of the development hereby
              permitted.
              All soft landscaping works required by the approved scheme shall be carried
              out before the end of the first planting and seeding season following first
              occupation of any part of the buildings or completion of the development,
              whichever is sooner.
              If any existing tree shown to be retained, or the proposed soft landscaping,
              are removed, die, become severely damaged or diseased within five years of
              the completion of development they shall be replaced with trees or shrubs of
              appropriate size and species in the next planting season (ie November to
              March inclusive).


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6010198


     5)       The development shall not be occupied until the energy saving and
              renewable energy measures detailed within the Energy Statement submitted
              as part of the application, dated 27 January 2026, are incorporated into the
              approved development.
     6)       No development shall take place, including any works of demolition, until a
              Construction Method Statement has been submitted to and approved in
              writing by the Local Planning Authority. The Statement shall provide for:
              i)      parking of vehicles of site operatives and visitors
              ii)     construction of access arrangements including the routing of vehicles
              iii)    loading and unloading of plant and materials
              iv)     storage of plant and materials used in constructing the development
              v)      the erection and maintenance of security hoarding including decorative
                      displays and facilities for public viewing, where appropriate
              vi)     wheel washing facilities
              vii) measures to control the emission of dust and dirt during construction
              The approved Construction Method Statement shall be adhered to
              throughout the construction period.
     7)       No operations (including tree felling, pruning, demolition works, soil moving,
              temporary access construction, or any other operation involving the use of
              motorised vehicles or construction machinery) whatsoever shall commence
              on site in connection with the development hereby approved until the branch
              structure and trunks of all trees shown to be retained and all other trees not
              indicated as to be removed and their root systems have been protected from
              any damage during site works including ground protection, in accordance
              with the report prepared by Russell Ball dated 3 February 2026.
              The protective measures, including fencing, shall be undertaken before any
              equipment, machinery or materials are brought on to the site for the purposes
              of development, and shall be maintained as approved until all equipment,
              machinery and surplus materials have been removed from the site. Nothing
              shall be stored or placed within any area fenced in accordance with this
              condition and the ground levels within those areas shall not be altered, nor
              shall any excavation be made. No fires shall be lit or liquids disposed of
              within 10.0m of an area designated as being fenced off or otherwise
              protected in the approved scheme. The construction of the development shall
              be carried out in accordance with the methodology also set out within the
              report prepared by Russell Ball dated 3 February 2026.
     8)       The dwelling hereby permitted shall be constructed as a self-build dwelling
              within the definition of Self-Build and Custom Housebuilding in the 2015 Act:
              i)      The first occupation of the dwelling hereby permitted shall be by a
                      person or persons who had a primary input into the design and layout of
                      the unit and who intends to live in the unit for at least 3 years; and
              ii)     The Council shall be notified of the persons who intend to take up first
                      occupation of the dwelling in the development hereby permitted at least
                      two months prior to first occupation.
End of Schedule

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      8
