Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by Jonathan Edwards BSc(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 03 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010739
St Barnabas Church, St Barnabas Close, Hereford, Herefordshire HR1 1DT
• The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
  against a refusal to grant planning permission.
• The appeal is made by Mr Simon Patient (Heritage Manor Ltd) against the decision of the County of
  Herefordshire District Council.
• The application Ref is 251696.
• The development proposed is demolition of existing Church. Erection of 52 Bed care facility on three
  floors with ancillary areas and parking.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the demolition of
   existing church and erection of 52 Bed care facility on three floors with ancillary
   areas and parking at St Barnabas Church, St Barnabas Close, Hereford,
   Herefordshire HR1 1DT in accordance with the terms of the application,
   Ref 251696, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Application for costs
2. An application for costs has been made by Mr Simon Patient (Heritage Manor Ltd)
   against the County of Herefordshire District Council. This application is the subject
   of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3. Representations suggest the Council should not have entertained the planning
   application leading to this appeal as an incorrect certificate of ownership has been
   submitted. The Council considers this matter has been addressed through the
   submission of a revised site location plan with an amended red line defining the
   extent of the development site. It is clear the Council considers the ownership
   certificate form is correct as it has determined the planning application leading to
   this appeal. Given this context and the lack of substantive evidence to the contrary,
   I find no reason to turn away this appeal on validity grounds.
4. The government issued a revised version of the National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework) in August 2026 and after the appeal was lodged. I
   have considered the main parties’ comments on the Framework in my assessment.
Main Issues
5. The main issues are (i) whether the proposal would result in the unacceptable loss
   of a community facility, and (ii) its effect on living conditions at residences on
   Admirals Close and at The Vicarage with regards to privacy and outlook.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010739


Reasons
Whether the proposal would result in the unacceptable loss of a community facility.
6. Under policy SC1 of the Herefordshire Local Plan Core Strategy (2015) (the CS),
   existing social and community facilities such as places of worship should be
   retained unless specified circumstances apply. These include when appropriate
   alternative facilities are available, or where it is shown the facility is no longer
   required, viable or fit for purpose and where appropriate, it has been vacant and
   marketed for community use without success.
7. Policy HC6 of the Framework also resists the loss of key community facilities
   including places of worship that have been used on a frequent basis. However, the
   same policy allows their removal when there is no reasonable prospect of the
   community use being retained due to insufficient community support or there is
   sufficient alternative provision in the local area.
8. The church and appeal site is owned by the Diocese of Hereford. However, it was
   declared closed for regular public worship in June 2019. For a while, it was
   informally used by an independent church but this use of the building ceased in
   July 2024 after the occupants were instructed to leave. Since then, the building has
   been vacant.
9. Only a limited level of information has been provided on the former users of the
   church and where they now operate. However, there is no substantive evidence
   that contradicts the appellant’s claims that the independent church and other users
   of the building have moved to other venues.
10. No detailed information has been provided by the Council nor the appellant on the
    presence and availability of community facilities within the local area. The appellant
    disputes the Council’s suggestion that there is a limited supply of community
    facilities within the northern part of Hereford. However, even if the Council’s
    contentions are accepted, it is fair to envisage a broader range of community
    facilities exist in the city as a whole. Indeed, the supporting text to CS policy SC1
    highlights as a key issue the lack of local services and facilities in rural areas and
    their increasing concentration in towns. Therefore, I tend to favour the appellant’s
    suggestion that there are sufficient alternative community facilities to the church
    within the local area.
11. I am advised the appeal site has been marketed, although there is very limited
    information before me on the marketing exercise and on the inquiries that this
    generated. As such, I am unconvinced the community facility use of the church
    would be unviable, although it would seem the marketing of the property has been
    unsuccessful. In any event, CS policy SC1 only requires marketing where
    appropriate. Moreover, policy HC6 of the Framework only refers to marketing of
    shops and public houses where commercial viability is an issue. Therefore, neither
    CS policy SC1 nor policy HC6 of the Framework require the church to be marketed
    if there is sufficient alternative facilities in the local area.
12. The evidence before me indicates that the church is no longer required as there are
    reasonable alternative facilities. For these reasons, I conclude the development
    would not result in the unacceptable loss of a community facility. In these regards, it
    would accord with CS policy SC1 and policy HC6 of the Framework.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010739


Effect on living conditions.
13. The appeal site slopes down from the front to the rear. As such, a car park to the
    rear of the site is at a lower ground level compared to the church. The car park
    adjoins the gardens of residences on Admirals Close as well as a garden to The
    Vicarage. I saw a fence, bushes and trees on parts of the boundary between the
    appeal site and the adjoining residences. Even so, the absence of trees and
    bushes on parts of the boundary means there is clear sight of the rear of Admirals
    Close residences from the church and the car park. Such views are from elevated
    vantage points as the residences are on lower land compared to the church.
14. The rear part of the proposed facility would be nearer to the boundary with Admirals
    Close and The Vicarage compared to the church. The nearest walls to the rear
    boundary would contain no windows. However, there would be windows in other
    walls as well as balconies and terraces towards the rear of the building. These
    would provide new vantage points to look onto the neighbouring properties. Trees
    on and near the common boundary would be retained and additional tree planting
    is proposed. However, the CGI images provided by the appellant suggest the
    vegetation would not entirely obstruct views onto Admirals Close and The Vicarage.
    As such, it is likely the development would lead to more intrusive overlooking onto
    the adjacent residences compared to the existing situation.
15. It is common for homes and gardens within urban areas to be overlooked to a
    degree by other properties. Indeed, the appeal site as it stands allows views onto
    the neighbouring residences, particularly those on Admirals Close. However, the
    development would increase the opportunity for intrusive overlooking.
16. Furthermore, the proposed building would be more noticeable than the church from
    the Admirals Close properties and The Vicarage as it would be closer to the site
    boundary and it would be significantly taller. The existing and proposed trees would
    partially screen the building but the images provided by the appellant indicate it
    would still be visible from the adjoining back gardens. From the Admirals Close
    properties immediately to the rear of the site, the facility would appear overbearing
    due to its height and overall mass and as it would be on higher land. However,
    existing mature trees already cause a dominating effect onto The Vicarage and the
    development would not meaningfully worsen the outlook from this property.
17. I understand the proposal has been revised following consultation with local
    residents with the aim to reduce the effects of the building on nearby dwellings.
    Nonetheless, for the above reasons, I conclude the development would have a
    harmful effect on living conditions at properties behind the site on Admirals Close in
    terms of loss of privacy and outlook and at The Vicarage in terms of loss of privacy.
    In these regards, the development would not accord with CS policy SD1. Amongst
    other things, this policy looks for all development to safeguard residential amenity.
    The Council’s submissions also refer to CS policy LD1 but this contains no
    provisions relevant to the assessment of this main issue.
Other considerations.
18. Interested parties have submitted comments on other matters. Concerns are raised
    that the development would cause a loss of light to adjoining residences. However,
    the development would lie to the east and north east of the adjacent gardens and
    so it would only cause overshadowing during parts of the morning. The residences
    would still have access to direct sunlight for most of the day as the sun moves

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010739


     southwards and then westwards in the sky. Therefore, the proposal would avoid an
     unacceptable level of overshadowing.
19. The care facility is unlikely to generate noise of a nature or level to cause
    unacceptable disturbance to local residents. Construction of the facility is bound to
    be noticed but any associated noise would be for a temporary time and could be
    controlled to an acceptable level through a condition on hours of construction. Also,
    I see no reason why lighting associated with the development is bound to affect
    living conditions at the neighbouring properties. A planning condition could be
    imposed to ensure any external lighting is appropriate.
20. The proposal would include parking spaces as well as an ambulance bay.
    Concerns are raised on the amount of parking spaces that would be provided as
    well as the effect of traffic movements associated with the development on highway
    safety. However, I attach significant weight to the comments from the local highway
    authority officer that the level of parking and its layout is satisfactory. Moreover, the
    officer raises no concerns to the proposed access arrangements or to the impacts
    of the proposal on highway safety. A planning condition is suggested by the Council
    to ensure construction vehicle parking is managed appropriately.
21. The proposed building would be sizeable, although it would be accommodated
    comfortably on the plot with garden areas, existing trees and new planting on parts
    of the site. Also, the facility would include lower elements and different external
    materials that would break up the building’s mass. Moreover, there is an existing
    tall nursing home adjacent to the site. As such, the proposed building would not
    appear unusual by virtue of its size or design. The various open spaces and
    terraces would provide sufficient communal areas for residents and staff.
22. The local public sewerage system drains to a wastewater treatment works (WwTW)
    that ultimately discharges to the River Wye Special Area of Conservation (the
    SAC). Welsh Water advise the foul water flows associated with the development
    can be accommodated within the immediate public sewerage system. However, the
    relevant WwTW is currently failing to comply with performance standards on the
    forward flow of phosphorous. Welsh Water are required to deliver a scheme at the
    WwTW to ensure compliance with the performance standards and so it suggests a
    condition that would restrict the use of the proposed development until after 31
    December 2026. The development would not be ready for occupation by that date
    given its scale and likely time required for construction. As such, I consider the
    suggested condition is unnecessary. Furthermore, in light of the comments from
    Welsh Water, I agree with the findings of the Council’s Habitat Regulations
    Assessment that the proposal would have no likely significant effects on the
    qualifying features of the SAC.
23. Comments from NHS Herefordshire and Worcestershire indicate the development
    would have an effect on the provision of local health services and that a financial
    contribution towards mitigation should be secured through a planning obligation.
    However, the submissions indicate there is no requirement under the terms of the
    Council’s Planning Obligations Supplementary Planning Document to secure such
    a contribution. As such, I find a planning obligation as suggested is unnecessary to
    ensure the development is acceptable in planning terms.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010739


24. The Council’s Ecology advisor suggests it is unlikely the development would have
    any effects on protected species or other features of ecological interest. Based on
    the submissions, I find no reason to disagree with this advice.
25. Cox Cottage is a grade II listed building on the opposite side of Venns Lane to the
    appeal site. Its significance includes its age as it dates from the early 19th century
    and as it was purpose built for the important artist David Cox. Also, it is visually
    interesting due to its quaint appearance with thatched roof and small windows. On
    the other side of St Barnabas Close is another grade II listed building called Abbey
    Grange. This was also lived in by David Cox and so its significance in these
    regards is similar to Cox Cottage. Moreover, its dressed stone front elevation
    contains interesting architectural features and a well-proportioned symmetry. The
    listed buildings together have a group value due to their close proximity and
    connection with the painter.
26. The development would be seen in the same views along Venns Lane and
    St Barnabas Close as both listed buildings and so it would affect their settings. I am
    required to pay special regard to the desirability of preserving the setting of the
    listed buildings and any architectural or historic interest that they possess1.
27. The new facility would not obstruct existing views of Cox Cottage from the highway
    as it would be set away from the roadside boundaries of the site. The development
    would remove current viewpoints from land directly outside the church but there
    would be views towards Cox Cottage from the proposed car park and land to the
    side and front of the care facility. As such, the proposal would not affect the visual
    appreciation of Cox Cottage.
28. Also, the proposed building would not block views from the roads of Abbey Grange.
    Indeed, the inclusion of windows facing St Barnabas Close would allow users of the
    development to more readily appreciate the architectural qualities of the listed
    property compared to the existing church. The proposal would avoid any visual
    barrier between Cox Cottage and Abbey Grange and so their link to each other and
    to David Cox would remain unaffected. Therefore, the proposal would cause no
    harm to the setting of the listed buildings and it would preserve their significance.
29. The above considerations fail to justify a decision to dismiss the appeal. As such,
    they do not affect my overall assessment.
Points in support of the proposal and planning balance.
30. The harm I have identified in respect of the second main issue means the proposal
    would not accord with the CS policies when read as a whole. It follows to consider
    whether other factors justify granting planning permission contrary to the
    development plan.
31. The appeal site is in an urban area that clearly lies within the built up confines of
    Hereford. Policy S4 of the Framework dictates that development within settlements
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects. The national decision-making policies of the
    Framework should be considered in carrying out this balancing exercise.
32. I have found the proposal would not lead to the unacceptable loss of a community
    facility having regard to CS policy SC1. There would be no adverse impact in
1
    Section 66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                   5
Appeal Decision 6010739


     relation to the safeguarding of buildings for particular uses as referred to in part
     2(a)(i) of policy S4 of the Framework. This is a neutral factor in my overall
     assessment.
33. In terms of benefits, the development would make better use of underutilised land
    as advocated under policy L2(1)(b) of the Framework. This is a factor of substantial
    weight. The development would also create construction employment and
    employment for care workers once it is operational. Any planning permission
    granted would be subject to the mandatory biodiversity gain condition and so the
    proposal would lead to a minor enhancement in these regards. These factors
    together attract considerable weight.
34. Annex D of the Framework requires local authorities to demonstrate a supply of
    deliverable housing sites that would be sufficient to provide a minimum of 5 years’
    worth of housing when assessed against their housing requirements. The Council
    suggest it is only able to show 3.11 years’ worth of sites, which is a significant
    shortfall. The proposal would help address an evidenced unmet need for more
    residences, a benefit that attracts substantial weight.
35. Moreover, the officer from the Council’s Strategic Housing Team supports the
    proposal as there is a significant local need for care bed spaces. This sentiment is
    reflected in CS policy H3 that seeks the provision of a range of housing including
    that capable of meeting the needs of the elderly population. The appellant refers to
    the Council’s Market Sustainability Plan 2023 that indicates the number of nursing
    home beds will need to increase. The proposal would help address this specific
    accommodation need. As such, the scheme benefits from the substantial weight as
    advocated under policy HO7 of the Framework. The facility also accords with policy
    HO9(1)(a)(i) of the Framework as it would provide acceptable living conditions and
    it would be in a urban location with appropriate access to services. Overall, the
    benefits of the development attract very considerable weight.
36. Policy P3 of the Framework looks for development to be appropriate to its location
    and to consider effects on living conditions. The Council also suggests the
    identified harm to residential amenity would bring the proposal into conflict with
    policy L2 of the Framework, as this looks for residential redevelopment schemes to
    maintain acceptable living conditions in terms of privacy. The identified harm
    caused to living environments at neighbouring residences would be mitigated to a
    degree through the provision of new planting. Even so, I attach significant weight to
    the adverse effects in these regards.
37. In applying the planning balance, I find the benefits of the proposal would not be
    substantially outweighed by the adverse effects and so policy S4 of the Framework
    dictates that planning permission should be approved. This support justifies
    allowing the appeal and granting planning permission contrary to the CS.
Conditions
38. I have had regard to the list of conditions suggested by the Council in light of policy
    DM6 of the Framework. Where necessary, I have made amendments for reasons
    of precision and to avoid the use of pre-commencement requirements.
39. I attach condition 2 that lists the approved plans for clarity reasons. I have sought
    clarification from the main parties as to the numbers of the drawings showing floor
    plans that are before me for consideration. The responses have been inconsistent

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6010739


     as the Council has asked me to consider floor plan drawings numbered 805 024,
     which the appellant has asked me to ignore. In any event, I am satisfied that other
     drawings show at different scales the floor plans of the proposed building and so I
     have omitted the 805 024 drawings from the list of approved plans.
40. Condition 3 is imposed to help minimise the use of resources. Condition 4 is
    required in the interests of highway safety and to safeguard living conditions at
    nearby residences. Conditions 5 and 6 are needed to safeguard the well-being of
    trees on the site that are to be retained. Condition 7 will ensure the development is
    served by a suitable water supply. Condition 8 is required to ensure the appropriate
    disposal of foul and surface water from the development. There is no need for
    separate conditions that stipulate how foul and surface water shall be managed as
    these are matters that would be assessed through the terms of the condition.
41. There is no need for a condition on hard landscaping and proposed levels as the
    appeal drawings already provide sufficient information. There is also information
    before me on the proposed planting. However, condition 9 requires the submission
    and approval of cultivation details as well as an implementation timetable and a soft
    landscape management and maintenance plan. This is needed to ensure the
    development is of a satisfactory appearance and to minimise overlooking onto the
    neighbouring properties.
42. Condition 10 is imposed to ensure the development includes measures to enhance
    the biodiversity value of the site and promote the well-being of wildlife. Conditions
    11 and 12 are imposed to promote sustainable modes of travel to and from the
    development. Condition 13 is required in the interests of highway safety.
    Condition 14 seeks to avoid a nuisance to nearby residents and harmful effects on
    foraging or commuting bats. There is no need for a separate condition that
    stipulates the design of external lighting as this would be assessed by the Council
    under the terms of the condition.
43. The approved plans provide details of the materials to be used in the construction
    of the external elevations of the facility. Accordingly, the suggested condition that
    requires samples of materials to be approved is not required. Also, there is no need
    for a condition that requires the approval of details of external features such as soil
    and vent pipes, boiler flues and meter boxes as these would be minor elements of
    the whole building and they would not meaningfully affect its appearance. The
    suggested condition on how solar panels are disposed of once they become
    redundant is not related to planning and so it has not been imposed.
Conclusion
44. The proposal would conflict with the development plan but material considerations
    indicate that a decision should be made other than in accordance with it. Therefore,
    I conclude the appeal should be allowed.

Jonathan Edwards
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6010739


SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS

     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       Except where otherwise stipulated by conditions attached to this permission,
              the development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
              following approved plans:-
              -    Site Location Plan and Block Plan: DWG 805 041 B
              -    Proposed elevations with materials: DWG: 805 050
              -    External works/car parking: DWG: 805 030 H
              -    Existing plans and elevations: DWG: 805 040
              -    Level 0 Floor Plan DWG: 805 043
              -    Level 1 Floor Plan DWG: 805 044
              -    Level 2 Floor Plan DWG: 805 045
              -    Proposed elevations: Plan DWG: 805 046
              -    Proposed elevations: Plan DWG: 805 047
              -    Floor Plan Level 0 DWG: 805 032
              -    Floor Plan Level 1 DWG: 805 033
              -    Floor Plan level 2 DWG: 805 034
              -    Floor Plan Lower-level DWG: 805 031
              -    Landscaping scheme level 1 DWG SE P48 GD01
              -    Landscaping scheme level 1 DWG SE P48 GD02
              -    Topographical survey DWG BA 350200123-01 rev A
              -    Topographical survey with UGS DWG BA 2500780 01
              -    Haydon Plan/Tree Plan: 11445-D-AIA Rev B
              -    CGIs of proposal 805 048
              -    CGIs of proposal 805 049
              -    Exiting Vehicles Visibility Assessment 325/2024/021 P1
     3)       The development hereby permitted shall not begin on either the demolition or
              construction until a Resource Audit has been submitted to and approved in
              writing by the local planning authority. The Resource Audit shall identify the
              approach to materials and resource efficiency during the demolition of the
              existing building as well as the construction and operational phases of the
              development and shall include the following details:
              -    the amount and type of construction aggregates required and their likely
                   source;
              -    measures to minimise the use of raw materials (including hazardous
                   materials) during construction, through sustainable design and the use of
                   recycled or reprocessed materials;


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6010739


              -    steps to be taken to reduce, reuse and recycle waste (including
                   hazardous waste) generated during the construction phase;
              -    the type and volume of waste expected to be generated during both the
                   construction and operational phases of the development;
              -    details of any on-site waste recycling facilities to be provided during
                   construction and once the development is operational;
              -    measures to maximise the diversion of waste from landfill during the
                   operational phase, including recycling, composting, and recovery
                   strategies;
              -    end-of-life considerations for materials used within the development,
                   including potential for reuse and recyclability;
              -    an assessment of the embodied carbon and lifecycle carbon costs of
                   materials to be used.
              Thereafter, the development shall be carried out in accordance with the
              approved Resource Audit.
     4)       The development hereby permitted shall not begin on either the demolition or
              construction works until details and location of the following have been
              submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority, and
              which shall be operated and maintained during construction of the
              development hereby approved:
              -    a method for ensuring mud is not deposited onto the Public Highway
              -    construction traffic access location
              -    parking for site operatives
              -    construction traffic management plan (including construction working
                   hours).
              The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
              details for the duration of the construction.
     5)       The development hereby permitted shall not begin on either the demolition or
              construction works until an Arboricultural Method Statement (AMS) and Tree
              Protection Plan (TPP) have been submitted to and approved by the local
              planning authority. The AMS/TPP should include information to show
              measures designed to minimise the impacts of demolition and construction
              works to retained trees. The development shall be carried out in accordance
              with the approved AMS and the TPP.
     6)       Except where otherwise stipulated by conditions attached to this permission,
              the development works hereby submitted shall be carried out in accordance
              with the submitted Hayden’s Tree Survey and Aboricultural Impact
              Assessment dated 7 March 2025 and the accompanying drawing numbered
              11445-D-AIA Rev B.
     7)       Apart from the demolition of the existing building, no works on construction of
              the development hereby permitted shall begin until a potable water scheme
              to serve the development has been submitted to and approved in writing by
              the local planning authority. The scheme shall demonstrate that the existing
              water supply network can suitably accommodate the proposed development.
              If necessary, the scheme shall include details of how the existing public water

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     9
Appeal Decision 6010739


              supply network would be reinforced. The approved potable water scheme
              shall be fully implemented prior to the first occupation of the facility hereby
              permitted and shall thereafter remain in perpetuity.
     8)       Apart from the demolition of the existing building, no works on construction of
              the development hereby permitted shall begin until a drainage scheme to
              serve the development has been submitted to and approved in writing by the
              local planning authority. The scheme shall provide for the disposal of foul,
              surface and land water, and include an assessment of the potential to
              dispose of surface and land water by sustainable means. The scheme shall
              be implemented in accordance with the approved details prior to the first
              occupation of the development and no further foul water, surface water and
              land drainage shall be allowed to connect directly or indirectly with the public
              sewerage system.
     9)       Apart from the demolition of the existing building, no works on construction of
              the development hereby permitted shall begin until a written specification
              setting out the size, quantity, density and cultivation details of the planting as
              shown on the approved plans, as well as a implementation timetable for this
              planting and a schedule of maintenance for a period of 10 years has been
              submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
              planting shall be provided and maintained in accordance with the approved
              details.
     10)      Prior to the first occupation of the care facility hereby permitted, the species
              enhancements as specified in section 4.3 of the Awareecology Biodiversity
              Net Gain Report dated 29.4.2025 shall have been provided and thereafter
              the installed features shall be retained and maintained.
     11)      Prior to the first occupation of the care facility hereby approved, a Travel Plan
              which contains measures to promote alternative sustainable means of
              transport for staff and visitors with respect to the development shall be
              submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
              approved Travel Plan shall be fully implemented. A detailed written record
              shall be kept of the measures undertaken to promote sustainable transport
              initiatives and a review of the Travel Plan shall be undertaken annually. All
              relevant documentation shall be made available for inspection by the local
              planning authority upon reasonable request.
     12)      Prior to the first occupation of the care facility hereby permitted, full details of
              a scheme for the provision of covered and secure cycle parking facilities
              within the curtilage of the care facility shall be submitted to and approved in
              writing by the local planning authority. The approved cycle parking facilities
              shall be provided and made available for use prior to the first use of the
              development hereby permitted. Thereafter, these facilities shall be retained
              and maintained.
     13)      Prior to the first occupation of the care facility hereby permitted, full details of
              the entry barrier system serving the Venns Lane access— including its
              specification, method of operation (e.g. automatic detection), fail-safe
              procedures, and long-term management arrangements—shall be submitted
              to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The barrier system
              shall be installed in accordance with the approved details prior to the first use
              of the development. Thereafter, it shall be retained, operated, and maintained


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    10
Appeal Decision 6010739


              for the lifetime of the development to ensure the Venns Lane access only
              allows vehicles onto, and not off, the permitted car park.
     14)      Details of any external lighting to be provided to serve the development
              hereby permitted shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local
              planning authority prior to its installation.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   11
