Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 July 2026
by A Caines BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17th August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010972
101 Dalston Lane, Hackney, London E8 1NH
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Ayorinde Adewale (Adewale Properties UK Limited) against the decision
     of the Council of the London Borough of Hackney.
•    The application Ref is 2025/2059.
•    The development proposed is change of use of the basement and part of the ground floor from a
     youth club (Sui Generis) to a drinking establishment with expanded food provision (Use Class Sui
     Generis) and installation of a kitchen extract system.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for change of use of the
       basement and part of the ground floor from a youth club (Sui Generis) to a drinking
       establishment with expanded food provision (Use Class Sui Generis) and
       installation of a kitchen extract system at 101 Dalston Lane, Hackney,
       London E8 1NH in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 2025/2059,
       subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Applications for costs
2.     Applications for costs were made by the appellant against the Council, and by
       the Council against the appellant. Those applications are the subject of
       separate decisions.
Main Issue
3.     The main issue is whether the proposal would result in the unjustified loss of social
       and community infrastructure having regard to relevant development plan policies.
Reasons
4.     The appeal site forms part of a recently completed mixed-use building comprising
       residential accommodation above commercial floorspace. Planning permission
       was granted in 2017 for redevelopment of the site including replacement youth
       club floorspace at basement and ground floor levels. A subsequent permission
       granted in 2021 approved the change of use of the ground floor element from
       youth club use to flexible Class E floorspace, leaving the basement as the
       remaining youth club accommodation.
5.     There is no dispute that the lawful planning use of the basement remains as a
       youth club. I have had regard to the planning history of the site and the Council's
       submission that reprovision of the youth club formed an important component of
       the redevelopment scheme.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010972


6.      However, the evidence before me indicates that, despite completion of the building
        several years ago, the replacement youth club has never become operational. The
        basement has remained vacant and there is no evidence before me that any youth
        activities have ever been undertaken from the premises.
7.      Policy LP8 of the Hackney Local Plan (2020) (HLP) seeks to protect existing social
        and community infrastructure. Policy S1 of the London Plan (2021) (LP) similarly
        seeks to resist the loss of social infrastructure except in prescribed circumstances.
8.      The Council relies principally upon the absence of marketing evidence
        demonstrating that the premises are no longer required. It contends that the
        proposal therefore fails to satisfy the requirements of policy LP8.
9.      Whilst I acknowledge that no marketing evidence has been submitted, I do not
        consider that factor to be determinative in the particular circumstances of this
        appeal. The underlying purpose of the policy is to safeguard socially valuable
        infrastructure where there is a realistic prospect of continued community benefit.
        The evidence before me does not demonstrate such a prospect.
10. In this respect, there is no evidence before me that the intended occupier identified
    during the earlier planning applications remains interested in occupying the
    premises. Nor is there any evidence that another youth or community organisation
    has expressed an interest in operating from the basement. Furthermore, despite
    the passage of a considerable period since completion of the building, no
    community use has become established.
11. I have had regard to the Council's reference to identified demand for youth
    facilities in the wider Dalston area and the objectives of the recently adopted
    Dalston Plan. However, evidence of a strategic need for youth provision does not,
    by itself, demonstrate a realistic prospect that this particular vacant basement unit
    will deliver such a facility.
12. Accordingly, whilst I attribute some weight to the retention of the lawful youth club
    use given the site's planning history, that weight is substantially reduced by the
    fact that the replacement facility has never operated, no current community benefit
    is being delivered, and there is no persuasive evidence before me that occupation
    for youth club purposes is likely to occur within a reasonably foreseeable period.
13. Against this, the proposal would secure the productive use of accommodation that
    has remained vacant since completion of the development. The Council’s
    evidence indicates that the proposal would be acceptable in terms of design,
    heritage, and living conditions subject to appropriate conditions.
14. Interested parties have referred me to another appeal decision concerning
    premises at East India Dock Road1. However, each appeal must be determined on
    its own facts and circumstances. In that case, the Inspector found insufficient
    evidence to demonstrate that the established lawful community use was no longer
    required and noted the absence of evidence regarding alternative community
    occupation. The present appeal concerns replacement community floorspace that
    has never become operational following redevelopment of the site and therefore
    materially different circumstances apply. As such, whilst I have had regard to the
    decision, it does not lead me to a different conclusion.

1
    APP/E5900/W/25/3376318


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010972


15. Overall, whilst the proposal would conflict with policies LP8 of the HLP and S1 of
    the LP insofar as it would result in the loss of lawful social infrastructure in
    principle, the planning circumstances of this case significantly diminish the weight I
    attach to that conflict. The benefits arising from the productive use of
    accommodation that has remained vacant since the redevelopment of the site,
    thereby securing an active use and contributing to the vitality and economic activity
    of the area, outweigh that conflict. I therefore conclude that the proposal would not
    result in an unjustified loss of social and community infrastructure. The proposal
    would accord with the development plan when read as a whole.
Other Matters
16. I have had regard to the site's location adjacent to the St Mark's Conservation
    Area and opposite the Graham Road and Mapledene Conservation Area, together
    with the nearby Grade II listed building at 126 Dalston Lane. The proposal involves
    no significant external alterations, and the Council raised no objection on heritage
    grounds. Having paid special attention to the desirability of preserving or
    enhancing the character or appearance of the conservation areas, and having had
    special regard to the desirability of preserving the setting of the nearby listed
    building, I find that the character and appearance of the conservation areas, and
    the setting of the nearby listed building would be preserved.
17. I have also noted the additional concerns raised by interested parties, including in
    relation to noise, odour, anti-social behaviour, parking, traffic, servicing, waste
    management, lift arrangements, fire safety, security and the cumulative effects of
    licensed premises in the locality. However, the Council did not refuse permission
    for any of those reasons. The evidence before me shows that the Council's
    environmental health officers initially objected to the proposed low-level discharge
    extraction system but withdrew that objection following the substitution of a
    Purified Air RefLOW 1.5 recirculation system. Subject to conditions, the Council
    ultimately raised no technical objection relating to living conditions. Nor did the
    Council raise any objection on highways grounds. On the evidence before me, I
    have no substantive reason to reach a different view.
18. Furthermore, many of the concerns raised relate to matters controlled by separate
    regulatory regimes, including licensing, building regulations, fire safety and general
    site management. Whilst I appreciate the genuine concerns of local residents, the
    evidence before me does not demonstrate that these matters would justify
    withholding planning permission. I have considered all other matters raised but
    none alter my overall conclusion.
Conditions
19. I have considered the conditions suggested by the Council and technical
    consultees in light of the tests set out in the Framework and Planning Practice
    Guidance. Where necessary, I have amended the wording for clarity, precision,
    and enforceability, and I have only imposed those conditions that meet the
    relevant tests.
20. In addition to the standard conditions relating to the commencement of
    development and compliance with the approved plans, I have imposed a condition
    restricting the hours of operation of the premises in line with those proposed and in
    the interests of the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers. Further conditions
    relating to the installation and operation of the approved Purified Air RefLOW 1.5

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010972


       extraction, filtration and odour control system, and in relation to plant noise levels,
       are necessary in the interests of protecting neighbouring living conditions from
       noise and odour. However, I have not imposed the suggested condition requiring
       submission of further detailed drawings of the Purified Air RefLOW 1.5 system, as
       sufficient details are already contained on the approved plans and its installation
       and operation are secured by conditions.
21. I have also not imposed the Council’s suggested conditions requiring the
    submission of a sound insulation scheme and subsequent sound insulation testing,
    as the proposal was not refused on the basis of inadequate sound insulation and
    the evidence before me does not demonstrate that such measures are necessary
    to make the development acceptable. In these circumstances, the suggested
    conditions would fail the test of necessity.
Conclusion
22. For the reasons given, the appeal should be allowed, subject to the conditions in
    the schedule.

A Caines
INSPECTOR



SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS

     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: L100; P101; P102; P103; P104.
     3)       The premises shall not be open to customers outside the hours of 11:00 to
              23:00 on any day.
     4)       Prior to the first use of the development hereby permitted, the Purified Air
              RefLOW 1.5 extraction, filtration and odour control system shown on the
              approved plans shall be installed and made fully operational. The approved
              system shall thereafter be retained, operated and maintained in accordance
              with the manufacturer's recommendations for the lifetime of the development.
     5)       The rating level of noise emitted from all fixed plant and machinery
              associated with the development shall be at least 10 dB(A) below the existing
              background noise level (LA90,T), when measured or assessed in accordance
              with BS 4142:2014+A1:2019 at the nearest noise-sensitive premises.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
