Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 14 September 2026
by John Pearce MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2nd October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010746
Canons, Hobbs Cross Road, Matching, Harlow, Essex CM17 0NP
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Costel Morariu against the decision of Epping Forest District Council.
•    The application Ref is EPF/0578/26.
•    The development proposed is Demolition the existing house and garage and erection a new single
•    detached dwelling with associated parking and amenity.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.     The revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published
       in August 2026. The revised Framework is a material consideration which should
       be taken into account from the day of publication. Having considered the revisions
       and in light of the principles of natural justice, the parties have been provided with
       an opportunity to comment on the revised Framework.
Main Issues
3.     The main issues are:
           •    whether the proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt
                for the purposes of development plan policy and the Framework;
           •    whether the proposed development would preserve or enhance the setting
                of the nearby listed building;
           •    the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area; and
           •    if it is inappropriate, whether the harm to the Green Belt by reason of
                inappropriateness, and any other harm, would be clearly outweighed by
                other considerations so as to amount to the very special circumstances
                necessary to justify the development.
Reasons
Whether the proposal is inappropriate development
4.     The Framework explains that the objective of Green Belt Policy is to prevent urban
       sprawl by keeping land permanently open. The government attaches great
       importance to Green Belts, the essential features of which are their openness and
       permanence.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010746


5.     Policy SP5 of the Epping Forest District Local Plan 2011-2031 2023 (LP) states
       that the openness of the Green Belt will be protected from inappropriate
       development in accordance with national planning policy and Policy DM4 of the
       LP. Policy DM4 sets out the approach to assessing development proposals in the
       Green Belt and is broadly consistent with that of the Framework.
6.     Policy GB7 1 of the Framework sets out the categories of development that are not
       inappropriate in the Green Belt, and therefore should not be regarded as harmful
       to the Green Belt or be required to demonstrate very special circumstances. This
       includes at criterion b the replacement of an existing building, provided that the
       existing building is of permanent and substantial construction, and is lawful in
       planning terms. In the case of proposals for a replacement building, it should be for
       the same use and not materially larger than the one it replaces. This reflects the
       exception set out in Policy DM4 C.(iv) of the LP.
7.     The existing building has a primarily rectangular plan form with accommodation
       within the roofspace. The Council’s undisputed calculations demonstrate that the
       proposed dwelling would have a footprint that would be 38.8% larger than that of
       the existing dwelling. In addition, the proposed dwelling would have a floorspace of
       479 square metres, which would equate to an increase of 141.9%. Even if the
       calculations did not include the floorspace of the basement, there would still be a
       significant increase in the floorspace over and above that of the existing dwelling.
8.     While the difference in height between the proposed replacement building and the
       existing building would be limited, the substantial width and depth of the proposed
       building would result in a building with a considerably greater scale and massing
       than that of the existing building. Taken together, the new building would be
       materially larger than the one it would replace.
9.     Criterion e of Policy GB7 states that the redevelopment of previously developed
       land (including a material change of use to residential or mixed-use including
       residential), which would not cause substantial harm to the openness of the Green
       Belt is not inappropriate in the Green Belt.
10. Previously developed land is defined in Annex 2 of the Framework as ‘land which
    has been lawfully developed or is or was occupied by a permanent structure and
    any associated fixed surface infrastructure associated with it, including the
    curtilage of the developed land (although it should not be assumed that the whole
    of the curtilage should be developed)’. The site would not fall within the exclusions
    set out within the definition given that the site is not within a built-up area.
    Accordingly, the site would be previously developed land and the proposal for a
    replacement detached dwelling would comprise a redevelopment.
11. Openness has both a spatial and a visual aspect. This means that the absence of
    visual intrusion does not in itself mean that there is no impact on the openness of
    the Green Belt. Equally, this does not mean that the openness of the Green Belt
    has no visual dimension and thus both aspects need to be considered.
12. The existing dwelling is positioned centrally within the site and set in from the side
    boundaries but is closer to Hobbs Cross Road than the neighbouring properties.
    The proposed dwelling would be of a considerable scale and mass, and would be
    materially larger than the building it would replace. The development also includes
    a large area of hardstanding to the front of the dwelling. The significant volume of


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010746


         the proposed dwelling would lead to a considerable and harmful reduction in the
         spatial openness of the Green Belt at the site.
13. The proposed dwelling would be clearly visible in views to the front of the site,
    including the public right of way on the opposite side of the road. The front
    elevation, comprising three forward facing gables, would make the building appear
    imposing and conspicuous.
14. Nonetheless, the dwelling would be set back from the front boundary, towards the
    rear of the building line formed by the neighbouring properties. The presence of
    the existing development to one side of the site and the mature trees and
    vegetation to the other would partially screen the development in views in either
    direction along Hobbs Cross Road. Consequently, whilst there would be harm to
    the visual openness of the Green Belt at the site, the level of harm would be
    limited and localised to the site and the immediate area. Moreover, the
    development would not unacceptably impact the function and purpose of the
    Green Belt and would not lead to an encroachment of development into the
    countryside.
15. Accordingly, although the proposal would harm the openness of the Green Belt,
    the adverse effects would be moderate. Given that the proposal would not cause
    substantial harm to the openness of the Green Belt, the development would
    accord with criterion e of Policy GB7 of the Framework.
16. Therefore, the proposal is not inappropriate development, as per Policy GB7 of the
    Framework. Consequently, very special circumstances do not need to be
    demonstrated for the proposal to be considered acceptable in Green Belt terms.
    The proposal therefore accords with the Policies SP5 and DM4 of the LP and the
    Framework, which collectively seek to protect the Green Belt from harm.
Listed building
17. The appeal site is close to the Grade II listed building at Inglenook1. Section 66 (1)
    of the Planning (Listed Building and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (LBCAA)
    requires special regard be had to the desirability of preserving listed buildings,
    their setting and any features of special architectural or historic interest which they
    possess.
18. Inglenook is a small hall house consisting of a timber-framed and plastered
    building finished beneath a thatched roof. The building dates from the sixteenth
    century and was altered in the seventeenth and nineteenth centuries. A yellow
    brick extension and a conservatory are modern enlargements to the building. The
    special interest of Inglenook arises in part from its historical and architectural
    interest, which, despite alterations remains legible and illustrative of its original
    design.
19. The listed building is within a row of buildings, which includes the existing dwelling
    at the appeal site, but is otherwise within a rural area characterised by open fields.
    The countryside location of Inglenook, alongside the modest scale and defined row
    of buildings in the area, makes a positive contribution to the setting of the listed
    building. The contribution made by the existing building at the appeal site is limited
    by the low intervisibility with the heritage asset.

1
    List Entry Number: 1337198


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010746


20. The proposed dwelling would be set further back within the appeal site but would
    be broadly alongside the existing row of buildings, including Inglenook. While the
    position of the dwelling would not be harmfully discordant, its scale and design,
    emphasised by the imposing forward facing gables and areas of glazing, would be
    at odds with the prevailing scale and understated appearance of development in
    the area. Moreover, in combination with the expanse of hardstanding to the front of
    the site, the urban appearance of the development would erode the rural context
    that forms the setting of the listed building. Consequently, the proposal would harm
    the significance of the heritage asset.
21. Policy HE5 2 of the Framework requires that an assessment should identify
    whether proposals would be likely to result in harm to the significance of a heritage
    asset, either from work affecting the asset itself or from development within its
    setting, and that the degree of harm should be identified. The proposal would
    result in a low degree of harm, given the limited contribution that the appeal site
    makes to the significance of Inglenook.
22. Policy HE6 1 of the Framework states that when considering the potential effect of
    a development proposal on the significance of a designated heritage asset,
    substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation. Policy HE6 4 of the
    Framework states that where development proposals would harm the significance
    of a designated heritage asset the effect on the asset and its significance should
    be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the proposal.
23. The proposal is to replace a single dwelling with a larger dwelling and would not
    contribute positively towards the supply of housing in the District. The appellant
    suggests that the proposed dwelling would provide modern living standards,
    accessibility and energy saving requirements. However, there is no substantive
    evidence before me that demonstrates the existing dwelling could not achieve a
    similar level of living and energy standards and accessibility. Moreover, no further
    public benefits resulting from the proposal have been presented. Accordingly,
    public benefits would not outweigh the harm identified.
24. I conclude that the proposal would not preserve the setting of the nearby listed
    building. The development therefore conflicts with the historic environment policies
    of the Framework, the expectations of S66(1) of the LBCAA and Policy DM7 of the
    LP, which states that development proposals that affect any heritage asset or its
    setting should preserve and, wherever possible, enhance the significance of the
    heritage asset having regard to the special architectural or historic interest of its
    character, appearance and the contribution made by its setting.
Character and appearance
25. The site is part of a row of detached dwellings to one side of Hobbs Cross Road in
    an area with a prevailing rural character. The existing dwelling at the site is
    perpendicular to the road with a prominent forward facing gable. The dwelling is
    positioned closer to the road than the other dwellings within the row of
    development. Development in the area comprises a limited range of architecture,
    primarily consisting of dwellings with first floor accommodation within the
    roofspace with side facing dormer windows. The dwelling at Threshcot appears as
    a larger building by virtue of its orientation and greater width across its plot.
26. The architecture of the proposed dwelling has sought to incorporate some features
    of surrounding development, including the render finish and forward projecting

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010746


       gables. However, the building would be substantially larger and bulkier than the
       property it would be replacing, and this would make it appear imposing within the
       street scene. The scale of the development would be emphasised by the deep
       flank walls and the juxtaposition of the new dwelling with the more modestly scaled
       neighbouring properties.
27. The proposed dwelling would not be harmfully prominent within the row of existing
    buildings due to its position within the site away from the front boundary.
    Nonetheless, its scale and overtly urban design would fail to reflect the prevailing
    scale and prevailing rural character of the area. The proposed landscape works to
    the front and side boundaries would not be sufficient to blend the development
    with its surroundings or disguise the disproportionate scale and bulk of the
    dwelling.
28. I conclude that the proposal would harm the character and appearance of the
    area. The development therefore conflicts with Policy DM9 of the LP, which
    requires that all new development must achieve a high quality of design and
    contribute to the distinctive character and amenity of the local area.
Planning Balance
29. The Framework does not change the statutory status of the development plan as
    the starting point for decision making. The proposal is not in accordance with the
    aforementioned policies of the LP, with the associated conflict reflecting harm to
    the significance of the listed building and to the character and appearance of the
    area. The development conflicts with the development plan as a whole and should
    be refused unless other material considerations indicate otherwise.
30. The proposal would harm the significance of the designated heritage asset at
    Inglenook. Whilst the level of harm is at the lower level, Policy HE6 states that any
    harm to a designated heritage asset will be a matter of considerable importance
    and weight and that substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation.
31. The appellant states that the existing dwelling could be extended through the use
    of permitted development rights. Nevertheless, I have not been provided with
    substantive details, including plans or a Lawful Development Certificate, that would
    demonstrate that there is a realistic prospect that such development would take
    place. Moreover, I cannot be certain that the effects from permitted development
    would be comparable to those of the appeal proposal. Therefore, this limits the
    weight that I can apportion to this consideration.
32. The appellant indicates that the existing dwelling has suffered from prolonged
    neglect. Nonetheless, there is no substantive evidence before me that details the
    extent of works required to repair and modernise the building. Moreover, the
    information before me suggests that the building is generally without major
    structural defect. I therefore attribute minimal weight to this consideration.
33. Taking the stated benefits together, collectively there would be limited benefits
    associated with the appeal scheme. However, the harm to the significance of the
    heritage asset and to the character and appearance of the area, and the conflict
    with the development plan would be of greater significance.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010746


Other Matters
34. The objective of Schedule 7A of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 is for
    development to deliver at least a 10% increase in biodiversity value relative to the
    pre-development biodiversity value of the onsite habitat. This increase can be
    achieved through onsite biodiversity gains, registered offsite biodiversity gains or
    statutory biodiversity credits.
35. The mandatory condition requiring biodiversity net gain of at least 10% is imposed
    on permissions granted pursuant of a planning application made on or after 12
    February 2024 or 2 April 2024 for small developments such as this. Given that the
    application was made after 2 April 2024 and there is no mechanism before me to
    secure the development as self-build housing, the mandatory requirement applies.
    However, as I am dismissing the appeal on other matters, there is no need for me
    to consider this matter further.
36. The site falls within the ‘Zone of Influence’ for the Epping Forest Special Area of
    Conservation (EFSAC). The Council’s Habitats Regulations Assessment identifies
    that the proposal is outside of the scope of the mitigation strategy. Given the
    nature and use of the site, the Council concluded that the proposal would generate
    no likely significant effect to the EFSAC in terms of recreational pressure. In
    addition, given that the proposal is for a replacement dwelling on a one-for-one
    basis, the development would not increase atmospheric pollution. Based on the
    evidence, I see no reason to reach a different conclusion. However, as I am
    dismissing the appeal on other matters, there is no need for me to consider this
    matter further.
Conclusion
37. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

John Pearce
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
