Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by F Bradley BRP (NZ) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1st October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010951
Land north of the Bower House, Clatterbury Lane, Clavering, Saffron Walden
CB11 4QR
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Julia Perry against the decision of Uttlesford District Council.
•   The application ref is UTT/26/0506/FUL.
•   The development proposed is described as the erection of one self-build dwelling with cartlodge,
    altered vehicle access and associated landscaping.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. Matters relating to flooding were not included as a reason for refusal on the
   Council’s decision notice. Nonetheless as this was capable of being a material
   consideration in my determination of the appeal, I sought the parties’ views on the
   application of the sequential test given that part of the site is within Flood Zones 2
   and 3. The appellant provided a response which concludes that the sequential test
   is not required but no response was received from the Council. As the Council and
   appellant have been afforded the opportunity to comment on this matter, no party
   would be prejudiced, and I have therefore determined the appeal on this basis.
3. The proposal is indicated as being for a self-build dwelling and therefore could
   benefit from the self-build and custom build exemption from biodiversity net gain
   (BNG) provided for in the Biodiversity Gain Requirements (Exemptions)
   Regulations 2024. A unilateral undertaking (UU) was submitted with the appeal to
   secure the proposal as a self-build dwelling. I return to this matter below.
4. During this appeal, a new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework)
   was published on 17 August 2026. The parties were given an opportunity to
   comment on the implications of the revised Framework for the appeal. The
   appellant provided a response, and I have taken their comments into account in
   reaching my decision. No response was received from the Council.
5. I have included the site’s postcode in the site address above to more accurately
   identify its location.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010951


Main Issues
6. The main issues are whether the proposed development would:
         •     be in a suitable location for new housing having regard to flood risk;
         •     satisfy the requirements of the statutory framework for BNG; and
         •     be in a suitable location for new housing having regard to the development
               plan.
Reasons
Flood risk
7. The eastern part of the site, which includes the access onto Clatterbury Lane, is
   located within Flood Zones 2 and 3 in respect of fluvial flooding. The remainder of
   the site, including where the proposed dwelling would be sited, is within Flood Zone
   1. The site is at low risk of surface water flooding.
8. No sequential test has been undertaken by the appellant and the Council did not
   refer to the sequential test in its reasons for refusal or its officer report.
   Notwithstanding this, it is my duty to consider whether the proposal complies with
   the national and local policy requirements.
9. Core Policy 36 of the Uttlesford Local Plan 2021-2041 (the LP) requires all
   development proposals to follow the sequential approach and, among other things,
   provide safe access and egress for future users of the development and an
   appropriate emergency evacuation plan where appropriate.
10. Policy F5 of the Framework sets out that the aim of the sequential test is to steer
    new development to areas with the lowest risk of flooding from any source. Where
    the test applies, development proposals should not be located in areas at risk of
    flooding where alternative sites, appropriate for the development, are reasonably
    available in areas with a lower risk of flooding. Part 2 of the policy sets out
    circumstances where the sequential test is not required, and I will return to this
    below.
11. The application is supported by a Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) which indicates
    the maximum flood level for a 1 in 100 flooding event, plus 35% allowance for
    climate change, is 85.800 AOD. Given the access level of 85.118 AOD, flood
    depths of approximately 682mm could occur across the access route.
12. The appellant contends that the depth of floodwater would not prevent access by
    emergency vehicles and that the adjacent byway would allow access to and from
    the site in the worst-case flood conditions. However, no substantive evidence has
    been submitted to support these claims. While the FRA sets out proposed
    mitigation measures including a flood evacuation plan, it does not demonstrate how
    the site could be safely accessed or provide definitive escape routes in a flooding
    event. Accordingly, it has not been demonstrated that the development would be
    safe for its anticipated lifetime. For these reasons, I find that the proportionate
    approach referred to in the Planning Practice Guidance1 (PPG) in requiring the
    sequential test to be undertaken should not be applied in this case.

1
    Paragraph: 027 Reference ID: 7-027-20220825


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          2
Appeal Decision 6010951


13. Part 2 of Policy F5 of the Framework states that the sequential test should be used
    in areas known to be at risk now or in the future from any form of flooding, unless
    one of a number of circumstances applies. Part 2(b)(i) is not met as built
    development within the site boundary, including access or escape routes, would be
    located in an area that would be at risk of flooding from any source, now and in the
    future (having regard to potential changes in flood risk). Part 2(b)(ii) is not relevant
    as it relates only to sites at risk of surface water flooding. As the site is not allocated
    in the LP, part (a) is also not relevant. None of the circumstances identified in part
    (c) apply in this case.
14. The appellant has referred to two High Court cases in support of the appeal. The
    first judgment2 found that the sequential test should not be interpreted in a highly
    specific way and that there is a need for flexibility. As the sequential test had been
    applied in that case, I am not persuaded this case is relevant to the appeal. In the
    second judgment3 the Court held that the Inspector erred in law by treating the
    absence of a sequential test as fatal to the application without carrying out any
    proper or meaningful balance with the development plan and Framework, and the
    other material considerations. I address the weight given to the absence of a
    sequential test and the unacceptable flood risk on the site as part of the planning
    balance below.
15. To conclude, no sequential test has been undertaken, and I have not been
    provided with sufficient evidence to demonstrate that there are no reasonably
    available sites at a lower risk of flooding capable of accommodating the proposed
    development. Furthermore, the submitted evidence does not satisfactorily
    demonstrate that the proposed layout, design and any mitigation measures would
    ensure the safety of future occupiers and users for the lifetime of the development.
    Consequently, I am not satisfied that the site is in a suitable location for housing
    having regard to flood risk. The proposal would therefore conflict with Core Policy
    36 of the LP and Policies F4 to F7 of the Framework which collectively seek to
    direct development away from areas at highest risk of flooding and ensure that
    development is safe for its lifetime without increasing flood risk elsewhere.
Self-build and BNG provision
16. The Environment Act 2021 introduced BNG as a statutory requirement. Where
    applicable, it is secured through a statutory planning condition intended to ensure a
    minimum 10% increase in biodiversity value. Compliance with this statutory regime
    is a material consideration for the decision maker, as failure to do so could
    undermine both its effective implementation and the wider biodiversity objectives it
    seeks to achieve. Core Policy 40 of the LP requires development proposals to
    provide a minimum of 20% BNG, unless it can be clearly demonstrated that
    provision in excess of the statutory minimum 10% would make development
    unviable.
17. Article 7 of the Town and Country Planning (Development Management Procedure)
    (England) Order 2015 requires an application for planning permission to be
    accompanied by a statement confirming whether the development would be subject
    to the statutory BNG condition and, if not, the reasons for that belief.


2
 Mead Realisations Ltd v Secretary of State for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities [2024] EWHC 279
3
 Gladman v Secretary of State for Homes, Communities and Local Government (1) Lancaster City Council (2) [2026] EWHC 51
(Admin)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             3
Appeal Decision 6010951


18. The appeal is supported by a UU to secure the proposal as self-build housing and
    so the proposal would not be required to secure BNG for which provision has not
    been made. However, there are numerous issues with the UU as submitted
    including: it is not accompanied by any evidence of title; it does not include the site
    plan in Schedule 1; it makes no provision to ensure that the dwelling is occupied by
    those who have commissioned it for a reasonable period of time; and it contains
    numerous errors including references to dwellings and plots in the plural and to
    reserved matters when the application is for full planning permission for a single
    dwelling. On the basis of what is before me I am not satisfied that the development
    can be considered to be custom or self-build and the proposal has also failed to
    demonstrate that it would make appropriate provision for BNG.
19. The appellant has drawn my attention to two appeal decisions 4 for self-build
    dwellings in which, respectively, the Inspectors gave positive significant and
    substantial positive weight to the self-build elements of the schemes. For the
    reasons set out above, the scheme has not been secured as a self-build dwelling
    therefore it is not a benefit of the scheme.
20. To conclude, the proposed development fails to satisfy the requirements of the
    statutory framework for BNG and conflicts with Core Policy 40 of the LP which
    requires all development proposals to demonstrate a minimum of 20% BNG.
Suitable location having regard to the development plan
21. Core Policy 3 of the LP sets out the settlement hierarchy for the district within which
    Clavering is classified as a larger village. The policy states that there is a
    presumption in favour of sustainable development within the existing built area of
    key settlements, local rural centres and larger villages. Development outside the
    existing built areas of these settlements will only be permitted where it is allocated
    in the LP or within a Made Neighbourhood Development Plan. Clavering does not
    have a defined settlement boundary therefore consideration of whether the site falls
    within the built area of the village is a matter of planning judgement.
22. The appeal site comprises a grassed field served by an existing access.
    Agricultural fields lie to the north and west. Residential properties are located
    immediately to the south and on the opposite side of Clatterbury Lane to the east.
    The village does not have a tightly defined or readily discernible settlement pattern,
    being characterised instead by a dispersed form of development extending across
    a relatively wide area.
23. Having regard to its relationship with the adjoining residential properties to the
    south and east, the site is perceived as forming part of the built area within the
    village. It does not perform the role of a distinct gap within the settlement. The siting
    of the proposed dwelling would align with the existing dwelling to the south, and the
    site derives a degree of containment from that property and the established tree
    belt along its northern boundary. Consequently, the proposal would reflect and
    reinforce the predominantly linear pattern of development that characterises this
    part of the village.
24. For the above reasons, I find that the site is within the built area of Clavering where
    the presumption in favour of development applies under Core Policy 3 of the LP.
    This is consistent with Policy S4 of the Framework which states that development

4
    APP/R3650/W/22/3300262 and APP/C1570/W/25/3365969


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          4
Appeal Decision 6010951


     proposals within settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so
     would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against
     the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
25. A footway opposite the site provides pedestrian access to a range of services and
    facilities located both to the north and south. The site lies within reasonable walking
    distance, being less than one kilometre, from a primary school, public houses, the
    village hall, the village supermarket and other local shops and services. In addition,
    nearby bus stops provide services to surrounding villages and the larger
    settlements of Saffron Walden and Bishop’s Stortford. Whilst the roads are unlit,
    the presence of footways and the 30 miles per hour speed limit assists in making
    the routes reasonably accessible for pedestrians and cyclists. The location would
    be attractive for different users and make the most of existing and proposed
    transport infrastructure and would, accordingly, be in a sustainable location.
26. In conclusion, the site is in a suitable location for new housing having regard to the
    development plan’s spatial approach. Development in this location would be
    consistent with Core Policy 3 of the LP which provides for sustainable development
    within the existing built area of key settlements, local rural centres and larger
    villages. It is also consistent with Core Policies 26, 27 and 28 of the LP which,
    taken together, seek to ensure developments should be located close to key
    services and facilities and promote walking, cycling and access to public transport.
27. Development Policy 1 is referred to in the Council’s second reason for refusal and
    provides for new dwellings in the open countryside. As I have found the site to be
    within the built area of Clavering, this policy is not therefore relevant.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
28. The development proposal would be located in an area at risk of flooding. As no
    sequential test has been carried out, I have found there would be conflict with
    policies in the development plan and the Framework which seek to locate new
    homes in areas of low risk of flooding and substantial weight is attached to this
    adverse effect.
29. Despite the proposal being indicated for a self-build home, the absence of a
    mechanism to secure the dwelling for this specific purpose means that this is a
    factor that does not weigh in support of the proposal. The consequent failure to
    comply with the statutory provisions for BNG attracts significant weight.
30. The Council has confirmed it can only demonstrate a housing land supply of 4.77
    years. Substantial weight is given to the provision of a new dwelling in accordance
    with the Framework, with the proposal providing a modest contribution to the
    Council’s housing supply.
31. Some biodiversity enhancements, separate to BNG, are proposed in the submitted
    Preliminary Ecological Appraisal including the provision of bat and bird boxes and
    native hedgerow enhancements. A new pond and tree planting is also proposed
    which would provide further biodiversity enhancements. Economic benefits would
    result from the construction of the proposal, as well as from future occupiers
    supporting local services and facilities. Taken together, these benefits of the
    scheme attract moderate weight in favour of the proposal.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010951


32. The site lies within a settlement where Policy S4 of the Framework establishes a
    presumption in favour of development. However, the adverse effects and policy
    conflicts identified in relation to flood risk and BNG are considerable and weigh
    heavily against the proposal, such that they substantially outweigh the benefits of
    the proposal.
33. In conclusion, the proposal conflicts with the development plan taken as a whole.
    Material considerations, including the Framework, do not indicate that a decision
    should be taken other than in accordance with the development plan. Accordingly,
    the appeal is dismissed.

F Bradley
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
