 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 7 August 2026
 by B J Sims BSc (Hons) CEng MICE MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date:20 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010571
 31 Mulberry Close, New Barnet, EN4 9PP
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Eamonn Reidy against the decision of Barnet London Borough Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/1215/HSE.
 •    The development proposed is the erection of a single-storey side extension.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the erection of a single-
   storey side extension at 31 Mulberry Close, New Barnet, EN4 9PP, in accordance with
   the terms of the application, Ref 26/1215/HSE, and subject to the following
   conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby approved shall be carried out only in accordance
              with following approved drawings:

                   575926-050: Existing plans and elevations
                   575926-051: Existing site plan
                   575926-053: Proposed plans
                   575926-054: Proposed elevations
                   575926-055: Proposed site plan
     3)       The materials used in the external finishes to the extension shall match or
              complement those used in the main building.
Main Issues
2. The main issues are the effects of the proposed development on the character and
   appearance of the host property and the surrounding area, and on neighbouring
   amenity.
Reasons
Character and Appearance
3. 31 Mulberry Close is the end property of a terrace which, with other similar
   dwellings, fronts a paved parking area. This is reached via a narrow, winding
   access drive off the main part of Mulberry Close that connects to Margaret Road.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6010571


4. The appeal property enjoys a comparatively large side and rear garden, well
   screened from the frontage by mature trees.
5. The proposed single-storey side extension would occupy much of the side garden,
   leaving the minimum gap of 1m at the side boundary recommended by the Barnet
   Supplementary Residential Design Guidance (RDG) Part 3. The RDG also
   recommends that side extensions should not exceed half the width of the main
   house, should be set back from the principal elevation and should normally have a
   roof pitch reflecting the form of the main roof.
6. In this case, the extension would be appropriately set back but its width would
   exceed half that of the main dwelling and it would have a flat roof.
7. I recognise the thrust of the Council argument that, in size and form, the extension
   would depart from the relatively regular appearance of the terrace and other nearby
   dwellings. However, in other respects the detailed design would complement the
   main house.
8. Despite the flat roof and substantial width, I find, in this particular case, that the
   extension would appear reasonably discreet. I do not consider that it would upset
   the character or appearance of the host dwelling, the terrace as a whole or the
   surrounding street scene, to an unacceptable degree. That is especially so given
   the strong frontage tree screening. But I consider that the visual impact of the
   development would be acceptable, even if ultimately that vegetation were not to
   survive.
9. For these reasons, I find that, in terms of character and appearance, the proposed
   development would avoid unacceptable conflict with the relevant Policies CDH01
   and CDH05 of the adopted Barnet Local Plan (BLP) which require extensions to be
   of good design, complementary and subordinate to their host.
10. Moreover, this development would make more efficient use of the space available
    within the appeal site and enhance the accommodation provided by this family
    home. These are material planning benefits, in line with Policy CDH01 and London
    Plan Policy D3. I judge these benefits to be sufficient to offset any residual concern
    in terms of non-compliance with the strict terms of the supplementary RDG.
Amenity
11. Amenity concerns arise essentially from the understandable misgivings of close
    neighbours within Mulberry Close regarding potential increase in demand for on-
    street car parking, as well as the practical and potentially disruptive effects of the
    construction of the proposed extension.
12. However, I see no likelihood that the relatively modest extension to the existing
    household would generate significant additional parking demand. I acknowledge
    that the construction phase would require due consideration from the Appellant and
    their builders to minimise disruption but this matter is also governed by other
    legislation. Furthermore, such a transient neighbourhood issue does not, in my
    view, warrant objection to this appeal in terms of the provisions of BLP Policy
    CDH01 to protect amenity.


                                                                            -   continued -


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
 Appeal Decision 6010571


Conclusions
13. The policies quoted above are all consistent with the National Planning Policy
    Framework and I find that, overall, the proposed development would be compliant
    with the development plan as a whole.
14. On consideration of every matter raised in the written representations, I find nothing
    further to affect my decision and, therefore, conclude that this appeal should be
    allowed and the permission sought granted, subject only to the standard conditions
    set out above.




B J Sims
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
