Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 August 2026
by David Wyborn BSc(Hons) MPhil MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 4 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010822
Land adjacent to 115 Loampit Vale, London SE13 7TG
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Coker against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
     Lewisham.
•    The application Ref is DC/25/141630.
•    The development proposed is the construction of a four-storey building to provide 9 student
     accommodation bedrooms (Use Class Sui Generis), together with the provision of cycle and refuse
     storage on land adjacent to 115 Loampit Vale SE13.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The appeal scheme was refused for six reasons. At the appeal stage, further
       reports have been submitted seeking to address some of the reasons for refusal.
       These include a BRE Daylight and Sunlight Assessment, Parking Stress Survey,
       Biodiversity Net Gain Statement and a Phase 1 Contamination Desk Study. The
       Council has relied on its Planning Report for its case at appeal, and therefore has
       not provided an analysis as to whether or not the additional reports have
       addressed some of the reasons for refusal. In these circumstances, in my analysis
       below, each reason for refusal has been considered as a main issue in this appeal,
       and I have taken into account these new reports, and whether or not they address
       the respective reason for refusal.
3.     At the appeal stage, a draft Unilateral Undertaking (UU) under section 106 of the
       Town and Country Planning Act 1990 has been submitted. This included draft
       obligations in terms of student occupation, affordable student accommodation and
       car-free accommodation. Without prejudice to the outcome of the appeal, I gave
       an opportunity for the UU to be completed, however, it has not advanced beyond
       its draft form. It, therefore, has no legal effect and I have dealt with the appeal on
       that basis.
4.     On 17 August 2026, the Government published a revised National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework). This latest version of the Framework has introduced
       plan-making and national decision-making policies. It is effective from the day of
       publication and I sought comments on the revised Framework from the main
       parties on the implications for this appeal.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010822


Main Issues
5.     The main issues are:
       •   the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area,
       •   the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of the occupants of 2
           Claybank Grove and 1 Loampit Hill, with particular regard to any unacceptable
           harm from the loss of light, outlook and/or sense of enclosure,
       •   whether or not the proposed Purpose Built Student Accommodation (PBSA)
           would be policy compliant, in particular, in relation to the requirements of Policy
           H15 of the London Plan 2021, Policy HO7 of the Lewisham Local Plan 2025
           and Section 3 of the PBSA London Plan Guidance 2024,
       •   whether or not the scheme has demonstrated it would meet with the
           requirements for Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG),
       •   the effect of the development on parking in the local area, and
       •   whether or not the scheme demonstrates that it would be safe to develop for
           residential use having regard to any ground contamination.
Reasons
Character and appearance
6.     The appeal site is located within the built-up area of this part of Lewisham where
       there are, opposite the site and to the south east, buildings that are generally
       commercial premises on the ground floors with residential space on the upper
       floors. To the broadly west of the site, and in roads set back from Loampit Vale
       and Loampit Hill, the properties are predominantly residential on all floors.
7.     The adjoining main road to the appeal site, Loampit Hill leading onto Loampit Vale,
       is a busy urban road that heads to the centre of Lewisham. The appeal site is a
       small undeveloped gap between two terraces on the southern side of Loampit Vale
       where it joins Loampit Hill.
8.     On the same side of the road as the appeal site, from the north west, there are two
       storey houses, then a more modern development of flats over four storeys, then
       two storey houses, followed by the gap, which is the appeal site, and then three
       storey properties with the upper two floors set back from the commercial ground
       floor frontage. Generally, the older buildings in these terraces have a reasonably
       rhythmical run of window openings and a modest width of each building that
       combines to provide some positive elements to the character of the street scene.
9.     The four storey, more modern, flats have some variation to their frontage, with set-
       back, vertical sections providing some reference to the width of the nearby terrace
       buildings, and with the upper sections recessed in places to reduce the dominance
       of the upper floor.
10. The appeal site is an overgrown space which is seen and experienced in
    conjunction with these runs of properties. Being within the settlement area, and
    without any use or designation, it is in principle suitable for development. I have
    had regard to the Small Sites Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document
    (October 2021) (the Small Sites Design Guide). In section 12.2.5, it explains that in
    some cases a new building of more than one storey above the prevailing building

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010822


       height may be acceptable, providing that it achieves exceptional design quality and
       meets all other relevant aspects of planning policy. This is reinforced by figure 26
       of the Small Sites Design Guide which explains that where existing building
       heights are varied, new infill development may be up to one storey taller than its
       neighbours, provided it achieves a high degree of design quality.
11. In this case, there is a mix of building heights and, in principle given the variations
    in height when looking along this stretch of properties, a height of four stories on
    the appeal site could be possible with a suitable design.
12. A four storey building is proposed for the appeal site. The front elevation would be
    positioned to have some set back in the plot behind a low wall with railings and the
    building would be attached to the side wall of 115 Loampit Vale. However, the front
    elevation design would have a reasonably plain and uninviting appearance. In
    particular, the modest sized, ground floor square windows, with the brick face to
    that part of the elevation, would appear quite austere on the ground floor near the
    footway and pay little regard to the appearance of other ground floors along this
    run of buildings. It would not provide an especially active frontage in this location.
13. The position of the upper floor windows would relate poorly to those in the
    adjoining buildings and the render and zinc cladding would not be a mix of
    materials or pattern that would complement or reflect the surrounding shape or
    form of buildings in the street scene. The height and effect of the fourth floor zinc
    cladding would over emphasise the height of the building above the neighbouring
    structures. Furthermore, the building would have no material recesses or variation
    in set-back sections to provide a depth to the frontage elevation and add interest to
    the design.
14. When seen from angled views, particularly from across the road to the east, the
    side, rendered elevation would project in front of the upper floors of No 115. This
    section of the building with its height and bulk would be an overly prominent and
    functional element within the street scene that would not appear in character or
    integrate successfully with its surroundings.
15. Overall, the proposed development would result in an overly dominant building in
    this street scene which would not have the necessary architectural variation and
    composition including with materials, detailing, massing and form to respond
    positively to the site and integrate successfully with its surroundings. Without the
    necessary high degree of design quality, the Small Sites Design Guide
    circumstance that could justify a four storey building on the site would not be met.
16. I note that the appellant considers that the design elements, and any concerns
    with them, could be addressed by a condition which sought agreement over the
    architectural details, fenestration rhythm and material specification. However, this
    is a detailed application with the design and materials details included for public
    inspection and comment. Also, the external massing and envelope of the building,
    with no meaningful recesses or set-backs to give the building some feeling of
    depth is also part of the scheme. It would not be reasonable or acceptable to seek
    the redesign of the building by a post decision condition.
17. For the above reasons I conclude that the development would harm the character
    and appearance of the area. In particular, the scheme would not respond
    appropriately to its context so that it would integrate with and enhance its
    surroundings as required by paragraph 1 of Policy DP3 of the Framework. Nor

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010822


       would the development create visually attractive, distinctive and characterful
       development to establish or maintain a strong sense of place and pride, including
       through the use of a coherent palette of materials, design features and planting, to
       meet the requirements of criterion 2.g of Policy DP3 of the Framework.
18. There would be corresponding conflict with Policies D3 and D4 of the London
    Plan, Policies QD1 and QD10 of the Lewisham Local Plan and the Small Sites
    Design Guide which set the development plan and supplementary guidance to
    ensure that, amongst other things, development proposals must demonstrate an
    understanding of the site context and respond positively to Lewisham’s local
    distinctiveness by providing buildings, spaces and places that reinforce and
    enhance local character.
Living conditions
19. To the western side of the site is the residential property, 1 Loampit Hill, a two
    storey building. This property has front and rear first floor windows, but also side
    windows facing the appeal site and a small, enclosed side garden. At the rear of
    the appeal site, the side gable of 2 Claybank Grove is located. This is a more
    modern property with a rear garden that backs onto the three storey, side wall of
    115 Loampit Vale.
20. The proposed building would extend across the majority of the site and be
    constructed to four storeys, although set a modest distance back from the
    boundaries with these two adjoining properties.
21. At the appeal stage, a BRE Daylight and Sunlight Assessment has been
    submitted. This highlights that most surrounding windows after the development
    would meet with the appropriate standards, although a handful of windows would
    have a modest adverse reduction in sunlight and daylight. I agree with the
    Assessment, and related commentary from the appellant, that in the
    circumstances of this urban environment, the effects on surrounding windows are
    within a reasonable tolerance and not unacceptable.
22. The outside space to 1 Loampit Hill is presently very compromised by the
    surrounding vegetation in combination with its awkward shape, position and small
    size adjoining its side extension. There is little space available for any meaningful
    outside activities and it is not a space that would presently encourage sitting
    outside. The appeal building, while it would be imposing next to this property,
    would not materially detract from the living conditions for those who may choose to
    use the outside space to the side of No 1 because of the already restrictive
    characteristics of this area.
23. Also, the side first floor windows to No 1 do not appear to be the only windows to
    those rooms. With the proposed building set a little way back into the site, I am
    satisfied that outlook would not be unduly compromised from this existing property
    when occupants were using these upper floor rooms. Overall, in terms of the
    impact on this adjoining property at 1 Loampit Hill, the scheme would be
    acceptable because it would not materially undermine the living conditions for
    these occupants.
24. In terms of the relationship with 2 Claybank Grove, I was able at the site visit to
    view the rear of this property and its garden from the upper level balcony of 115
    Loampit Vale. The high wall of No 115 lies at the end of the garden of No 2, but

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010822


       the underdeveloped nature of the adjoining rear gardens along the terrace of
       Claybank Grove and the openness of the appeal site on the other side mean that
       No 2 has a reasonable level of amenity and outlook for users of this rear garden.
25. The proposed building would be four storeys, and although set a modest way in
    from the joint boundary with No 2, in this context it would appear as a tall and
    imposing elevation that would effectively box in one side of the garden. The
    windows in the proposed rear elevation could be obscure glazed to prevent
    overlooking of that garden, but the presence, form and height of parts of the rear of
    the appeal building would be very overbearing as a feature in such proximity to the
    modest sized garden at No 2. It would be such that it would harmfully and
    unacceptably undermine the living conditions for the occupants of No 2 when they
    used this garden space. That the building would be to the north of this space and
    the garden would be open to the other side would not mitigate the overbearing
    sense of enclosure that would result.
26. In conclusion, the relationship with 1 Loampit Hill would be satisfactory and the
    daylight and sunlight to adjoining properties would not be so undermined to form a
    justification to withhold permission. However, I conclude that the position of the
    rear elevation in relation to the rear garden of 2 Claybank Grove would create an
    unduly harmful sense of enclosure and so affect the outlook for the occupants of
    No 2 that the scheme would be unacceptable. There would, in this respect, be
    conflict with Policy D3 of the London Plan, Policies HO2, QD7, QD8 and QD10 of
    the Lewisham Local Plan and the Small Sites Design Guide which seek, notably in
    this case, to ensure that the scheme will not result in an unreasonable adverse
    impact on the amenity of neighbouring land uses and properties, including their
    rear gardens.
Purpose Built Student Accommodation
27. It is acknowledged that there is a need for Purpose Built Student Accommodation
    (PBSA) in the Borough and the site is well located to access services, transport
    and facilities for student occupants. Importantly, there are further and higher
    educational facilities in the general area.
28. The policy requirements for PBSA are set out in Policy H15 of the London Plan
    and Policy HO7 of the Lewisham Local Plan, with supplementary guidance in the
    PBSA London Plan Guidance 2024.
29. In the absence of a completed planning agreement, key requirements of these
    planning policies for the delivery of PBSA would not be secured. For instance, a
    planning agreement is necessary to secure the accommodation for the use by
    students, including with a nomination agreement with one or more specific higher
    education providers, and to provide room(s) as affordable student accommodation.
30. The scheme is accompanied by a Student Accommodation Management and
    Maintenance Plan which could be secured by a planning condition in any approval.
    Furthermore, with the location and proposed internal layout, these practical
    aspects of the scheme would meet the requirements of criterion 1.c of Policy HO9
    of the Framework. Nevertheless, as explained, a nomination agreement and the
    affordable elements have not been secured by planning agreement and these are
    fundamental development plan policy requirements for the delivery of PBSA. I am
    not satisfied that these matters can be secured by planning condition in any
    approval, including because such matters as the affordable element and the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010822


       nomination agreement are matters that can only reasonably be dealt with by
       detailed obligations. Indeed, the PBSA London Plan Guidance 2024 explains that
       to fulfil the policy requirements of Policy H15, the developer should be prepared to
       enter into an S106 agreement as part of the permission.
31. In these circumstances, I conclude that the proposed PBSA would not be policy
    compliant because key requirements of Policy H15 of the London Plan, Policy
    HO7 of the Lewisham Local Plan and Section 3 of the PBSA London Plan
    Guidance 2024 would not be met.
Biodiversity Net Gain
32. The Town and Country Planning (Development Management Procedure)
    (England) Order 2015 (the Procedure Order) (as amended) sets out the legal
    requirements for an application for planning permission and this includes
    information relating to the biodiversity gain condition. The Procedure Order
    explains that there is a requirement for a statement as to whether the applicant
    believes that planning permission, if granted, would be subject to the biodiversity
    gain condition or where the applicant believes that planning permission, if granted,
    would not be subject to the biodiversity gain condition, the reasons for that belief.
33. The Procedure Order further explains that in the case where the applicant believes
    that planning permission, if granted, would be subject to the biodiversity gain
    condition, the completed biodiversity metric calculation tool or tools (as the case
    may be) showing the calculation of the biodiversity value of the onsite habitat are
    required to accompany the submission.
34. This is reinforced by the Planning Practice Guidance which explains that when a
    planning application is submitted for development which the applicant believes is
    subject to the biodiversity gain condition, there are minimum national information
    requirements related to biodiversity net gain which the applicant must provide. The
    Planning Practice Guidance also explains that these requirements will allow
    consideration of existing habitat baselines for relevant applications so there is a
    common understanding about the pre-development biodiversity value of the
    development’s onsite habitat at this stage.
35. At the application stage, it was claimed that the development would be exempt
    from biodiversity gain requirements. The Council did not believe that this would be
    the case and this objection is subject to the fourth reason for refusal
36. At the appeal stage, a Biodiversity Net Gain Statement (the BNG Statement) has
    been submitted and the appellant has withdrawn the exemption claimed and seeks
    to set out the route to a Biodiversity Net Gain Plan. However, the information
    submitted does not include a baseline survey undertaken by a competent person
    to assess the habitats present which would then lead to the completion of a
    biodiversity metric calculation as part of the submission. Consequently, the Small
    Sites Metric spreadsheet, which would normally be required in such a case, does
    not form part of the submission and there is no habitat/site plan showing existing
    habitats.
37. The BNG Statement explains that the site comprises approximately 97.1 square
    metres of unmaintained greenery (rough grass, scrub and self-set vegetation)
    together with one tree, enclosed to the frontage by a low wall and railings with an
    advertisement hoarding. It is acknowledged in the BNG Statement that a baseline

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6010822


       habitat survey (UK Habitat Classification) and a tree survey are required to fix the
       pre-development biodiversity value.
38. I appreciate that any approval is subject to the statutory biodiversity gain condition
    and that this is a pre-commencement requirement to show the 10% uplift in
    biodiversity, either on or off-site. It is explained that the scheme would incorporate
    a biodiverse (living roof), replacement tree(s), and soft landscaping and urban
    greening. However, in accordance with the Procedure Order, it is necessary to
    submit the completed biodiversity metric calculation tool or tools (as the case may
    be) showing the calculation of the biodiversity value of the onsite habitat at the
    application and now appeal stage.
39. Without that submission it is not known what the baseline is and therefore there is
    not sufficient evidence at the appeal stage to be assured regarding the necessary
    calculations and requirements to achieve 10% BNG on or off site. As the BNG
    Statement explains there are unmaintained greenery on the site that has
    biodiversity value and this should be assessed in accordance with the
    requirements in the Procedure Order.
40. I therefore conclude that the requirements to assess biodiversity of the site and in
    turn the requirements of the Procedure Order have not been met. The details do
    not demonstrate that the scheme would meet with the requirements of BNG. The
    Council’s concern with this issue has not been addressed and an objection on this
    basis is merited. Accordingly, there would be conflict with Policy N2 of the
    Framework which seeks to improve the natural environment.
Parking
41. At the appeal stage the appellant has submitted a Parking Stress (Beat) Survey
    and Section 106 Parking Mechanism (the Parking Report) which explains that
    parking surveys were undertaken following the Lambeth Methodology. This is an
    established methodology to determine whether there is spare road side capacity
    were a new development to be introduced into an area and those new residents
    were to apply for and receive permits to park in the Controlled Parking Zone
    (CPZ).
42. When examining the Parking Report, I note that it does not specify the dates or
    times when the two surveys took place. No map or plan showing the
    measurements used in calculating parking capacity has been supplied as part of
    the submissions so this has not been seen or verified by the Council. Furthermore,
    there is no drawing showing the site location and extent of the survey area,
    together with all other parking and waiting restrictions, double yellow lines, double
    red lines, bus lay-bys, etc which should also normally be shown on the plan with
    such a parking survey report.
43. In this case, three roads have been identified for the survey. Elswick Road and
    Claybank Grove are within 200m of the site and subject to CPZ B1 restrictions. It is
    understandable that these roads should be included. The other road included in
    the survey is Algernon Road and the details state that the section surveyed was
    from Vicars Hill to Loampit Vale. This is a very long section of road and based on
    my site visit, I estimate that the bottom section is about 1000m from the appeal
    site. Usually, the extent of the survey area, where that road continues beyond
    200m from the site, is extended to the next junction or shortened to the previous
    one, or sometimes taken to a suitable location along the road. There could be a

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6010822


       number of junctions along Algernon Road that would make a logical boundary to
       the survey area and extending the area of survey as far as the junction with Vicars
       Hill includes areas where the parking for occupants of the appeal site is unlikely to
       occur because of the distance.
44. Furthermore, the survey area should be confined to the same CPZ that the appeal
    site is located within. In this case, CPZ B1. The top section of Algernon Road is
    within CPZ B1. However, beyond Brookbank Road, and for about two-thirds of
    Algernon Road, the road falls within CPZ T. This stretch of road should not be
    included as part of the parking survey analysis, and any available road side
    parking spaces discounted. This is because residents of the appeal site, if they
    were to have a parking permit, would be confined to parking within CPZ B1 and
    would not be able to obtain a permit for CPZ T. This seems to largely invalidate the
    Algernon Road survey results.
45. While the Parking Report shows some spaces are available locally for parking,
    because of the concerns with the Parking Report I have outlined above, I do not
    consider that it can be deemed sufficiently reliable and conclusive so as to
    adequately demonstrate that allowing the development, with the ability for
    occupants to apply for parking permits, would not cause parking stress locally.
46. These concerns could be overcome by preventing the appeal residential units, and
    in turn their occupants, from being able to apply for or hold a parking permit for
    CPZ B1. The mechanism to do so would usually form an obligation in a planning
    agreement and would include a financial provision for the Council to make a Traffic
    Regulation Order which would preclude those appeal site addresses, and as a
    result the occupants of those addresses, from being granted the ability to apply for
    or hold a parking permit for that CPZ. In this case, a completed planning
    agreement with such an obligation is not before me.
47. In all these circumstances, it has not been adequately shown that there would not
    be parking stress resulting from the development. Without the demonstration of
    adequate road side spaces or car free accommodation, this could lead to parking
    in unauthorised locations, perhaps towards junctions and in unneighbourly
    locations that could cause adverse safety issues and inconvenience to other road
    users and pedestrians.
48. In the light of the above analysis, I conclude that the evidence does not
    demonstrate that the surrounding area could accommodate the parking demand
    generated by the development without harmful impacts on local parking and the
    potential safety of other road users and pedestrians. There is no secure
    mechanism to deliver car-free housing which forms part of the scheme.
    Consequently, there would be conflict with Policies T6 and T6.1 of the London
    Plan and Policy TR4 of the Lewisham Local Plan which establish the development
    plan approach to parking and development.
Ground contamination
49. The Planning Practice Guidance explains that if there is reason to believe
    contamination could be an issue, applicants should provide proportionate but
    sufficient site investigation (a risk assessment) prepared by a competent person to
    determine the existence or otherwise of contamination, its nature and extent, the
    risks it pose and to whom/what (the receptors) so that these risks can be assessed
    and satisfactorily reduced to an acceptable level.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6010822


50. At the appeal stage, a Phase 1 Preliminary Risk Assessment - Ground
    Contamination Desk Study (the Desk Study) has been submitted. It is undated and
    does not reference the author of the study and therefore it is not possible to
    conclude that it has been undertaken by a competent person. Nevertheless, it
    seems that there is the potential for contamination, either because the site was an
    access route in the past to the nearby church and it could subsequently have been
    used for informal tipping.
51. The Desk Study recommends that a Phase 2 intrusive investigation should take
    place and this could be made the subject of planning condition in any approval.
    This would safeguard the position and in a worst case scenario require any
    contaminated land to be removed. As the site is a modest size, remediation of the
    land would be a reasonable undertaking and I am satisfied that the risks to future
    occupants can be suitably managed in the future. On balance, with the safeguard
    of a planning condition in place, I am satisfied that the Desk Study is sufficient to
    demonstrate that the site could be made safe for its intended residential use.
    There would be sufficient compliance, when considered in the round, to meet with
    the intentions of Policy SD11 of the Lewisham Local Plan and Policy P2 of the
    Framework concerning ground conditions.
Other Matters
52. The Grade II Listed Bibleway Tabernacle is located approximately 25m to the
    south east. There is a gap between buildings that allows a small part of the listed
    building to be glimpsed across part of the appeal site from Loampit Vale. The listed
    church is already largely screened from the appeal site by other development and
    the principal elevation is not in the same street scene or experienced together with
    the appeal site. Given the nature of the relationship and the form of the proposal, I
    am satisfied that the setting and significance of this listed building would not be
    adversely affected by the development.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
53. The scheme would harm the character and appearance of the area, unduly detract
    from the living conditions of the occupants of 2 Claybank Grove, not secure the
    accommodation as PBSA, not provide sufficient information to demonstrate that
    the requirements of biodiversity net gain have or could be met and does not
    demonstrate that there would not be parking stress with related adverse highway
    impacts. These are serious shortcomings of the scheme with related conflict with
    development plan policies. The adverse effects of the scheme would be
    substantial. It is such that the scheme would conflict with the development plan
    when considered as a whole.
54. In terms of the relevance to the issues in this appeal, the development plan
    policies which are conflicted by the proposal are not materially inconsistent with
    the decision-making policies in the Framework and therefore I attach them
    considerable weight.
55. On the other hand, the scheme would provide residential accommodation to meet
    a need in an area where in the past the Housing Delivery Test was 32% and the
    latest results show for 2025 a delivery level of 65%. With the adoption of the
    Lewisham Local Plan, the Council is able to demonstrate a Framework compliant
    supply of housing land.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6010822


56. Policy HO7 of the Framework advises that substantial weight should be given to
    the benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the
    evidenced needs of the community and PBSA is one such need. However, that
    type of student housing, and the local policy requirements to accompany that
    delivery, have not been secured as part of the scheme. Nevertheless, substantial
    weight can be attributed to the provision of 9 rooms and related shared facilities of
    residential accommodation. The Framework also, with Policies L2 and L3, seeks to
    make effective use of land and for development to achieve appropriate densities.
    However, Policy L3 explains that in considering the potential to increase densities,
    the existing character of an area should be taken into account, in accordance with
    Framework Policy DP3. In the case of this scheme, it has been concluded to fail
    Policy DP3 of the Framework because of the adverse effect on the character and
    appearance of the area. Consequently, there would not be complete compliance
    with the Framework policies that seek to increase densities and make the effective
    use of land.
57. The scheme would be located in a very sustainable location and occupants would
    have excellent access to public transport. A development of this nature would
    generate economic and social benefits during construction and in subsequent
    occupation. The scheme would provide an acceptable standard of accommodation
    for occupants, including a wheelchair accessible room. There would be cycle
    parking to encourage an additional sustainable transport option. Furthermore, the
    principle of construction on the site within this built-up part of the Borough is
    accepted, but the details of the scheme are not development plan or entirely
    Framework compliant for the reasons explained. Collectively, the positive merits of
    the scheme, which would deliver 9 rooms of accommodation and related shared
    facilities, should be considered to be a moderate level of benefit, even when
    attaching some of those positive planning elements substantial weight in favour of
    approval.
58. Policy S3 of the Framework explains that decisions on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. For
    development within settlements, Policy S4 states that development proposals
    within settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework.
59. In this case, there is conflict with policies of the Framework and the harms
    resulting from the scheme are clear and tangible. It is such that the benefits of the
    scheme, while worthwhile, would be substantially outweighed by the adverse
    effects of the development when assessed against the national decision-making
    policies in the Framework. Accordingly, the scheme would not be sustainable
    development within the meaning of the Framework and this weighs against the
    scheme.
60. It follows that the proposal should be determined in accordance with the
    development plan and material considerations do not indicate a decision should be
    made otherwise than in accordance with the development plan. Accordingly, I
    conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

David Wyborn
INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
