Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 July 2026
by Richard Gilbert BA (Hons) MSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 26th August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010984
The Granary, Shipton Grange, Holme Road, Shiptonthorpe, East Riding of
Yorkshire YO43 3PZ
• The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
  against a refusal to grant planning permission.
• The appeal is made by Harriet Hewitt against the decision of East Riding of Yorkshire Council.
• The application Ref is 26/00102/PLF.
• The development proposed is a single storey rear extension.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2.       An application for costs was made by Harriet Hewitt against East Riding of
         Yorkshire Council. This application is the subject of a separate Decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.       I note the dispute relating to the development description and the unconventional
         layout of the appeal property and its neighbours, those being the Old Farm House,
         The Fold Barn and Shipton Grange. For the purpose of the appeal, it is necessary
         for me to determine the principle and rear elevations of the appeal property.
4.       In having regard to Appendix F of the appellant’s statement, Holme Road sets the
         postcode for the appeal property. The south-east elevation faces towards that
         highway. Although it does not contain the main entrance, the south-east elevation
         includes architectural details, including doors and windows, laid out in a way that
         can be understood to be the front of the house. The vehicular access also
         approaches the house from a south easterly direction. By contrast, the north-east
         elevation contains only the main entrance, which is otherwise replicated in style, if
         not function, on the south-east elevation. It also faces towards the neighbouring
         property, The Fold Barn. In this spatial context, I determine the south-east
         elevation to be the principle elevation. The north-west elevation runs parallel to the
         principal elevation, and includes a conservatory extension, it therefore has the
         appearance and function of a rear elevation.
5.       The appeal is accompanied by an updated plan1, showing a slightly reduced
         length of extension. This change seeks to partly address the first reason for refusal
         in particular. The plan has not been subject to formal public consultation but the
         Council did have an opportunity to comment on it as part of the appeal process.
         Given this, and given my overall findings below, accepting this plan at this stage

1
    3370-02-01D Proposed Drawings

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010984


         would not be unfair or deprive those who should have been consulted the
         opportunity of such consultation. Therefore, having regard to the principles of
         Holborn2, acceptance of the plan would not be procedurally unfair. As a result, I
         have therefore taken it into account in determining this appeal.
6.       I have used the description of development from the application form in the banner
         heading above as this suitably describes the development proposed.
7.       During the course of the appeal a new National Planning Policy Framework (the
         Framework) was published on the 17 August 2026. Whilst the format has altered,
         any considerations that are material to this decision have not fundamentally
         changed. I am satisfied that this has not prejudiced any party and I have had
         regard to the latest version in reaching my decision.
Main Issues
8. The main issues are the effect of the proposed development on:
       • the character and appearance of the appeal property and surrounding area; and
       • the living conditions of the existing and future occupiers of the neighbouring
         property, Old Farm House, with particular regard to outlook and daylight.
Reasons
Character and appearance
9.       The appeal property is a semi-detached dwelling set over two-storeys. It has been
         converted from an agricultural use and possesses a two-storey rear wing. A single
         storey conservatory is attached to the rear elevation and is positioned between the
         wing and the side boundary shared with the attached neighbour, the Old Farm
         House. The appeal property sits in-line with its attached neighbour, reflecting their
         historic use as a linear farmstead. This layout contributes to the traditional
         agricultural appearance of the appeal dwelling in a distinctive rural setting.
10. The proposed development is a single storey rear extension with a pitched roof
    punctuated by five rooflights. At a width broadly half that of the appeal dwelling, it
    would infill the space between the rear wing and the side boundary shared with the
    Old Farm House. The extension would run almost the length of this boundary up to
    the opposing rear boundary. At these proportions, the size of the extension would
    be substantial. It would have a footprint approaching that of the dwelling to which it
    would be attached and would therefore appear as a disproportionate and
    incongruous addition. The proposal would be particularly noticeable from vantage
    points within the farmstead of Shipton Grange to the north, where it would appear
    as an inconsistent form of development relative to the more restrained projection
    of the extensions to Old Farm House.
11. The appeal property includes a variety of domestic door styles that would be
    replicated in the design of the proposed extension. The consistency in the design
    of the extension is acceptable in this respect. However, the proposed rooflights are
    not a characteristic shared with the appeal property, nor that of its adjoining
    neighbour, Old Farm House. The rooflights introduce a new domestic feature that,


2
    Holborn Studios Ltd v The Council of the London Borough of Hackney [2017] EWHC 2823 (Admin)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               2
Appeal Decision 6010984


       alongside the disproportionate size of the extension, erode the rural character of
       the appeal property and its contribution to the surrounding area.
12. As the proposal would be situated on the rear elevation, it would be screened from
    Holme Road by the appeal property, which itself is concealed from public view by
    neighbouring dwellings, mature hedging and trees. Whilst this diminishes the
    degree of harm from public vantage points, it does not eliminate the harm to
    character and appearance incurred across private areas in the immediate setting,
    notably from the Old Farm House and the farmstead beyond.
13. I acknowledge that the mature hedging encloses the garden space in front of the
    principal elevation and enables it to be used in a way akin to a rear garden.
    Nonetheless, this does not diminish the harm I have identified above nor the
    conclusion I have drawn in respect of the preliminary matters.
14. Similarly, whilst the Old Farm House has been subject to a series of extensions,
    they are not comparable to the appeal proposal as they are materially different in
    design, footprint and projection. I therefore attach limited weight to a comparison
    with them.
15. In relation to the Council’s consistency in applying planning policy to agricultural
    conversion proposals, which includes a previous refusal of planning permission at
    the appeal property, I do not have the full details of this case from which to make
    an informed comparison. Nor do I have the full details of the cases that relate to
    the alternative approach of the Local Planning Authorities in Leeds or Harrogate.
    Consequently, these considerations are not determinative of the appeal.
16. For the reasons set out above, the proposed development would have a harmful
    effect on the character and appearance of the appeal property and the surrounding
    area. Conflict therefore arises with Policy ENV1 of the East Riding Local Plan
    Update 2020-2039 (2025) (ERLPU) which seeks all development proposals to
    contribute to safeguarding and respecting the diverse character and appearance of
    the area through their design, layout, construction and use. I do not determine
    Policy S4 to be relevant to this main issue as the appeal proposal would not incur
    a change in the use of land and would not form a new dwelling.
Living Conditions
17. The proposed rear extension would be situated upon, and occupy the majority of
    the length of the rear side boundary shared with the Old Farm House. It would
    therefore introduce a tall blank wall across this boundary, oppressively enclosing
    the garden of this neighbour while overbearing windows that serve its kitchen and
    dining rooms. The arrangement of the proposed extension parallel to the dining
    room of Old Farm House would also form a narrow channel between the two
    extensions. When combined with its height, length and position upon the shared
    boundary, the proposed extension would harmfully diminish the amount of daylight
    received by the window serving the kitchen of Old Farm House.
18. A guideline size for rear extensions is set out in G17 of the East Riding Design
    Code (2025) (ERDC) and is intended to prevent unacceptable loss of light to
    neighbouring properties. The Council highlight that, regardless of the orientation of
    the property, G17 specifies what an acceptable projection should be for an
    extension close to a shared boundary. As the proposed extension would far


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010984


       exceed the maximum projection recommended in G17, the breach of this guidance
       further substantiates the harmful impact on living conditions it would generate.
19. I acknowledge that the existing fence height could be raised to maximise its height
    through permitted development rights. However, as the eaves of the extension
    would rise substantially above that height, and even further above the height of the
    existing fence, I am not persuaded that the proposal would appear only marginally
    taller or less imposing. Similarly, whilst its roof ridge would be set-in from the side
    boundary, this would not alleviate other harmful factors, notably the excessive
    length of the extension combined with its eaves height and position abutting that
    boundary. The set-back of the proposal from the opposing rear, even as amended,
    is not significant, and does not substantially diminish the excessive length of the
    proposal overall.
20. The Council have stated in their officer report that, as the extension would be
    located to the north-east of Old House Farm, it would not result in overshadowing
    or overlooking of that neighbouring property. I find no reason to reach a different
    conclusion and, noting that sunlight and daylight are distinct, would agree with the
    appellant’s contention that the proposed extension would also be overshadowed
    by the two-storey host dwelling.
21. Although the existing occupiers of Old Farm House identify greater privacy for their
    seating area, their support does not outweigh the harm that would be incurred by
    the proposal, particularly in respect of the overbearance to this area. Equally, this
    support does not take account of future occupiers, who are otherwise unable to
    advocate a position in this respect.
22. For the reasons set out above, the proposed development would have a
    detrimental effect on the living conditions of the existing and future occupiers of the
    neighbouring property, Old Farm House, with particular regard to outlook and
    daylight. Consequently, the proposal conflicts with Policy ENV1 of the ERLPU
    which seeks development that has regard to the amenity of existing or proposed
    properties.
Other Matters
23. The Council may not have a specific policy for development proposals that affect
    dwellings that have been subject to an agricultural conversion. However, the
    Council have had regard to Policy ENV1 of the ELRP which is deemed to be
    relevant to the main issues. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
24. I note the concerns raised by the appellant in respect of the Council’s conduct
    relating to the development description, the submission of amended plans and the
    reference to amended plans on the decision notice. The Planning Practice
    Guidance states that it is at the discretion of the Local Planning Authority whether
    to accept changes to an application once it has been validated and whether such
    changes need to be consulted upon. Having reviewed the correspondence
    between the parties prior to determination of the application, I determine the
    Council exercised their discretion in these respects and clearly communicated their
    reasons for doing so. Consequently, no procedural unfairness has occurred which
    affects the determination of the appeal.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010984


Conclusion
25. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

Richard Gilbert
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
