    Appeal Decision
    Site visit made on 21 August 2026
    by L Gardner MRTPI
    an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
    Decision date: 09 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010195
24 Eastwood Road, South Woodford, Redbridge, London E18 1BW
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Martin Dennett against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
       Redbridge.
•      The application Ref is 0650/26.
•      The development is proposed change of use from an existing residential dwelling (use class C3) to a
       small house in multiple occupation (use class C4).

Decision
1.       The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for proposed change of
         use from an existing residential dwelling (use class C3) to a small house in
         multiple occupation (use class C4) at 24 Eastwood Road, South Woodford,
         Redbridge, London E18 1BW in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref
         0650/26, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.       During the appeal proceedings, the appellant has submitted a document titled
         HMO Management Plan, as well as revised floor plans showing an increase in the
         floor area of room 2. Both of these have been provided in direct response to the
         Council’s reasons for refusal. However, paragraph 1e. of the HMO Management
         Plan outlines that the room shown as room 2 on the application plans will be used
         only as storage or ancillary non-sleeping accommodation.
3.       The additional documents provided through the appeal process therefore
         contradict the original application. The removal of room 2 as sleeping
         accommodation would represent a fundamentally different scheme from that which
         the Council based its decision upon, resulting in procedural unfairness. I have
         therefore not accepted the revised documents presented during the appeal
         process and have assessed the appeal based on the plans submitted to the
         Council.
4.       Throughout the course of the appeal a revised National Planning Policy
         Framework (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. The main parties
         were provided with an opportunity to comment. I have had regard to the 2026
         version of the Framework in my decision.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010195


Main Issues
5.     The main issues are:
           •    whether the proposal would provide adequate living conditions for future
                occupiers, with particular regard to internal space;
           •    the effect of the proposal on the supply of family housing in the borough;
                and,
           •    whether the proposal would provide for adequate means of site
                management.
Reasons
Living conditions
6.     The Council’s Housing Design Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) (2019)
       sets out criteria for the assessment of houses in multiple occupation (HMOs),
       including space standards based on minimum space standards set out by
       Redbridge Council Property Licensing service and the GLA Housing Guide.
       Bedrooms are required to be a minimum of 7.5m² with a width of 2.15m for a
       single room, and 11.5m² with a width of 2.75m for a double room.
7.     The single bedroom annotated as room 2 would have a floor area of just 6.7m²,
       falling short of the SPD requirements by some margin. The nature of HMOs often
       means that occupiers are reliant on their bedrooms as the only areas of private
       habitable space. This places emphasis on ensuring such spaces provide
       acceptable internal living conditions. In the absence of a sufficient floor area, the
       occupiers of room 2 are likely to feel overly constrained within their living
       environment, to the overall detriment of their living conditions.
8.     Based on the above, the proposal would not provide adequate living conditions for
       future occupiers, with particular regard to internal space. This is contrary to
       Policies LP26 and LP29 of the Redbridge Local Plan (2018) (the Local Plan) and
       Policy D6 of the London Plan (2021) (the LP) insofar as they seek to ensure that
       developments provide a high standard of residential accommodation, including in
       respect of the size and quality of internal space. It would also be contrary to the
       HMO Space Standards set out in the SPD.
Family housing
9.     Policy LP5 of the Local Plan sets out that the Council will aim to secure homes
       across a range of dwelling sizes and tenures. The policy goes on to set a focus on
       the provision of larger family homes (three bedrooms or more), in line with the
       Council’s Local Housing Needs Assessment (updated 2023), which demonstrated
       that the need for homes of over three bedrooms, represented 68% of the overall
       need.
10. The Council introduced a borough wide Article 4 direction removing permitted
    development rights for changes of use to HMOs, reflecting concern it has about
    the potential effect of such changes on the supply of family-sized dwellings. The
    appeal proposal would represent the loss of an existing four-bedroom
    dwellinghouse, representing a loss to housing of a suitable size for family
    accommodation.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010195


11. The evidence before me does not suggest that HMOs are particularly prevalent
    along Eastwood Road. Whilst the Council contend that a high number of HMO
    applications have been received in the borough since 2020, and that the ward of
    South Woodford has a relatively high concentration of HMOs, it is accepted that
    the appeal proposal would not trigger the creation of more than 20% HMO
    properties along Eastwood Road, a criteria for consideration as set by the
    Council’s Housing Design SPD. I therefore do not find that the figures relating to
    borough wide applications for HMOs are a direct indication of harm at the appeal
    site.
12. Moreover, within the supporting text for Policy LP5 of the Local Plan, it is
    recognised as being important that the borough’s housing stock provides for a
    wide range of housing needs and offers choice. I therefore find it cannot follow that
    Policy LP5 of the Local Plan seeks only for the provision of family housing.
13. My attention has also been drawn to the LP, specifically Policy H9 which explicitly
    recognises that HMOs are an important part of London’s housing offer, reducing
    pressure on other elements of the housing stock. The Council accept that an HMO
    would provide a different housing type giving variety for residents of the borough.
14. Whilst I note concerns relating to the cumulative loss through conversion to HMOs,
    the Council would retain the ability to resist proposals where for example, they fail
    to meet the criteria of the Housing Design SPD and represent a proliferation of
    HMOs in an area. Based on the evidence before me, I remain to be satisfied that,
    even without a specific need for HMOs, the loss of the appeal property as a family
    dwelling in this specific location would have a fundamental impact on the supply of
    family housing within the borough.
15. Within both its associated officer report and appeal statement, the Council has
    referred to appeal decisions1 where Inspectors have taken the view that the loss of
    family housing would result in planning harm.
16. With the exception of 35 Coventry Road, I have not been provided with the full
    appeal decisions for these cases. Even from the limited information provided, I
    note that there appear to be differences with the appeal scheme before me.
    Specifically, the decision for 35 Coventry Road related to a proposal for the
    conversion to three individual flats rather than a HMO. The extract from the
    decision at 16 Wakefield Gardens, included within the officer report, refers to the
    dwelling proposed for conversion being 5 bedrooms (rather than a 4 bedroom
    dwelling as is the case with the appeal proposal).
17. Moreover, I note the inclusion within the appellant’s case of further decisions2
    where previous Inspectors have not found harm relating to the loss of family
    housing to a HMO use. Based on the evidence before me, I cannot be satisfied
    that any of the decisions referred to are so directly comparable that they would
    lead me to alter my overall conclusions on this main issue, which are based on the
    site specific merits of the appeal proposal.



1
  16 Wakefield Gardens, Ilford (Appeal Ref: 6004750), 12 Princes Road, Barkingside, Ilford (Appeal Ref: 6005502), 18 Leyswood
Drive, Newbury Park, Ilford (Appeal Ref: 6004591), 93 Romford Road, Chigwell (Appeal Ref: 6005625) and 35 Coventry Road,
Redbridge (Appeal Ref: APP/W5780/W/24/3356002)
2
  76 Eastwood Road, South Woodford (Appeal Ref: APP/W5780/W/20/3262152), 54 Hastings Avenue, Ilford (Appeal Ref:
6005078) and 38 Hertford Road, Ilford (Appeal Ref: 6005192)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               3
Appeal Decision 6010195


18. In the context of the overall intentions of Policy LP5 of the Local Plan, to provide a
    range of homes that will lead to the creation of mixed, inclusive and sustainable
    communities, the change of use to a small HMO in this location would not be
    contrary to the policy when read as a whole. This is because it would provide a
    form of housing that would make a modest contribution to diversifying the range of
    accommodation available to meet the needs of different groups, including single
    people, sharers and those unable to access self-contained housing.
19. I have also identified no specific conflict with Policy LP26 of the Local Plan in
    relation to this main issue, which seeks to promote high quality design, including in
    the context of the way an area functions.
Management Plan
20. One of the criteria for the assessment of HMOs as set out in the Housing Design
    SPD is that a Management Plan should be submitted for consideration. The aim of
    these plans is in part to avoid endemic problems that can potentially occur from
    HMO development and can adversely impact the community.
21. Policy LP26 of the Local Plan, amongst other matters, seeks to protect the
    amenities of neighbouring occupiers, including in relation to matters such as noise.
    The Council has accepted that, given the proposed number of occupants, the
    proposal is unlikely to have a significant detrimental impact on neighbouring
    occupiers in terms of noise and disturbance. I find no reason to reach an
    alternative judgement in this respect.
22. Whilst it would still be reasonable to expect a Management Plan to deal with wider
    issues such as the management of waste and parking, in the absence of
    underlying concerns relating specifically to the site, I find that it would be entirely
    reasonable for such a document to be sought for approval through condition.
    Based on the inclusion of such a condition, the proposal would provide for
    adequate means of site management.
23. I have identified no conflict with Policy LP26 of the Local Plan arising from this
    main issue. The Council has also referred to Policy LP29 of the Local Plan in
    relation to this matter, but this policy relates to amenity and internal space
    standards, and I find it to be of limited relevance to the overall management of the
    site.
Planning Balance
24. Policy S4 of the Framework outlines that development proposals within
    settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by adverse effects, when assessed against the national
    decision-making policies in the Framework.
25. The scheme would provide a HMO that would arguably result in a more effective
    use of land. This would contribute to the mix of housing within the area and align
    with policies within the Framework which seek to provide homes to meet the needs
    of the community, including the needs of various different groups. There would
    also be economic benefits through occupiers contributing to the local economy.
26. Whilst I have found that the appeal scheme would not provide adequate internal
    space for the future occupiers of room 2, this in itself does not represent specific
    conflict against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010195


27. In this case, I therefore do not find that the adverse effects arising from the
    proposal would be so significant that they would substantially outweigh the
    benefits. In the context of Policy S3 of the Framework, the presumption in favour of
    sustainable development therefore applies.
Conditions
28. I have considered the conditions put forward by the Council, where necessary I
    have amended the wording in the interests of effectiveness and precision.
29. In the interests of certainty and clarity, I have imposed the standard conditions
    relating to the commencement of development as well as the approved plans. It is
    also necessary to secure cycle parking spaces and refuse storage arrangements
    proposed as part of the development in the interests of visual amenity and
    sustainable travel.
30. I have imposed a condition seeking a management plan, in the interests of the
    living conditions of both future occupiers and existing neighbouring occupiers, in
    line with the expectations of the Housing Design SPD.
31. The Council has suggested a condition limiting the development to a maximum of
    6 occupants and a separate condition seeking to prevent the conversion of
    communal spaces into additional bedrooms. The accessibility of the communal
    spaces could be a matter dealt with through the wider management plan.
32. It is implicit from the plans that the proposal is for 5 bedrooms. Whilst I note the
    intentions of controlling the occupancy, it would not be realistically enforceable to
    prevent occupants from moving partners in for example. On this basis, I am not
    satisfied that these two suggested planning conditions would be reasonable or
    necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms.
Conclusion
33. Whilst I have identified conflict with the development plan relating to the living
    conditions of future occupiers, the adverse effects of the proposal do not
    substantially outweigh the benefits of the proposal. As a result, the presumption in
    favour of sustainable development within the Framework would apply, and the
    appeal should be allowed.

L Gardner
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010195


SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS


 1)      The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
         the date of this decision.
 2)      The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
         drawing nos DWL 02; DWL 03; and DWL 04.
 3)      Prior to first occupation of the development hereby approved, refuse storage
         facilities shall either be implemented and made available for use in accordance
         with the details shown on the approved plan DWL 04 or shall be implemented
         and made available for use in full accordance with alternative refuse storage
         details which shall have previously been submitted to and approved in writing by
         the local planning authority. In either eventuality the approved refuse storage
         facilities shall be maintained thereafter for the lifetime of the development.
 4)      Prior to first occupation of the development hereby approved, provision for cycle
         storage shall be implemented and made available for use in full accordance with
         cycle storage details which shall have previously been submitted to and
         approved in writing by the local planning authority. The approved cycle storage
         facilities shall be maintained thereafter for the lifetime of the development.
 5)      Prior to first occupation of the development hereby approved, a HMO
         Management Plan which provides details in respect of the use and on how the
         HMO will be managed, addressing the requirements specified in the Council’s
         Housing Design Guide (2019) (including paragraphs 5.2.6 – 5.2.7) shall be
         submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The HMO
         Management Plan as approved shall then be implemented at the site prior to first
         use of the site as a C4 small HMO and shall be adhered to at the site thereafter
         in accordance with the approved Plan for the life of the development.


END OF SCHEDULE




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
