Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 30 July 2026
by S F Barnes MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23rd September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010223
70 London Road, Grays, Thurrock RM17 5YB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission under section 73 of the Town and Country Planning
     Act 1990 (as amended) for the development of land without complying with conditions subject to
     which a previous planning permission was granted.
•    The appeal is made by Ms. Canan Kuran against the decision of Thurrock Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01093/CV.
•    The application sought planning permission for change of use from Use Class E (b) to Use Class E
     (a) (Retail Shop), and single storey side and rear extensions without complying with a condition
     attached to planning permission Ref 23/01281/FUL, dated 31 January 2024.
•    The condition in dispute is No 8 which states that: Hours of operation - The premises shall only be
     open to customers between 08.00 hours and 22.00 hours Monday to Sunday including Public
     Holidays. No customer shall be present upon the premises outside of permitted hours.
•    The reasons given for the condition are: In the interests of amenity and to ensure that the
     development remains integrated with its surroundings as required by Policy PMD1 of the adopted
     Thurrock LDF Core Strategy and Policies for the Management of Development [2015].

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (Framework) was
       published on 17 August 2026, after the deadlines had passed for the exchange of
       statements and final comments on this appeal. The main parties were provided
       with an opportunity to comment upon the revised Framework but have not done
       so.
3.     Planning permission was granted for the change of use of the building to a retail
       shop (amongst other changes), which commenced in April 2025. Condition 8
       restricts customer opening hours. The appellant seeks to vary the condition to
       permit opening between 07:00 and 23:00 daily, extending the approved hours by
       one hour at either end of the day. The Council considers that these extended
       hours would result in harmful noise and disturbance to neighbouring occupiers.
4.     In support of the appellant's contention that the varied condition would not
       significantly alter the effects of noise for neighbouring occupiers, an Environmental
       Noise Impact Assessment ('ENIA') was submitted with the appeal. The Council
       and interested parties had an opportunity to comment on the report. As such,
       considering that report would not prejudice the interests of any party.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010223


Main Issue
5.     The main issue is the effect of varying Condition 8 on the living conditions of
       neighbouring occupiers, with regard to noise and disturbance.
Reasons
6.     The appeal site contains an end-terrace, two-storey building, with the appeal shop
       premises at its ground floor. The shop’s customer car park is directly outside of the
       building, fronting London Road but accessed from Grovelands Way. This adjoins
       the front windows of 72 London Road and lies below windows at an upper-floor flat
       within the appeal building. The surrounding area contains a mix of commercial and
       residential development, including a large supermarket (Aldi) and other retail
       premises opposite the site on London Road.
7.     The car park is close to the front windows of the adjoining dwellings, which contain
       habitable room windows that would be sensitive to noise and disturbance during
       nighttime hours. The appeal premises provide a conveniently located shop for
       nearby residents, many of whom may travel there on foot. However, the customer
       car park enables customers to arrive by car and creates the potential for
       associated vehicle activity immediately adjacent to neighbouring dwellings.
8.     Although the ENIA concludes that the operation of the site would have a low
       adverse impact on such neighbouring sensitive receptors, this conclusion relies
       primarily on sound rating levels derived from average noise measurements. The
       report describes ‘car park noise’ as subjectively loud and it is not clearly explained
       how customer and car park noise has been distinguished from prevailing road
       traffic noise in its average measurements. Nor is there any separate assessment
       of the audibility and effects of intermittent noise events which might be expected
       from customer activity, such as vehicle engine starts, door slams, vehicle audio
       sounds and conversations, during the additional opening hours sought at these
       neighbouring sensitive receptors. Consequently, I am not satisfied that the ENIA
       demonstrates that harm to living conditions for neighbouring occupiers would be
       avoided in those respects.
9.     Whilst the extension of opening hours sought is limited in absolute terms, it would
       facilitate customer activity during periods when neighbouring occupiers could
       reasonably expect a comparatively peaceful residential environment, particularly
       for sleeping and enjoyment of their homes. The appellant has not proposed any
       mitigation measures to address resulting noise and disturbance during the
       additional opening hours sought. Given the foregoing, noise and disturbance
       associated with customers arriving, departing and using the car park during the
       extended hours is likely to harm neighbouring occupiers' living conditions.
10. It is unclear whether the premises already operates in accordance with the
    proposed opening hours. Even if it does, the absence of substantiated evidence of
    noise complaints would not, in itself, be determinative of the acceptability of the
    proposal’s likely effects. A premises license (ref. 24/00383/LAPRE) has been
    granted subject to a number of conditions, too. However, this has been considered
    under a separate but complementary regulatory regime, so does not alter my
    conclusions on the effects of the proposal in planning terms.
11. Much larger supermarkets nearby, including Aldi and Morrisons, feature large car
    parks. However, from what I have seen, neither the car parks nor the retail

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010223


       premises adjoin neighbouring dwellings in a way that is comparable to the appeal
       site. Consequently, these sites do not provide a direct comparison with the appeal
       proposal and do not weigh in its favour.
12. Concluding on this, varying Condition 8 would have a harmful effect on the living
    conditions of neighbouring occupiers, with regard to noise and disturbance.
    Without suitable control on opening hours for visiting customers, the development
    would conflict with the relevant provisions of Policy PMD1 of the Thurrock Local
    Development Framework Core Strategy and Policies for Management of
    Development (2015). This policy, amongst other things, seeks to avoid
    development that is likely to cause unacceptable effects on the amenities of the
    area.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
13. The proposal would have a harmful effect on the living conditions of neighbouring
    occupiers and therefore conflicts with the development plan, taken as a whole.
14. Framework Policy S4 states that development proposals within settlements should
    be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by
    any adverse effects when assessed against its national decision-making policies.
15. Framework Policy E2 directs that substantial weight should be given to economic
    benefits of proposals for commercial development allowing businesses to expand.
    The proposal would support the operation of a small business that provides local
    employment and consumer choice and could also reduce some journeys to larger
    supermarkets. However, there is little evidence before me that the business would
    not remain viable without the proposed variation to Condition 8, nor that any
    resulting social, economic or sustainability benefits would be more than limited. In
    view of the scheme’s small scale, I attach only limited weight to these benefits as a
    whole.
16. Set against that, Framework Policy P3 states that proposals should provide
    healthy living conditions for occupiers, including in relation to noise pollution that
    could have an unacceptable adverse effect on quality of life. No mitigation
    measures have been identified to address the resulting harm, which would endure
    for the duration of the development. I attach significant weight to this harm.
    Consequently, the benefits of the proposal would be substantially outweighed by
    its adverse effects when assessed against the Framework’s national decision-
    making policies. As such, Framework Policy S4 does not indicate that permission
    should be granted in this instance.
17. In conclusion, material considerations in the proposal’s favour are not of sufficient
    weight to indicate that a decision should be made other than in accordance with
    the development plan. Therefore, for the reasons given, and having regard to all
    other matters raised, the appeal should be dismissed.

S F Barnes
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
