Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by K Townend BSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 11 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010973
Cedars Farm, Broadwas, Worcester WR6 5NE
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Staniel Stoilov against the decision of Malvern Hills District Council.
•    The application Ref is M/25/00216/FUL.
•    The development proposed is for a new detached dwelling with associated landscaping.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a new detached
       dwelling with associated landscaping at Cedars Farm, Broadwas, Worcester WR6
       5NE, in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref M/25/00216/FUL, and
       the plans submitted with it, subject to the conditions set out in the Schedule of
       Conditions attached to this decision.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The South Worcestershire Development Plan Review (the SWDPR 2026) was
       adopted by the Council on 25 March 2026 and replaces, in full, the South
       Worcestershire Development Plan, 2016 (the SWDP 2016). This appeal was
       received before the adoption of SWDPR 2026 and as such, at that time it was
       emerging policy and Policies from the SWDP 2016 were referred to in the decision
       notice.
3.     I have received copies of the relevant adopted SWDPR 2026 policies and both
       main parties have had an opportunity to comment on them. I have, therefore,
       determined the appeal against the recently adopted policies.
4.     Any reference to the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) in this
       decision, unless otherwise specified, will be in relation to the August 2026 version.
5.     The appellant has submitted a signed Unilateral Undertaking (UU) providing a
       financial contribution towards affordable housing. I have addressed this in my
       reasoning below.
6.     The address in the banner heading above is taken from the Council’s decision
       notice as this better describes the location of the development.
Main Issues
7.     The main issues are:
         •    whether the appeal site is an appropriate location for the proposed
              development, having regard to the development strategy for the area and the
              accessibility of services and facilities; and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010973


         •    whether a suitable mechanism is available to secure a contribution towards
              affordable housing.
Reasons
Location
8.     The appeal site is a grassed paddock enclosed by fencing and hedges and
       between two existing dwellings, Cedars Farm and Oaklands. It is accessed via a
       shared driveway leading from a cul-de-sac which itself is off the A44.
9.     Policy SWDPR 03 of the SWDPR 2026 sets the spatial development strategy for
       the area. Broadwas is defined, in Annex B, as a Category 2 settlement as it has at
       least two key services and access to at least a daily bus service for employment
       and shopping purposes. Subsection D of Policy 03 advises that the open
       countryside is defined as land beyond any Development Boundary, where
       development will be strictly controlled subject to other policies in the Plan. The
       appeal site lies outside the settlement boundary for Broadwas and is, therefore,
       considered to be within open countryside.
10. The appeal proposes a form of development which is not supported by any of the
    other policies within the SWDPR. The appeal would, therefore, be contrary to the
    recently adopted Plan, specifically policy SWDPR 03. Furthermore, the proposal
    would fail to comply with any of the types of development set out in Policy P2 of
    the Broadwas and Cotheridge Neighbourhood Plan, 2019 (the NP).
11. Policy SWDPR 03 of the SWDPR 2026 and Policy P2 of the NP are both broadly
    consistent with the Framework in seeking to restrict development outside
    settlements. However, the SWDPR 2026, albeit recently adopted, and the NP both
    predate the latest version of the Framework. Policy S5:1 of the Framework advises
    that only certain forms of development should be approved outside settlements.
    However, the forms of development listed in the policy should be approved, unless
    the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects,
    when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
    The Framework is a material consideration to which I can give weight.
12. Even if I accept that the appeal site is not within a large built-up area, the
    Framework advises that the definition of settlements include areas defined as such
    in the development plan. Broadwas is defined as a settlement in the SWDPR 2026
    and is, therefore, a settlement when considered against the definition in Annex B
    of the Framework.
13. Criterion (e) of Policy S5:1 is relevant in this case. It allows for limited infilling
    within groups of houses outside of defined development boundaries. The appeal
    site is close to the defined settlement boundary, between two existing houses and
    to the rear of a group of other houses. The appeal site is, therefore, within a group
    of houses, albeit that it is outside the development boundary. Moreover, as a
    proposal for a single dwelling between two existing properties, it would comprise
    limited infilling. It would not represent a standalone extension of residential built
    form into the open countryside, would be read in the context of the surrounding
    houses, and would not disrupt the established settlement pattern.
14. For these reasons, although the proposal would conflict with Policy SWDPR 03 of
    the SWDPR 2026, in that it is development outside the settlement boundary of


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010973


        Broadwas, Policy S5:1(e) of the Framework would support the proposal. As the
        Framework is a material consideration in planning decisions, I can give weight to
        Policy S5:1(e) in determining the appeal.
15. That the Council can now show a five year housing land supply, with the required
    20% buffer, would not reduce the weight of Policy S5:1(e) or mean that, under
    Policy HO7:1 of the Framework, that I should not support additional housing.
16. The Council seeks to argue that the location of the site is not sustainable and that
    this harm would substantially outweigh the benefits of the development. I
    acknowledge that there are limited services and facilities in the settlement and
    that, as noted by other Inspector’s decisions referred to by the Council1, the
    services and facilities would not meet all of the day-to-day needs of future
    occupiers. Moreover, I accept that there is limited public transport and that this
    might not offer convenient access to employment.
17. Nevertheless, Broadwas is defined in the SWDPR 2026 as a category 2
    settlement. It is a settlement where Policy SWDPR 03 would support new housing,
    albeit the policy seeks to ensure that such development is only within the
    development boundary. Moreover, the public house, school, recreation field, and
    bus stops are all within walking distance of the appeal site and there is a doctor’s
    surgery within cycling distance, even if this would only be suitable for competent
    and confident cyclists. Consequently, there are services and facilities in Broadwas
    that any new development would be capable of supporting, enhancing, and
    maintaining the vitality of, even if these are not all of the facilities that would be
    required for day-to-day living.
18. The reliance on the private car for access to other facilities and employment would
    be no different for the residents of the appeal site and the residents of existing
    housing in the village, including those on the road serving the appeal site and
    either side of the appeal site. Even if the bus services that serve the village are
    infrequent and not suitable for returning home from work after 17:00, there are bus
    services which, along with the options for cycling, would provide genuine
    alternative means of travel for the future occupants and minimise the need to
    travel by car.
19. The appeal decision at Tack Farm acknowledged that the future occupants would
    be reliant on the private car but that this was the case for the existing residents.
    Moreover, it acknowledges that Broadwas is a settlement suitable for limited
    growth which creates tension between allowing new housing in a settlement with
    limited services and facilities. This is similar to the appeal before me. However, the
    appeal at Tack Farm is materially different to the appeal before me in that it was
    further from the development boundary. Moreover, the appeal sites on the A44
    and at Brook Farm were also further from the services and facilities and the
    development boundary than the site at Cedars Farm. None of the three appeals
    drawn to my attention are directly comparable to the current proposal and are,
    therefore, all materially different and justify a different conclusion on this appeal.
20. The context of the area, albeit outside the settlement, is immediately next to other
    houses and the addition of one further dwelling would not result in a significant
    amount of movement, even with daily comings and goings. Nevertheless, Policy

1
    APP/J1860/W/24/3354156, APP/J1860/W/25/3361765, APP/J1860/W/25/3365077



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           3
Appeal Decision 6010973


       TR3:1(b) of the Framework still seeks to ensure that opportunities should be taken
       to utilise existing or proposed transport infrastructure and support walking,
       wheeling, cycling and public transport. In this case and given the material
       differences to the other appeals referred to by the Council, I find that the appeal
       site is in a suitable and sustainable location for the scale of the development and
       given the level of movement that would be likely to be generated.
21. The policies in the SWDPR 2026 are clear that the appeal site is not one where
    residential development would normally be permitted. Nevertheless, Policy S5:1(e)
    of the Framework allows for limited infilling within groups of houses. I have found
    that the appeal proposal would comply with this exception in the Framework and
    that it would also be in an appropriate location, having regard to the accessibility of
    services and facilities.
22. By reason of the appeal complying with Policy S5:1(e), I also find that it complies
    with Policy S3:1 of the Framework and is sustainable development. Consequently,
    although the proposal would conflict with Policy SWDPR 03 of the SWDPR 2026
    there are other material considerations, specifically Policy S5:1(e) of the
    Framework, which supports the proposed development.
23. Moreover, as a suitable location for new housing in terms of the accessibility of
    services and facilities I find no conflict with Policy SWDPR 06 of the SWDPR 2026
    which, amongst other matters, requires development proposals, taking into
    account their nature and location, to demonstrate that the proposed layout and
    design would minimise the need to travel by car. This would, therefore, not
    constitute an adverse effect that would substantially outweigh the benefits of the
    development.
Affordable housing
24. Policy SWDPR 19 of the SWDPR 2026 sets thresholds for where residential
    development would be required to contribute to the provision of affordable
    housing. Within Designated Rural Areas, such as the appeal site, a financial
    contribution is required on sites of less than five dwellings. Policy HO5:1(a)(i) of
    the Framework allows local plan policies to set affordable housing requirements for
    residential developments which are not major developments. Policy SWDPR 19 is,
    therefore, consistent with Policy HO5:1(a)(i) of the Framework.
25. The appellant has provided a signed and dated UU as the mechanism by which to
    deliver a financial contribution towards affordable housing in accordance with
    Policy SWDPR 19. I am content that the contributions would satisfy the tests for
    planning obligations set out in Regulation 122 of the Community Infrastructure
    Levy Regulations (2010). I, therefore, find that the submitted UU overcomes the
    Council’s concerns in relation to this matter.
26. For the above reasons, the UU is a suitable mechanism to secure a contribution
    towards affordable housing and, therefore, the proposed development would
    comply with the requirements of Policy SWDPR 19 of the SWDPR 2026 which
    seeks to secure appropriate affordable housing.
Other Matters
27. Significant concerns have been raised by interested parties regarding the access
    to the proposed development and the lack of visibility for pedestrians. Access to


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010973


       the site is between two existing dwellings along a track which already serves
       Cedars Farm and Oaklands. Nevertheless, the proposal is for a single dwelling
       and the level of vehicle movements associated with one house would not
       significantly increase vehicles using this access track, or the private road.
28. From my observations on site there is space for a vehicle to wait on the private
    road if a vehicle is leaving the site or neighbouring properties, and also space near
    Oaklands for a vehicle to wait for another already travelling up the track. Moreover,
    I also saw that there is forward visibility from the track and that pedestrians in the
    immediate area would only be likely to be residents and visitors to the properties
    served by the track and, therefore, fully aware of the limited space and potential for
    meeting a vehicle. Pedestrian movements around the houses either side of the
    access track would come close to the track but would also be able to hear any
    vehicle movements due to the gravel surface. The Council raised no objections on
    these grounds and I have seen no substantiated evidence that would lead me to a
    different conclusion.
29. The concerns raised by the interested parties regarding access for fire appliances
    are noted. However, even though the fire appliance access plan indicates that
    such vehicles would need to cross over the boundary with the property to the side
    of the access drive, the evidence before me is that a fire appliance was previously
    able to gain access to the property next to the appeal site. Although interested
    parties noted that damage was caused the access was capable of being used by a
    fire appliance. Any damage caused to boundary fences or hedges would be a civil
    matter between the parties. Access for fire appliances is, as noted by Hereford and
    Worcestershire Fire and Rescue Service, also a matter for Building Regulations,
    separate to the planning process.
30. Furthermore, any damage that may be caused by the construction of the proposed
    development would be a civil matter between the parties, as was any damage
    caused by the construction of Cedars Farm.
31. I have no compelling evidence that the appeal site is at risk of flooding. Moreover,
    the development would need to ensure that it would not increase the risk of
    flooding elsewhere by ensuring the run-off rate is restricted to greenfield rates.
    This matter can be controlled by a suitably worded condition to require the details
    of the drainage to be submitted.
32. Although I note that the distance between the proposed dwelling and the waste
    collection point would be beyond the travel distance recommended for a resident
    to carry their waste this is also the current situation for Cedars Farm and would not
    be sufficient justification for dismissing the appeal.
33. The proposed dwelling would be two storeys and situated behind and between
    existing dwellings. The proposal also includes balconies to the first floor windows
    in the front and rear elevations. However, the layout and design would ensure that
    there is not unacceptable overlooking or loss of light to the properties either side.
    The separation distance between the proposed dwelling and the two nearest
    properties in front of the plot is also such that the proposal would not cause
    unacceptable overlooking of either the dwellings or their gardens.
34. The potential for overlooking from large vehicles travelling along the access
    driveway is an existing situation and would not be significantly increased by the
    development. The loss of the outlook over the countryside would result in harm to

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010973


       the occupants of the neighbouring properties. However, the loss of a private view
       would not be sufficient to justify dismissing the appeal.
35. The provision of one additional dwelling would also not substantially increase the
    amount of noise in the immediate area, even with the track being gravel surfaced.
    Construction noise can be limited through a condition to limit construction hours.
36. From the evidence before me, the appellant had served the appropriate notice on
    the owners of the driveway as part of the planning application process and lack of
    ownership of an access is not grounds to dismiss the appeal.
37. For the above reasons, none of the additional concerns raised by the interested
    parties would lead me to reach a different conclusion on this appeal.
Conditions
38. The Council has provided a list of suggested planning conditions, which I have
    considered against the Framework and advice contained in the Planning Practice
    Guidance. I have undertaken some minor editing and rationalisation in the
    interests of precision and clarity.
39. In addition to the standard condition which limits the lifespan of the planning
    permission I have specified the approved plans for the avoidance of doubt.
    However, I have not included the fire appliances access plan as this was
    submitted for information only and it would not be possible to enforce that this is
    the line that any such vehicle would take.
40. In order to ensure a satisfactory appearance of the development, I have included a
    condition requiring the materials to be submitted for approval and a condition to
    require the levels to be submitted. Moreover, to ensure that the surface water and
    foul drainage schemes are provided and maintained, so as not to increase the risk
    of flooding, I have also included a condition to this effect.
41. Given the residential nature of the immediate area, the local concerns and the
    restricted access, the condition to require the submission of a Construction
    Environmental Management Plan and to require the details of the hours of
    construction work to be submitted is necessary.
42. The condition requiring the provision of parking and turning space is also
    necessary in the interests of highway safety and to ensure the provision of off-
    street parking and turning for the development. I have also included a condition to
    secure cycle parking to encourage sustainability and alternative means of travel
    other than the car, in accordance with Policies SWDPR 06 and SWDPR 26 of the
    SWDPR 2026.
43. In the interests of protecting and enhancing ecology and biodiversity I have
    included a condition requiring the mitigation measures to be provided in
    accordance with the submitted ecology report. As required by Policy SWDPR 37 of
    the SWDPR 2026 the condition to secure at least 20% renewable or low carbon
    energy is also necessary and reasonable for the development.
44. However, given that the proposal is for a single dwelling and the whole of the
    appeal site would be either dwelling or domestic garden a condition to require the
    details of landscaping to be submitted is not necessary or related to the scale of
    the development. Moreover, a condition to require Compliance with the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6010973


       accessibility requirements of Building Regulations is also not necessary as this is
       controlled through other permitting regimes.
45. Nonetheless, I have included the condition to require the details of the boundary
    treatments to be submitted for approval as these matters would influence the effect
    on the living conditions of the occupiers of the neighbouring properties and the
    character and appearance of the area. Such a condition is, therefore, necessary
    and related to the development.
46. Informatives are not added to appeal decisions. The appellant should be aware of
    these from the Council’s evidence and I have, therefore, not included them.
Conclusion
47. For the above reasons, I find that the harm from the conflict with the development
    plan would not significantly and demonstrably outweigh the benefits that would
    arise from the development, when assessed against the policies in the Framework,
    taken as a whole. Accordingly, there are material considerations, which indicate a
    decision should be taken other than in accordance with the development plan.
48. For these reasons, the appeal should be allowed, subject to the conditions set out
    below.

K Townend
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6010973


SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: 2426-04 revision 01, 2426-05 revision 01,
              2426-08 revision 01, and 2426-09 revision 01.
     3)       No development shall take place until a Construction Environmental
              Management Plan Statement has been submitted to and approved in writing
              by the local planning authority. The Statement shall provide for:
              i)   the parking of vehicles of site operatives and visitors;
              ii) loading and unloading of plant and materials;
              iii) storage of plant and materials to be used in constructing the
                   development;
              iv) site operative facilities (office, toilets etc);
              v) wheel washing facilities;
              vi) measures to control the emission of dust and dirt during construction;
                   and
              vii) delivery, demolition and construction working hours.
              The approved Construction Environmental Management Plan shall be
              adhered to throughout the construction period for the development.
     4)       No development shall take place until details of existing ground levels and
              proposed finished ground and floor levels, in relation to the existing dwellings
              immediately around the site, have been submitted to and approved in writing
              by the local planning authority. The development shall be carried out in
              accordance with the approved details.
     5)       No development, above slab level, shall commence until details of a scheme
              for the disposal of foul and surface water drainage has been submitted to and
              approved in writing by the local planning authority. The scheme shall be
              implemented in accordance with the approved details prior to the first
              occupation of the dwelling and retained in perpetuity.
     6)       No development, above slab level, shall commence until details of the
              materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
              dwelling hereby permitted have been submitted to and approved in writing by
              the local planning authority. The development shall be carried out in
              accordance with the approved details.
     7)       Prior to the first occupation of the dwelling hereby permitted space shall have
              been laid out within the site for three cars to be parked and for vehicles to
              turn so that they may enter and leave the site in a forward gear, in
              accordance with drawing number 2426-09 Revision 01. That space shall
              thereafter be kept available for such purposes in perpetuity.
     8)       Prior to the first occupation of the dwelling hereby permitted facilities for the
              secure storage of cycles shall have been provided within the curtilage of the
              dwelling, in accordance with the Council’s standards. The cycle parking shall
              be retained in perpetuity.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6010973


     9)       Prior to the first occupation of the dwelling hereby permitted details of the
              boundary treatments to be erected shall be submitted to and approved in
              writing by the local planning authority. The boundary treatment shall be
              completed as approved before the dwelling is occupied.
     10)      Prior to the first occupation of the dwelling hereby permitted a scheme to
              secure at least 20% of the energy supply of the development from renewable
              or low carbon energy sources shall have been submitted to and approved in
              writing by the local planning authority. The approved scheme shall be
              implemented and thereafter retained in operation.
     11)      Prior to the first occupation of the dwelling hereby permitted the ecological
              mitigation measures shall be carried out in accordance with the details
              provided in the Sharpe Ecology ‘Preliminary Ecological Appraisal &
              Biodiversity Net Gain Assessment- Issue V1.0, February 2025’.


                                           **** END OF CONDITIONS ****




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          9
