    Appeal Decision
    Site visit made on 5 August 2026
    by N McGurk BSc (Hons) MCD MBA MRTPI
    an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
    Decision date: 28 August 2026


    Appeal Ref: 6010183
    Pavement o/s 19-23 Market Street, Huddersfield, HD1 2EH
    •   The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
        Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 against a refusal to grant express consent.
    •   The appeal is made by BT Telecommunications PLC against the decision of Kirklees Council.
    •   The application Ref is 2026/64/90570/W.
    •   The development proposed is 2no. digital 75-inch LCD display screens, one on each side of the
        Street Hub unit.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. The proposal the subject of this appeal is for an advertisement comprising 2no.
   digital display screens, one on each side of a BT Street Hub unit. The BT Street
   Hub unit referred to is intended to replace 2no. existing BT payphones located
   nearby, at the junction of Market Street and Cloth Hall Street, Huddersfield. A
   related application for full planning permission for the Street Hub structure itself
   (Ref 2026/62/90569/W) was refused by the Council and is the subject of a separate
   appeal decision (Ref 6010180).
3. A previous application1 for the installation of a communications hub was refused
   and subsequently dismissed at appeal in 2019.
Main Issues
4. The main issues in this case are the effect of the proposed advertisement on visual
   amenity, having regard to the Huddersfield Town Centre Conservation Area and
   the setting of Number 21 Market Street, a Grade II Listed Building; and its effect on
   public safety.
Reasons
Visual amenity
5. The appeal site comprises a section of pavement on Market Street in Huddersfield
   town centre. Market Street in this location is a very busy, well-used pedestrian and
   vehicular route. The appeal site lies close to a pedestrian crossing and to Market
   Street’s signalised junction with Cloth Hall Street. There is a parking bay alongside
   Market Street, between the road and the appeal site.

1
    Reference: 2019/91616.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6010183


6. The appeal site is located within the Huddersfield Town Centre Conservation Area,
   characterised by a mix of historic commercial buildings, many of which retain
   attractive decorative stonework and traditional detailing. These historic buildings
   combine to provide a strong sense of townscape quality, and as one moves
   through and past the site along Market Street, particularly in a northerly direction,
   the eyes are drawn to the presence of attractive stone buildings, both nearby and in
   the distance.
7. The appeal site is also located adjacent to and within the setting of Number 21
   Market Street, an attractive stone-built Grade II Listed Building with notable sash
   windows and stone decoration.
8. During my site visit, I observed there to be a range of existing street furniture,
   including illuminated shop signage and commercial displays, reflecting the area’s
   function as an active, modern town centre. However, I also noted that the appeal
   site itself appears open and spacious, with minimal street furniture providing for a
   pleasant, uncluttered appearance.
9. The proposed advertisements would comprise two prominent digital display
   screens, set one to either side of a BT Street Hub, a tall, modern free-standing
   structure with a user interface panel to one side. The advertisement displays would
   be set behind tempered and laminated glass.
10. The introduction of prominent, illuminated digital screens onto this section of
    pavement would, I find, represent a new and prominent addition to the street scene.
    Whilst the Street Hub’s overall footprint may be modest, the digital advertisement
    screens themselves would appear large and their very purpose, which would be to
    draw attention to themselves, would result in them appearing in line with, as well as
    above and below, the eye-line of passers-by.
11. I find that the introduction of such a tall, illuminated, changing display materially
    different from the mostly static signage elsewhere in the vicinity would combine with
    the prominent siting of the proposed advertisement screens to result in the proposal
    appearing as an incongruous and unduly dominant feature; and would contrast with
    the historic quality of No 21 Market Street, as well as other attractive buildings in
    the Huddersfield Town Centre Conservation Area. This would be to the detriment of
    visual amenity.
12. According to statute, Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
    Conservation Areas) Act 1990 requires that special attention shall be paid to the
    desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of these areas.
    National planning policy, as set out in the Framework, states that when considering
    the impact of a proposal on the significance of designated heritage assets,
    substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation and that significance
    can be harmed or lost through development within their setting.
13. The harm arising would be localised and in respect of the significance of the
    heritage assets, would be less than substantial. Public benefits may arise from the
    proposal in terms of access to free ultrafast public Wi-Fi, free phone calls, an
    emergency contact facility, wayfinding information, device charging, the potential
    for future air quality and traffic sensors, community messaging capability and the
    replacement of ageing phone kiosks. However, in this case, the public benefits
    identified do not amount to something that outweighs the harm identified.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
    Appeal Decision 6010183


14. Whilst the appellant proposes the removal of two existing payphones located at the
    junction of Market Street and Cloth Hall Street, those payphones are not located at
    the appeal site and their removal would not offset the effect of the proposed
    advertisements on the appeal site itself, where no comparable illuminated display
    currently exists.
15. Taking all of the above into account, I find that the proposed advertisements would
    harm visual amenity, having regard to the character and appearance of the
    Huddersfield Town Centre Conservation Area and the setting of No 21 Market
    Street, a Grade II Listed Building, contrary to the National Planning Policy
    Framework and to Local Plan2 Policies LP17(a), LP24(a), LP25 and LP35, which
    together amongst other things, seek to protect local character.
Public safety
16. The appeal site is located close to a pedestrian crossing and to the signal-
    controlled junction of Market Street and Cloth Hall Street. The immediate area
    comprises a very busy part of the town centre.
17. The proposed digital advertisement screens would display changing images
    specifically designed to attract attention. They would be sited close to the pavement
    edge in an area where drivers and pedestrians need to concentrate on the
    operation of the roads, the junction and on each other’s movements.
18. I find that the illuminated and eye-catching nature of the proposal would result in it
    being likely to distract the attention of both drivers and pedestrians and that this risk
    would be exacerbated by the volume of movement in this busy town centre
    location.
19. Consequently, I find that the proposed advertisements would harm public safety,
    contrary to the National Planning Policy Framework and to Policy LP21 of the
    Kirklees Local Plan, which together amongst other things, seek to protect public
    safety.
Conclusion
20. For the reasons given above, the appeal does not succeed.

N McGurk
INSPECTOR




2
    Kirklees Local Plan (2019).


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
