Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 August 2026
by L Clark BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 10 September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6010529
108 The Avenue, Tottenham, Haringey, London N17 6TG
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Mr Jay Sokal against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
       Haringey.
•      The application Ref is HGY/2026/0542.
•      The development proposed is change of use from C4 small HMO to 1No 1-bedroom flat and 1No 3-
       bedroom flat.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       The appeal premises (No 108) is described as being a small HMO. Existing plans
         submitted alongside the appeal show that there are approximately 5 kitchen/living
         (K/L) areas over three floors and that 2 rooms also occupy bedrooms within the
         K/L creating what I saw to be studio units. The layout as shown on the existing
         plans is approximately what I observed, with the exception of the second floor
         within the main dwelling, where the room also contained a bench with a cooker
         and a sink. Externally, there were no obvious cycle stands, rather the front area
         contained approximately 6 standard refuse bins and 1 caddy. Notwithstanding the
         differences, I have determined the appeal based on the proposed plans that have
         been submitted with the exception of the study.
3.       I note that the Council in its officer report describes the proposed study room
         within the ground floor flat as meeting the minimum requirement for a one
         bedspace single bedroom. However, whilst the Council changed the description of
         development on the officer report and Decision Notice to refer to the creation of 1 x
         2 bedroom and 1 x 3-bedroom flats, the notification letters on the planning
         application sent to nearby neighbours and consultees describe the development
         as a 1 x 1 bedroom flat and a 1 x 3-bedroom flat.
4.       Whilst I recognise that Councils have discretion as to whether or not future
         consultation is necessary1, an increase in bedspaces would, in my mind, change
         the size and intensity of its occupation and would also likely increase the demand
         for long-stay cycle parking. There is little evidence before me to demonstrate the
         Council’s reasoning behind why it did not re-consult. Therefore, given my findings,
         even if the room shown as a study on the proposed plans would meet the
         minimum requirement for a one bedspace single bedroom, I consider that the lack
         of re-consultation would have likely deprived those who were consulted on the
         application an opportunity to make any representations should they have wanted

1
    Planning Practice Guidance Paragraph: 026 Reference ID: 15-026-20190722

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010529


        to. Therefore, in the interests of procedural fairness, I have determined the appeal
        based on the proposed plans.
5.      During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
        (the Framework) was published and the main parties were provided with an
        opportunity to comment. I have had regard to the 2026 version of the Framework
        in my decision.
6.      The Council has drawn my attention to an Enforcement case2. Any enforcement
        process is a separate matter and falls outside the scope of my assessment, which
        must focus on the planning merits of the appeal proposal.
Main Issues
7. The main issues in this appeal are:
         • whether the conversion would be acceptable for subdivision having particular
           regard to local planning policy on conversion within the Family Housing
           Protection Zone (FHPZ); and,
         • the effect on living conditions of future occupiers with regards to cycle and
           refuse facilities; and floorspace for Flat 1 and outlook for Flat 2.
Reasons
Local planning policy
8. The appeal site (No 108) is a three-storey terraced house located within an
   established residential area. The proposed development would create a 1 bedroom
   / 2 person dwelling to the ground floor and a 3 bedroom / 4 person dwelling to the
   upper floors.
9. Policy DM16 of the Haringey's Development Management DPD 2017 (DPD) relates
   to residential conversions and seeks to retain a supply of larger family homes to
   meet Haringey's housing needs. It stipulates that the Council will only permit the
   conversion of larger homes to smaller self-contained homes subject to a number of
   criteria. Criterion B allows for conversions within the FHPZ, where it meets criteria
   (b-g) set out in Criteria A and where it would not lead to a net loss in the number of
   family-sized dwellings.
10. In terms of criterion A. b. this specifically refers to the gross original floor space of
    the existing dwelling being greater than 120sqm. The appellant does not dispute
    that the dwelling originally measured approximately 117sqm but contends that the
    property has been enlarged and now provides approximately 152.1sqm.
11. I acknowledge the property is now significantly larger than it was originally, and
    there would be no net loss in the number of family sized units, with the proposed 3-
    bedroom flat at the upper floors replacing the loss of a single-family unit. However,
    this does not outweigh the fact that the floor space of the original dwelling was
    below 120sqm and therefore considered too small for conversion by the standards
    set out in DPD Policy DM16.
12. I note that the appellant considers the DPD Policy overly rigid, however the policy
    nevertheless sets out a threshold against which proposals must be considered.

2
    ENF/2025/0571


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010529


         Even if No 108 is now larger, the criterion refers only to the ‘original’ internal floor
         space. As such, the development would not comply with criterion A.b.
13. I conclude that the proposed development would result in the loss of a dwelling
    which had an original floor space of less than 120sqm. The proposal would
    therefore fail to comply with criterion A.b. of DPD Policy DM16.
Living conditions - Cycle and refuse provision
14. DPD Policy DM4 seeks to ensure, amongst other things, that all proposals make
    on-site provision for general waste, and the separation of recyclable materials and
    organic matter3. Criterion B. b. states that on-site provision should provide
    accessible and safe access for occupants, and this mirrors criterion A. c. of DPD
    Policy DM16. Policy DM4 also states that in flatted properties there should be
    convenient access to recycling.
15. Proposed plans show that the front external area could accommodate
    approximately 5 bicycles at right angles to the front boundary, with 2 refuse bins4
    located on either side of the bay window. Notwithstanding this, the Council’s
    Transportation section seeks further information to demonstrate the layout of the
    long-stay cycle parking and waste storage.
16. I have considered whether this detail could be dealt with by condition as suggested
    by the appellant, however I saw that to the ground floor front elevation of No 108
    there was a bay window which projected into the front external amenity space. I
    also saw that the refuse bins associated with the property were aligned alongside
    the front boundary wall. Whilst these were parallel to the street and the front
    elevation of No 108, their overall length, position and depth noticeably reduced the
    remaining available space, particularly opposite the bay window. From my
    observations, even if bicycles could be accommodated opposite the refuse bins, I
    have little before me to demonstrate that either the refuse bins or bicycles furthest
    from the main door or gate could be accessed independently. I am therefore not
    persuaded that sufficient cycle and refuse provision could be accommodated to the
    front, or that they would be functionable or accessible for future occupants. As
    such, I am not persuaded that otherwise unacceptable development could be made
    acceptable through the use of a condition.
17. For the above reasons, I conclude that it has not been demonstrated that adequate
    provision and access could be made with regard to refuse bin and cycle storage.
    Without adequate provision and access the proposed development would likely
    have a harmful effect on the living conditions of future occupiers, whereby the only
    most accessible refuse bins would likely be used. This would result in them over-
    flowing into the street, and where bicycles would be stored within the dwellings
    reducing available living space. Accordingly, I find conflict with Policies DM4 and
    DM16 of the DPD which collectively seek to ensure that the provision and design of
    waste management facilities is accessible and convenient.
Living Conditions - Spacing standards and Outlook
18. The Council contend that the proposed ground floor flat (Flat 1) would be 2
    bedroom and not 1 bedroom as shown on the proposed plans. As I have found
    above, even if the room shown as a study is large enough to meet the minimum
3
    Criterion B
4
    Four in total.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      3
Appeal Decision 6010529


        requirements for a single bedroom, this is not what was originally applied for or
        what the Council consulted on.
19. Policy SP2 of the DPD relates to housing and seeks, amongst other matters, to
    ensure design standards deliver quality homes in Haringey by meeting, criteria 1 to
    4. Criteria 2 seeks to ensure that its design has regard to, amongst other things, the
    space standards in the London Plan 2021.
20. Policy D6 of the London Plan relates to housing quality and standards and seeks to
    ensure, amongst other things, housing developments meet the minimum standards
    set out in Table 3.1.
21. Table 3.1 sets out minimum gross internal floor areas and storage according to the
    type of dwelling and number of bedrooms. It states that a 1 bedroom/2-person unit
    over 1 storey should be 50sqm. The Council do not dispute that Flat 1 would
    measure approximately 52 sqm. This exceeds the minimum floor area set out in
    Table 3.1. Whilst the Council is silent on the matter of storage, given that the
    overall size of Flat 1 would exceed the minimum gross internal floor area, and my
    observations on site, the Flat would also likely be large enough to accommodate
    the required 1.5 sqm of storage.
22. Given the proposed unit would constitute a 1 bed 2-person unit, its overall floor
    area of approximately 52 sqm would comply with Policy D6. I therefore conclude
    that the proposed dwelling would provide future occupants of Flat 1 with a good
    standard of accommodation.
23. The proposed double bedroom in Flat 2 would be located to the front of the
    property within the second floor. This room is currently utilised as a kitchen/living
    room and has two roof lights. Both of these roof lights had coverings on at the time
    of my visit, and one rooflight was open which gave me an outlook of the sky. Even
    with the window coverings the room was fairly light.
24. The proposed plan shows that Flat 2 has two distinct habitable rooms on the first
    floor, with the living room to the front and the kitchen to the rear, with both rooms
    having windows in the ordinary sense. Given the primary function of a bedroom is
    to sleep, even if there is limited outlook from the double bedroom, the proposed
    layout of Flat 2 would nevertheless provide future occupants with a good standard
    of outlook during daytime hours from the majority of the remaining habitable rooms.
25. For the reasons given above, the proposed dwelling would accord with Policy D6 of
    the London Plan and Policies DM16 and SP2 of the DPD, which collectively seek to
    ensure development provides future intended occupiers with adequate levels of
    amenity.
Other Matters
26. The appellant contends that the Council has been inconsistent in its position given
    its planning history. Whilst the Council does not dispute that planning permission5
    was approved in 1973 for the conversion of No 108 to 2 self-contained flats, I am
    also mindful planning permission was approved for the conversion of the ground
    and first floor flat into a single dwelling6. However, neither party have provided me
    with the circumstances surrounding these cases. While I recognise that the

5
    Ref: OLD/1973/0044
6
    Ref: HGY/2019/0678


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010529


     appellant seeks to reinstate an earlier permission, a significant amount of time has
     elapsed since then, and the adopted plan is likely to have changed the planning
     circumstances.
27. The absence of harm with regard to neighbouring properties or character or
    appearance of the area and sustainable location are neutral matters in the overall
    planning balance, as this would be likely requirements of a well-designed
    development.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
28. The proposal would bring about a number of benefits, not least the provision of one
    dwelling to boost the housing supply. It would also have benefits to the local
    economy in subsequent occupation. Whilst these benefits can be afforded a
    modest degree of weight in favour of the scheme, they would be limited to the scale
    of the proposal. These benefits, together with the lack of harm with regard to
    internal living standards would not outweigh conflict with the development plan or
    the harm to the living conditions of future occupants with regard to the lack of
    accessible and convenient refuse and cycle provision.
29. The proposal therefore conflicts with the development plan as a whole and the
    material considerations do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other
    than in accordance with it.
30. Accordingly, I conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

L Clark
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
