Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026 by E Street BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010063
1 Waldegrave Road, Ealing W5 3HT
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by A Raja against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of Ealing.
•   The application Ref is 251413FUL.
•   The development proposed is the conversion of a dwellinghouse into two self-contained flats; single
    storey rear extension; demolition of single storey conservatory; first floor rear extension; alterations
    to side fenestration; rear roof extension; three rooflights to front roofslope; single storey detached
    garden outbuilding to be used as annexe; alterations to front elevation fenestration; installation of
    side door. (Retrospective Application).

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure and Preliminary Matters
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal scheme. The description of development for which on the
   application form does not include the previous extensions. The decision notice
   more accurately describes it in the manner I have referred to above. Due to the
   retrospective nature of the scheme and the inaccuracies between the site visit and
   the plans, the recommendation is based on the same plans on which the Council
   determined the application. This includes where the description refers to the
   outbuilding being an annexe. The plans show it as a cycle store.
3. Having reviewed the most recent changes to the National Planning Policy
   Framework (Framework), I am satisfied that they do not affect the substance of the
   main issues or the outcome of the appeal. Since arguments would not therefore be
   prejudiced, I have proceeded without further consultation with the main parties.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are the effect of the scheme on a) the living conditions of the
   occupiers of the development and b) the character and appearance of the area.
Reasons for the Recommendation
Living Conditions
5. The building has already been subdivided into two flats. There is no dispute around
   the space standards for Flat A and I have no reason to disagree. The Council has
   assumed that Flat B is for a two-bedroom four person flat. The appellant does not

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010063


     seem to disagree. The application form advises the scheme consists of one flat
     with 3 bedrooms and one flat with 4 bedrooms. Therefore, the intention of the
     bedroom numbers is unclear. That said, the plans under drawing AL(01) E suggest
     that Flat B consists of two bedrooms, a living space, office space and kitchen dining
     area. I can therefore only draw the conclusion that the space is for a two-bedroom
     four person flat.
6. There is also a level of uncertainty around the total gross floor area of Flat B with
   the appellant measuring it at 94 square metres (sqm) and the Council at 100sqm.
   Notwithstanding the minor discrepancy, the lower figure would exceed the minimum
   for a two-bedroom four person flat as per the Nationally Described Space
   Standards (NDSS) quoted in Policy D6 of the London Plan (LP) 2021.
7. The matter is surrounding “Bed 2” and how it does not meet the minimum size
   requirements for a double bedroom at 11.5sqm and resultantly is not able to
   accommodate four people. The Council’s calculated measurement equals 9.41sqm,
   whereby the plans suggest that the bedroom is 12.2sqm. Notwithstanding this, the
   appellant has advised that the room could be a single bedroom or the loft room
   could be a double bedroom to meet the technical requirements. However, there is
   no mechanism to secure which room is a double bedroom. Even a plans condition
   would not secure the bedroom size due to the ambiguity between the
   measurements and there being no demonstration of the size of the room with bed
   sizes. I am not sufficiently convinced that any such condition would be enforceable
   in any event as it relates to an internal arrangement. There is too much ambiguity
   surrounding the size of the room to make an informed recommendation of its
   accordance with the NDSS.
8. In terms of outside amenity space, the garden can be accessed by both the
   bedrooms of Flat A as well as the side access for any occupiers of Flat B. The
   proposed plans depict a 0.9m high chain link fence to separate the current amenity
   space for Flat A to have a private terrace and the remaining garden to be a
   communal area. However, during the site visit, this was not in place. The chain link
   fence as shown on the plans at 0.9m high would not alleviate the concerns raised
   in terms of a loss of privacy to the occupiers of the ground floor bedrooms to Flat A.
   The space could be used at any time of the day, and the proposed boundary
   treatment would not be sufficient to mitigate against the loss of privacy given the
   close relationship and its permeable nature.
9. The appellant has recommended a condition to implement a 1.8m high close
   boarded fence. Whilst the separation distance between the fence and the
   bedrooms would be small and outlook compromised, this would not be to a
   detrimental level given the different expectation of amenity space for flatted
   developments.
10. For the reasons above, notwithstanding the lack of harm in terms of the external
    amenity space, the scheme would still not avoid harm to the living conditions of
    occupants, in conflict with Policy D6 of the LP and Policy 3.5 Ealing Development
    Management Development Plan Document (DPD) 2013 which together amongst
    other things seeks to ensure that living conditions of occupiers is protected.
Character and Appearance
11. The appeal site is a two-storey end of terraced building at the top of a cul de sac.
    The flats have the appearance of a singular dwelling from the front elevation bar

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010063


     the two separate doors to access the individual units. The terraced nature of the
     building along with their rear outriggers lends a consistency between the buildings,
     notwithstanding that the appeal site is two flats. There are limited instances of
     single storey rear extensions.
12. The single storey rear extension spans the whole width of the dwelling and is
    modest in its height against the boundary treatment. The Ealing Housing Design
    Guidance recommends rear extensions should be no more than 3.5m and where it
    is exceeded sound design justification is needed. The Council’s evidence has not
    raised any concerns in terms of living conditions of neighbours by virtue of the rear
    extension. It is larger than the prevailing ground floor extensions. However, its
    overall appearance against the dwelling is subordinate and proportionate whilst
    leaving enough external amenity space for the occupiers.
13. The two-storey outrigger is a replication of the outriggers experienced along the
    terraced row. It is wider and slightly taller than the prevailing features, however, it
    sits comfortably with the wider context due to its location and design. Moreover,
    whilst the width results in the adjustment in the pitch of the roof, it is not harmfully
    so given it does not extend to the full width of the building. It still broadly follows the
    prevailing pattern of development. The render and lack of timber detailing is not
    contrastingly so from the adjoining buildings given the presence of pebble dash
    render. Resultantly, the form and design of the outrigger sits comfortably with the
    building and wider terraced dwellings.
14. With these matters in mind, whilst the single storey rear element conflicts with the
    design guidance, it does not result in any harm in terms of the wider character and
    appearance. Overall, the scheme complies with Policies D3 and D4 of the DPD and
    Policy DAA of the Ealing Draft Local Plan which, amongst other things, seek to
    ensure that developments are of a high-quality design and standard.
Conclusion and Recommendation
15. With regard to Policy S4 of the Framework and the principle of development within
    settlements, there would be some benefits to the proposals. It would support one
    additional residential unit which would add to housing in the area. It would also
    make an efficient use of land. However, there would only be one unit, and an
    efficient use of land would be expected to make a proposal acceptable in principle.
    I would therefore ascribe the benefits of the proposals limited weight.
16. The harm I have found, and the subsequent development plan conflict, relates to a
    poor standard of living conditions for future occupiers. Since this relates to the
    manner in which people would live, it is worthy of significant weight. The
    Framework also reinforces, in regard to section 12, the need to ensure safe and
    healthy living conditions. With this and the above in mind, the benefits of granting
    planning permission for the proposals would be substantially outweighed by the
    adverse effects.
17. The appeal scheme does not comply with the development plan, notwithstanding
    the lack of harm to the character and appearance of the area which would be a
    neutral matter, and I have been given no compelling reason, taking into account
    other material considerations advanced, to deviate therefrom. I therefore
    recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010063



E Street
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
18. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
