Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by O Marigold BSc DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 26 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010975
Ladywell, Road From Junction North East Of Lee Barton To West Street,
Kilkhampton, Bude, Cornwall EX23 9QP
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the
     Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•    The appeal is made by Paul Cottle against the decision of Cornwall Council.
•    The application Ref is PA25/08174.
•    The development proposed is change of use (and associated building operations) of part of an
     agricultural building to form a single dwelling.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Background and Main Issue
2.     Class Q of the General Permitted Development Order (GPDO) permits
       development consisting of the change of use of an agricultural building to a
       dwelling, and building operations reasonably necessary to convert it. In this case,
       the appeal building consists of a timber portal frame, with timber cladding, under a
       steel roof. The proposal seeks to convert part of the existing building into a
       dwelling.
3.     The Council and the appellant dispute whether the works involved would
       demonstrably amount to a conversion, and therefore whether they would fall within
       the scope of the GPDO. The main issue is whether the proposal complies with the
       description of permitted development under Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the
       GPDO, with regard to the building operations necessary to convert the building to
       residential use.
Reasons
4.     The appeal building has eight bays in total. Four of these bays would form the
       dwelling. Two of the bays would remain in agricultural use, and another two would
       be demolished. Under GPDO paragraph Q.1(j), development is not permitted if it
       would consist of building operations other than the installation or replacement of
       windows, doors, roofs, exterior walls, and services, to the extent reasonably
       necessary for the building to function as a dwelling.
5.     The High Court decision of Hibbitt1 clarified the extent of the Class Q rights. It
       found that the building must be capable of conversion without amounting to the
       complete or substantial re-building of the structure, or effectively resulting in a new
1 Hibbitt and another v SSCLG and Rushcliffe Borough Council [2016] EWHC 2853 (Admin)



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010975


       building. The judgement identified that there will be instances where the works
       needed would be of such magnitude that in practical reality what would be
       undertaken would amount to a rebuild, or a fresh build.
6.     The Planning Practice Guidance2 (PPG) states that for a building to function as a
       dwelling, it may be appropriate to undertake internal structural works, including a
       floor and internal walls. However, the PPG also makes clear that the GPDO does
       not intend to allow re-building work beyond that necessary for conversion. Only
       where the existing building is already suitable for conversion to residential use
       would it have the permitted development right.
7.     No detailed loadbearing calculations have been provided. That said, there is no
       legislative requirement for these to be submitted. I see little reason to question the
       conclusion of the Structural Engineer that, subject to some works, the structure
       including its columns, foundations and earth floor would be sufficient to support the
       additional loadings from the proposal. Impact damage to the building was recorded
       to one gable end and to a supporting post. Nevertheless, the Council does not
       suggest that there have been significant structural implications resulting from this
       damage.
8.     In undertaking the proposal, the core frame of the existing structure would be
       retained. The rear elevation is made up of timber boarding. A Structural Report
       submitted with an earlier application3 found that the boarding would require
       upgrading to make the building weatherproof. Subsequent evidence has been
       provided to show that it could be retained by a supporting framework behind it,
       together with insulation, albeit with the insertion of four new windows.
9.     Even so, the front elevation is currently formed of open bays. The proposal would
       involve new doors, windows and walls across four of the bays, the latter being
       fixed to the existing vertical timbers. What would be the western elevation of the
       dwelling is currently internal and open. As such, it would also require new walls
       and fenestration. The external eastern elevation of the building would serve an
       agricultural use, and would remain unchanged. However, a new internal wall within
       the existing frame would be required between the agricultural and domestic
       sections. Consequently, three of the four walls of the dwelling itself would be new.
10. Appreciable sections of the existing building would be demolished, including two
    bays and two rear lean-to structures. The Appeal Statement says that the existing
    roof would be retained, but with replacement sheeting where necessary, and so
    the extent of this change is not confirmed. Moreover, the most recent Structural
    Report states that the existing roof finishes would need to be replaced with an
    insulated profiled metal panel. The proposal would include a new non-structural
    floor. These elements all add to the extent of new work necessary to the building.
11. Taken individually, the changes proposed to the building would fall within the
    scope of Class Q.1(j). Nonetheless, when taken as a whole, the operational works
    required would be substantial. As a matter of planning judgement, I find that the
    proposal would go well beyond a conversion and would amount in effect to a fresh
    build. I cannot therefore conclude that it would comply with the description of
    permitted development under Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the GPDO.


2 Paragraph 105 Reference ID 13-105-20180615
3 LPA reference PA19/11121



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
Appeal Decision 6010975


12. The appellant has referred to an appeal at Sydenham, Oxfordshire4. That proposal
    involved extensive works to a barn that were still held to comply with Class Q.
    However, the other Inspector identified that there may be circumstances where the
    sum total of works amount to a rebuild. In any case, I have reached my findings
    based on the proposal and its details before me, and this other appeal decision
    does not change my findings.
Conclusion
13. For the reasons given above, and taking into account all other matters raised, the
    appeal is dismissed.

O Marigold
INSPECTOR




4 PINS reference APP/Q3115/W/25/3366845



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
