Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 9 September 2026
by Stewart Glassar BSc (Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010637
Longbrook Pavillion, Hook Lane, Bognor Regis PO22 8AT
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•    The appeal is made by Callan West against the decision of Arun District Council.
•    The application Ref is BR/51/26/PIP.
•    The development proposed is permission in principle for a maximum net gain of 8 No dwellings.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and permission in principle is granted for a maximum net
       gain of 8 No dwellings at Longbrook Pavillion, Hook Lane, Bognor Regis PO22
       8AT in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref BR/51/26/PIP, dated 1
       April 2026.
Application for costs
2.     An application for costs was made by Callan West against the Environment
       Agency. That application is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     The proposal is for permission in principle. Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
       advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
       housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has 2 stages:
       the first stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site is
       suitable in-principle, and the second (technical details consent) stage is when the
       detailed development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first of
       these 2 stages.
4.     The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
       land use and the amount of development permitted. All other matters are
       considered as part of a subsequent Technical Details Consent (TDC) application if
       permission in principle is granted. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
5.     A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published by
       the Government in August 2026, after the determination of the planning
       application. I have taken it into account in my decision.
6.     I have taken the description of development from the Council’s decision notice as it
       more clearly identifies the extent of the development sought.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010637


Main Issue
7.     The main issue is whether the site is a suitable location for residential
       development, having regard to the type and amount of development proposed.
Reasons
8.     The site is located at the end of Hook Lane. It is currently occupied by a former
       nursery school building and there is an existing bungalow immediately to the south
       which is excluded from the site. These two buildings share an access onto Hook
       Lane.
9.     The site is separated from the main residential area along Hook Lane by an
       existing foot/cycle path. This path marks the edge of the settlement boundary and
       so delineates the site from the rest of the settlement. Thus, in planning policy
       terms, even though the site is physically and visually well related to the nearby
       houses, it is not within the built-up area of Bognor Regis and is instead within the
       strategic gap between Bognor Regis and Felpham.
10. Despite being within the strategic gap, the officer report notes that the Arun Local
    Plan (ALP) does allow development in such areas where, for example, it does not
    undermine the physical and/or visual separation of settlements. As noted above,
    the site is previously developed and is physically and visually well related to the
    nearby houses and other built form around it. Consequently, the Council did not
    consider the site’s location and its development contrary to the ALP and I see no
    reason to disagree with this conclusion.
11. The site was identified as being within Flood Zone 3a and the Environment Agency
    initially objected to the proposal as no floodplain compensation was shown. Thus,
    future occupants’ safety for the lifetime of the development was queried and so the
    location was not considered acceptable for housing. The Environment Agency has
    subsequently revised its position and withdrawn its objection to housing being
    located on the site. Subject to certain floor levels being achieved for the new
    houses, there would be no safety risk were the site to flood.
12. The submitted site layout drawing is illustrative and must be viewed on that basis.
    However, it shows how eight dwellings, garden areas, parking and access could
    be provided whilst retaining the existing bungalow and access. Whilst the TDC
    stage would consider the details of any buildings and site layout, there is nothing
    to indicate that eight units could not be accommodated on the site or would not
    accord with the predominately residential character of the area.
13. Therefore, the site is suitable for residential development, having regard to its
    location, the proposed land use and the amount of development. It would accord
    with the policies of the ALP and in particular it would not be contrary to Policy W
    DM2 which seeks to ensure developments do not pose a flood risk.
Other Matters
14. The Council acknowledges that it is currently only able to demonstrate a 3.23 year
    supply of housing land and so this is evidence of an unmet need for housing. As
    the site would be well-related to the existing settlement and be of a scale which
    can be accommodated taking into account the existing availability of infrastructure,
    it would accord with Framework Policy S5, which addresses development outside


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010637


       of settlements. I do not find any of the Framework’s other policies to be an
       impediment to the proposal.
15. Interested parties have expressed concerns, particularly regarding an increase in
    vehicle movements along Hook Lane. However, the Highway Authority did not
    object to the principle of the development, and I have no substantive evidence
    before me to come to a different conclusion. The Highway Authority did note that
    details such as car and cycle parking as well as the vehicle tracking and the
    geometry/width of the access would need to be considered at the TDC stage.
    Similarly, matters such as the design of the houses, site layout, issues of
    contamination and site management would be for the TDC process to consider.
Conditions
16. The PPG makes it clear that it is not possible for conditions to be attached to a
    grant of permission in principle, whose terms may only include the site location,
    type, and amount of development. Where permission in principle is granted by
    application, such as this, the default duration of that permission is three years for
    an application for technical details consent to be submitted, and there is no
    justification to vary this period in this case.
17. Future applicants can be informed of what the Council expects to see at the TDC
    stage by reviewing their appeal submissions.
Conclusion
18. For the above reasons, having regard to the development plan as a whole, the
    approach in the Framework, and all other material considerations, I conclude that
    the appeal should be allowed and so permission in principle is granted.

Stewart Glassar
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
