Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 August 2026
by S. Burch BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 14 September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6010189
1391 - 1393 London Road, Norbury, London SW16 4AN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Merkur Slots Ltd (UK) against the decision of the Council of the London
     Borough of Croydon.
•    The application Ref is 26/00641/FUL.
•    The development proposed is the change of use of ground floor from vacant Class E unit to Adult
     Gaming Centre (AGC) (Sui Generis).

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the change of use of
       ground floor from vacant Class E unit to Adult Gaming Centre (AGC) (Sui Generis)
       at 1391 - 1393 London Road, Norbury, London SW16 4AN in accordance with the
       terms of the application, Ref 26/00641/FUL, and the plans submitted with it,
       subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.     For reasons of precision, I have taken the address used in the heading above from
       the Council’s decision notice. This refers to 1391-1393, whereas the address
       provided on the application form refers only to 1393. However, it is evident from
       the submitted site location plan that the appeal site also includes 1391.
       Furthermore, the appellant uses the address 1391-1393 in both their appeal
       statement and final comments document. I am therefore satisfied that the address
       in the heading above accurately describes the appeal site.
3.     The Council refers to the revised Croydon Local Plan 2024, which has been
       submitted for examination. I have not been supplied with a copy of the revised
       plan. However, the Council’s reasons for refusal does not identify any conflict with
       this plan and the Council outline that the policies carry limited weight, which would
       not outweigh current adopted policy. I have therefore based my decision on the
       current adopted development plan.
4.     During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
       (the Framework) was published. The main parties were provided with an
       opportunity to comment. I have had regard to the 2026 version of the Framework
       in my decision.
Main Issue
5.     The main issue in this appeal is the effect of the proposed opening hours on the
       living conditions of neighbours, with regard to noise and disturbance.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010189


Reasons
6.     The appeal site relates to the ground floor of a three-storey building (with
       accommodation in the roof space) located at the junction of London Road and
       Semley Road. The site forms part of the Secondary Retail Frontage within a
       District Centre.
7.     The surrounding area is relatively mixed in character. Along London Road, the
       area is predominately characterised by commercial uses at ground floor with
       accommodation on the upper floors of some properties. Indeed, the evidence sets
       out that there are residential properties on the upper floors of the appeal property.
       Semley Road is however predominately characterised by residential uses.
8.     The Council's case officer report notes that there are several late-night premises
       within the area, a number of which operate until between 2- 3am. Whilst some
       interested parties dispute this point, based on the evidence before me and my
       observations during my site visit, I am satisfied that there are several premises in
       the surrounding area that operate late into the night.
9.     The scheme seeks planning permission for the change of use from a Class E unit,
       which is currently vacant and was last used as a bank, to an adult gaming centre
       (AGC), falling under the Sui Generis use class. The proposed AGC would operate
       on a 24-hour basis, seven days a week.
10. A noise impact assessment (NIA) was submitted alongside the application. Both
    an internal and external noise impact assessment were carried out. Measurements
    from 10 operational venues across the UK owned by the appellant were used to
    assess potential noise impacts. Consideration was also given to the potential for
    open windows as part of the assessment and the positioning of the door on the
    corner of London Road and Semley Road.
11. In relation to internal noise, an assessment was undertaken of the potential effects
    arising from the proposed 24-hour operation on the residential units above the
    appeal site, which are the nearest noise-sensitive receptors. In determining the
    appropriate Noise Rating (NR) criterion required to safeguard the living conditions
    of occupiers, the assessment applied a threshold of NR20, which is considered
    sufficiently low to protect residential amenity. The report also sets out that this
    criterion has been adopted in previous assessments of a similar nature and has
    provided an adequate level of protection. Furthermore, the Council's Pollution
    Control Officer raised no concerns regarding the use of this threshold. In the
    absence of any substantive technical evidence to the contrary, I see no reason to
    disagree with the criterion adopted.
12. The assessment demonstrated that, once all rectification works are complete, the
    separating floor could attenuate operational noise levels sufficiently so that NR20
    would be achieved in the first-floor unit above. Such works include checking the
    entire separating floor area and sealing holes with sealant or mortar to prevent
    flanking paths. A new double layer of 15millimetre thick fire board is also
    recommended, and acoustic perimeter seals should be installed around the frame
    of the door and at the bottom. The door should also incorporate an automatic
    closer system.
13. Whilst the NIA does not expressly refer to vibration noise arising from specific
    equipment such as pinball machines, it clearly assesses operational noise

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010189


       associated with the proposed use, which would reasonably be expected to
       encompass noise generated by activities and equipment within the premises.
14. In relation to external noise, a baseline noise survey was undertaken between 2
    and 3am at the appeal site. The NIA explains that this period was selected as it
    represents the most noise-sensitive time of the night. The Council has not raised
    any concerns regarding the use of this assessment period. In my view, the
    selection of this time frame is reasonable, as it is generally a period when lower
    background noise levels and limited activity, in comparison to the daytime, would
    be expected. Accordingly, in the absence of any substantive technical evidence to
    the contrary, I have no reason to disagree with the use of this assessment period
    for the purposes of evaluating external noise impacts and considering whether a
    24-hour consent is appropriate.
15. The measured baseline noise levels in the area during the time period indicated
    that noise levels are relatively high in the area. The predominant ambient
    soundscape consisted of traffic on the local road network with maximum levels
    occurring from passing people who were observed sporadically walking and talking
    on the street.
16. Surveys of other Merker venues with 24-hour consent found that patrons generally
    arrive and leave without generating any sound. They also observed that patrons
    almost invariably arrived and departed on foot and did not congregate outside, or
    in the vicinity of, the premises. The surveys found that arrivals by car were
    extremely uncommon. Furthermore, patrons displayed no tendency towards
    shouting or other disruptive behaviour when outside, or when entering or leaving
    the premises.
17. An assessment of potential noise breakout to the closest residential premises
    located directly above was also undertaken using source noise measurements
    made within an existing site during peak operation. The assessment showed that
    the front façade would attenuate noise levels sufficiently to comply with the criteria
    of NR20 and British Standard BS8233:2014 (Guidance on Sound Insulation and
    Noise Reduction for buildings) (BS8233:2014) criteria for internal habitable rooms
    at the closest residential premises located directly above. An assessment of
    maximum levels demonstrated that under a worst-case and unlikely scenario,
    when the door is periodically open, predicted levels at the closest noise sensitive
    receptor would be below the criteria prescribed in BS8233:2014.
18. An assessment of the potential noise impacts arising from patrons smoking was
    also undertaken. The assessment found that the predicted worst-case noise levels
    would remain below the external night-time threshold of 60 dBA set out in the
    World Health Organisation's Guidelines for Community Noise and referenced
    within BS8233:2014.
19. As such, the NIA found that that noise impacts during the night are considered
    extremely unlikely to occur and operational noise levels from the future venue
    would be imperceptible against the prevailing background level during the most
    noise sensitive part of the night.
20. In terms of unpredictable noise events, the NIA found that random noise events
    are unlikely to occur and the chance of such an event occurring from other people
    in the area unrelated to the site is equal.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010189


21. In order to manage unpredictable noise events, the NIA includes an Operational
    Management Plan (OMP) which sets out a range of control measures. These
    include only playing background music in the premises and prohibiting tannoy
    systems. It also requires that the main entrance doors are not fixed or propped
    open at any time whilst the premises is trading and customers are present within
    the venue. Several secure by design measures would also be used such external
    CCTV.
22. Overall, the report concludes that noise impacts are not anticipated to arise and,
    as such, the site is suitable for 24-hour operation. The Council's Pollution Control
    Officer also states that, provided the recommended mitigation measures and
    specifications, including the Operational Management Plan (OMP), are strictly
    adhered to, the proposal would be satisfactory from a noise control perspective.
23. Notwithstanding the above, the Council concludes that the proposed opening
    hours would be significantly longer than those of neighbouring late-night premises
    and that the operation of the premises during the late-night and early-morning
    periods would be likely to result in unacceptable noise and disturbance affecting
    the amenities of neighbouring occupiers. However, the Council's appeal statement
    goes on to state that, had the proposed operating hours been between 9:00am
    and 1:00pm (it appears that the Council intended to refer to 1:00am, as it is
    unclear why a premises within a District Centre would be expected to close at
    1:00pm), the proposal could have been considered acceptable, subject to
    appropriate controls.
24. The Council has not however demonstrated what material difference there would
    be in terms of noise or disturbance impacts between the premises operating until
    1:00am and operating beyond its suggested 1:00am closing time. Indeed, there is
    a lack of empirical or otherwise sufficiently robust evidence to demonstrate that
    operation beyond 1:00am would result in unacceptable noise impacts on
    neighbouring occupiers. The fact that there are relatively few 24-hour premises in
    the area does not, in itself, demonstrate that a 24-hour operation would give rise to
    unacceptable levels of noise and disturbance. Furthermore, much of the NIA was
    undertaken during the period between 2-3am.
25. To conclude, based on the evidence before me, I am satisfied that, subject to the
    mitigation measures and controls set out in the NIA being implemented and
    adhered to, the proposed opening hours would not result in unacceptable harm to
    the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers with regard to noise and
    disturbance. If I were to allow the appeal, I could impose a planning condition
    requiring compliance with the recommendations contained within the NIA.
26. Accordingly, I find that the proposal would comply with Policies DM10 and DM23
    of the Croydon Local Plan (2018) (CLP) and Policies D13 and D14 of the London
    Plan (2021) (LP). Collectively, among other matters, these policies seek to protect
    the amenities of neighbouring occupiers, including from unacceptable levels of
    noise and disturbance.
27. There is nothing before me to suggest that, if a planning condition were imposed
    requiring compliance with the recommendations set out in NIA, those measures
    would not be adhered to. Indeed, should it become apparent that the requirements
    of such a condition were not being complied with, this would be a matter for the
    Council's Planning Enforcement Team to investigate and, where necessary, take


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010189


       appropriate action. There is no sufficiently authoritative evidence to confirm that
       visitor numbers in the NIA have been downplayed or are untrue.
Other Matters
28. Concerns have been raised by interested parties regarding the potential effects of
    the development on the vitality and viability of the District Centre and lack of active
    frontage. In its case officer report, the Council acknowledges that the scheme
    would result in the loss of a retail unit and as such it would not strictly comply with
    Policy DM4.2 of the CLP. This policy states that, within Croydon's District and
    Local Centres, changes of use at ground-floor level must accord with Table 5.3,
    which identifies acceptable uses. Nevertheless, it concludes that given the site has
    been marketed for a retail use in excess of 18 months, with no viable user found,
    and the use would offer employment and services, it would be acceptable in this
    instance.
29. The submitted marketing evidence demonstrates that the property was actively
    marketed for a Class E use for a period exceeding 18 months. Based on the
    outcome of that marketing exercise, the letting agent advised that, in their opinion,
    the premises are unlikely to be occupied by a Class E retailer in the foreseeable
    future. They attributed the lack of interest to several factors, including the absence
    of a traditional shopfront and the high costs associated with fitting out the unit. The
    marketing agent appears to be a reputable local firm and based on the evidence
    before me; I am satisfied that a genuine and robust marketing exercise was
    undertaken. I therefore attach significant weight to their professional opinion
    regarding the limited prospect of securing a retail occupier.
30. The appellant has also provided evidence indicating that its business generates
    customer activity and footfall within town centres at levels comparable to, and in
    some cases exceeding, those generated by traditional retail units. The evidence
    further suggests that, while the majority of customers make a specific trip to visit
    an AGC, a proportion subsequently visit other shops and services within the
    centre. Although this information is based on a snapshot of a relatively small
    number of the appellant's branches, I nevertheless consider that it provides some
    support for the appellant's contention that the proposed use would be acceptable
    in this location.
31. With regard to the lack of an active frontage, a shop display manifestations plan
    has been submitted for informational purposes only, given that the appeal relates
    solely to the proposed change of use of the unit. Nonetheless, the plan indicates
    that the display would include stud walls located a minimum of 1000 millimetres
    away from the shopfront glazing and would contain graphics needed for
    compliance and company visuals. The evidence sets out that there would also be
    areas without a setback display allowing views further into the unit. I consider that
    this arrangement, together with the good levels of pedestrian footfall in the area,
    would provide an appropriate active frontage.
32. Overall, having carefully considered the concerns raised by interested parties
    regarding the potential impact of the proposal on the District Centre, I conclude
    that, in the specific circumstances of this case, the proposed use would be
    acceptable. As set out above, the Council has reached the same conclusion.
33. Concerns have been raised regarding the alleged over-concentration of similar
    uses within the area and the cumulative effect of this. However, there is limited

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010189


       evidence before me regarding the precise distribution of directly comparable uses
       in the locality. Furthermore, the Council did not raise any concerns in this respect
       within it’s case officer's report. On the basis of the evidence before me, I have no
       reason to come to a different conclusion on this point.
34. Interested parties have suggested that the proposed opening hours of the venue
    would be out of character with the surrounding area. However, as set out above, I
    am satisfied that there are several premises in the vicinity that operate late into the
    evening and night. The appellant has also referred to a nearby gym that operates
    on a 24-hour basis. Furthermore, the Council concluded in its officer report that the
    proposal would not harm the character of the area. Although the Council raised
    concerns regarding noise and disturbance arising from the proposed opening
    hours, I have addressed these matters above and found that they would not result
    in unacceptable harm. Taking into account the site's location within a District
    Centre, together with the presence of other late-night uses in the surrounding area,
    I agree with the Council's conclusion that the scheme would not harm the
    character of the area.
35. Any future change of use of the unit would require planning permission, thereby
    allowing the suitability of any proposed use to be fully assessed before permission
    is granted. There is no substantive evidence before me to demonstrate that the
    proposal would result in unacceptable levels of light pollution. In any event, the site
    is located within a District Centre and a Secondary Retail Frontage, where artificial
    lighting associated with commercial premises and street lighting is a common and
    established feature of the environment. In this context, I am not persuaded that the
    proposed use would give rise to lighting impacts that would be materially harmful
    to the character of the area or to the living conditions of nearby occupiers.
36. The volume of objections received is not, in itself, a sufficient reason to dismiss the
    appeal. While concerns have been raised regarding the lack of pre-application
    discussion, there is nothing before me to indicate that the appellant was under any
    obligation to undertake pre-application discussions prior to the submission of the
    application. There is also nothing before me to indicate that the appellant was
    required to consult with the local police or community safety teams as part of the
    planning application process.
37. I am not satisfied that there is sufficient evidence before me to justify requiring
    further consultation with the local community through the imposition of a planning
    condition, if I were to allow the appeal. In this regard, the Council's officer report
    confirms that the application was publicised by way of notification letters sent to
    numerous nearby properties, thereby providing interested parties with an
    opportunity to comment on the proposal as part of the application process.
38. Whilst there may be operational differences between food outlets and AGC’s, I
    note that the reference at paragraph 5.18 of the appellant's appeal statement is
    made in the context of identifying other late-night uses within the area, rather than
    suggesting that such uses are directly comparable to the proposed AGC.
39. Concerns are raised by interested parties regarding anti-social behaviour, public
    nuisance and crime because of the proposed scheme. The Operational
    Management Plan (OMP), compliance with which could be secured through a
    planning condition, would require individuals who are considered to be under the
    influence of excessive alcohol to be refused entry to the premises. No alcohol


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6010189


       would also be sold on the premises. Furthermore, the surveys undertaken as part
       of the NIA observed that patrons were generally quiet and did not behave in a
       manner likely to cause disturbance to others. They also found that patrons did not
       congregate outside, or in the vicinity of, the premises. Having carefully considered
       the concerns raised by interested parties, I am not persuaded that there is
       compelling evidence before me to indicate that the proposed use would give rise to
       anti-social behaviour, public nuisance or crime.
40. Whilst an interested party has stated that risk assessments undertaken for
    comparable Merkur venues have identified high levels of crime in the surrounding
    areas, no details of those assessments have been provided. Nor is there any
    sufficiently robust or authoritative evidence before me to substantiate that claim. In
    the absence of such evidence, I attach little weight to this matter in my
    consideration of the appeal.
41. An interested party refers to noise and nuisance from a similar venue in Streatham
    Hill. However, I have no further information regarding this venue before me and
    therefore cannot conclude if it is directly comparable to the scheme before me.
    The appeal relates solely to a proposal for a change of use and does not concern
    the grant of a license or the erection of any signage. Matters relating to age
    verification are controlled through separate regulatory regimes, including the
    gambling licensing regime.
42. Concerns have been raised regarding the effect of the proposal on highway safety
    and parking demand. The Council's officer report explains that the site has a
    Public Transport Accessibility Level (PTAL) score of 5, on a scale where 6
    represents the highest level of accessibility and 1 the lowest. The Council
    therefore considers the site to be in a highly sustainable location and concludes
    that the proposed use would be unlikely to generate a significant increase in
    parking demand compared with the site's most recent use as a bank.
    Consequently, it has not identified any harm in this regard. I am also mindful that
    the NIA indicates that most patrons arrive and depart on foot rather than by private
    car. Considering the site's highly accessible location, the availability of a range of
    public transport options, its most recent use, and the findings of the NIA, I am
    satisfied that the scheme would not result in unacceptable impacts on highway
    safety or parking demand.
43. I am mindful that the appeal building is a locally listed building and is situated
    within a Local Heritage Area. However, the appeal proposal does not include any
    alterations to the existing external façade of the building. The Council therefore
    conclude that the proposal would not harm the appearance of either the locally
    listed building or the wider Local Heritage Area. Given that the external
    appearance of the building would remain unchanged, I agree with that conclusion.
    Any proposals for signage would be subject to separate assessment by the
    Council through the appropriate planning or advertisement consent process.
44. In addition to the matters addressed above, interested parties have raised
    concerns relating to the potential effects of the development on the nearby
    Bismillah Cultural Centre, the Norbury Baptist Church, the Norbury Islamic
    Academy and the Norbury Muslim Centre, including the ability to practice freedom
    of religion or belief. Concerns are also raised regarding the effect of the proposed
    scheme on children, including those from nearby primary schools and a nursery,
    elderly worshippers and residents of the nearby specialist care home. I have

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6010189


       therefore had due regard to Article 9 of the Human Rights Act 1998 and the Public
       Sector Equality Duty (PSED) under the Equality Act 2010. Religion or belief, age
       and disability are relevant protected characteristics to which the PSED applies.
       These rights are engaged in reaching my decision which includes having due
       regard to the need to eliminate discrimination, advance equality of opportunity, and
       foster good relations between persons who share a relevant protected
       characteristic and persons who do not. However, they are qualified rights, and
       interference may be justified where in the public interest. The concept of
       proportionality is key.
45. I acknowledge the concerns raised regarding noise and disturbance and the effect
    of this on worshipping and other activities in a peaceful, calm and welcoming
    environment. I also appreciate concerns raised in relation to noise and disturbance
    on residents of the nearby specialist care home. However, as set out above, I am
    satisfied that, subject to the mitigation measures and controls set out in the NIA
    being implemented and adhered to, the scheme would not result in unacceptable
    harm to the amenities of nearby occupiers of nearby Cultural Centres, Academies,
    Churches and the care home, with regard to noise and disturbance.
46. I also appreciate the severity of the concerns raised in relation to the safety and
    security of Muslims. However, as set out, there is a lack of firm evidence to
    demonstrate that the proposal would materially increase the risk of anti-social
    behaviour or crime. Furthermore, the evidence outlines how the appellant has
    submitted a premises license application which requires them to demonstrate
    adherence to the Gambling Act 2005 licensing objectives, which include
    preventing gambling from being a source of crime or disorder, amongst other
    things. Also, the surveys found that patrons displayed no tendency towards
    shouting or other disruptive behaviour when outside, or when entering or leaving
    the premises.
47. There is no robust evidence before me to demonstrate that the green outside
    Norbury Baptist Church would become a gathering place because of the proposal.
    As set out, the NIA found that patrons did not tend to congregate outside the site.
48. Concerns are raised regarding the impact of gambling on vulnerable people,
    including those in financial difficulty and those struggling with addiction, amongst
    other issues. The Gambling Act 2005 however requires the appellant to
    demonstrate compliance with various licensing objectives including protecting
    vulnerable people from being harmed or exploited by gambling. As such, whilst I
    appreciate the concerns raised, I do not find any planning harm in this regard.
49. Children, including those attending youth activities at the nearby Islamic Academy,
    may pass the site throughout the day. Residents of the nearby specialist care
    home would also live near it. The Gambling Act 2005 requires the appellant to
    demonstrate compliance with the licensing objectives, including the protection of
    children and other vulnerable persons from being harmed or exploited by
    gambling. Furthermore, the appellant is regulated and licensed by the Gambling
    Commission and operates a "Think 25" policy, whereby any person who appears
    to be under the age of 25 is required to provide an acceptable form of
    photographic identification to enter the premises. Compliance with this policy
    would be subject to regular independent testing at the premises, as explained in
    the evidence.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6010189


50. Concerns have also been raised regarding elderly worshippers, families and other
    individuals attending the nearby mosque who may pass the site when travelling to
    and from prayer and other community activities. However, while I acknowledge the
    concerns expressed by interested parties, I do not consider that the proposal
    would give rise to planning harm in this respect.
51. Consequently, the impacts of the proposed development on nearby Bismillah
    Cultural Centre, the Norbury Baptist Church, the Norbury Islamic Academy and the
    Norbury Muslim Centre and on children, the elderly and residents of the nearby
    specialist care home are deemed acceptable. It is therefore proportionate in the
    circumstances to allow the appeal when considering the well-established and
    legitimate planning purposes of national and local planning policies.
Conditions
52. The Council has suggested a number of conditions which I have considered in
    light of the advice in the Framework and Planning Practice Guidance. Where
    appropriate, I have adjusted the wording of the conditions in the interests of
    precision and enforceability.
53. In addition to the standard time condition, I have imposed a condition requiring that
    the development is carried out in accordance with the approved plans, for the
    avoidance of doubt and in the interests of certainty.
54. In the interests of the living conditions of neighbours, I have imposed a condition
    requiring compliance with the recommendations set out in Appendix C of the NIA.
    This condition would ensure that the mitigation measures identified in Appendix C
    are implemented prior to the first operation of the AGC and retained thereafter. For
    the same reason, I have also imposed a condition requiring the use to operate in
    accordance with the measures set out in the OMP and the Secured by Design
    Measures document.
55. I have imposed a condition requiring the submission of a Waste Management
    Strategy prior to the first use of the AGC. The information provided in respect of
    refuse storage, management and collection arrangements is limited.
    Consequently, a condition is necessary to ensure that adequate arrangements are
    secured in the interests of the character and appearance of the area and the living
    conditions of neighbours. For the avoidance of duplication, I have combined the
    Council's suggested conditions relating to these matters.
56. Although not included within the Council's list of suggested conditions, the case
    Officer report indicates that the provision of four cycle parking spaces is necessary
    to ensure compliance with relevant planning policies. In the interests of promoting
    sustainable transport, I have therefore imposed a condition requiring the use of the
    AGC. This would ensure that adequate cycle parking provision is secured for users
    and staff of the development.
57. I have not imposed the condition requiring compliance with certain submitted
    documents, including the Design and Access Statement, Heritage Statement and
    Planning Statement, as I do not consider it to be necessary. Matters requiring
    control are adequately secured through other conditions.
58. The Council's suggested condition requiring the submission of details and samples
    of external facing materials is also unnecessary, as no alterations to the external


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6010189


       appearance of the building are proposed. Similarly, the suggested condition
       relating to window display areas is neither necessary nor reasonable, given that
       planning permission is not required for internal window displays. Furthermore, I do
       not consider the suggested condition relating to timber-framed windows and doors
       to be relevant to the proposal before me, which relates solely to the change of use
       of the premises.
59. I have not imposed the Council's suggested condition relating to opening hours. As
    set out above, I am satisfied that, subject to the implementation of, and ongoing
    compliance with, the recommendations and measures identified in the NIA, the
    proposed opening hours would not give rise to unacceptable harm to the living
    conditions of neighbouring occupiers in terms of noise and disturbance.
    Accordingly, I do not consider such a condition to be necessary.
60. I have also not imposed the suggested conditions relating to noise limiters or noise
    from air handling units, mechanical plant and musical equipment. The evidence
    indicates that only background music would be played, rather than amplified
    sound. Furthermore, the evidence demonstrates that operational noise levels,
    particularly from music, would be low, averaging around 65 dB, which is
    significantly below the 85 dB threshold typically associated with noise-limiting cut-
    out devices. The NIA also demonstrates that noise breakout would remain
    compliant with the relevant noise criteria even where windows and doors are
    partially open. On the basis of the evidence before me, I am therefore not satisfied
    that such conditions would be necessary or reasonable.
61. I also do not consider the Council's suggested condition relating to sound
    insulation to be necessary. The implementation of appropriate sound insulation
    measures is adequately secured through the condition requiring compliance with
    the mitigation measures set out in Appendix C of the NIA. Furthermore, the
    Council's Pollution Control Officer confirmed that the recommendations and
    specifications contained within the NIA would be satisfactory for noise control
    purposes. In these circumstances, I am not satisfied that a separate condition
    relating to sound insulation would be necessary.
62. The Council's Pollution Control Officer also appears to have suggested several
    additional conditions; however, these do not form part of the Council's suggested
    list of conditions. In any event, having regard to the nature of the proposed use, I
    do not consider a condition requiring the submission of a Delivery and Servicing
    Plan to be necessary, as deliveries are likely to be minimal. Given the location of
    the site within a District Centre, where artificial lighting is commonplace, I do not
    consider a condition relating to lighting to be necessary. I am also not satisfied that
    sufficient evidence has been provided to demonstrate the need for a condition
    requiring any boilers to meet specified standards.
Conclusion
63. For the reasons given above, and having regard to all other matters, I conclude
    that the development would comply with the development plan as a whole. The
    appeal is therefore allowed.



S.Burch - INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
Appeal Decision 6010189




                                           SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS


         1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
            date of this decision.


         2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
            the following approved plans: Site Location Plan, No Drg No., Site Plan, No
            Drg No., Proposed Ground Floor, Drg No. 924-PL-101 Rev 2., Proposed
            Display Manifestation, Drg No. 924-PL-106 Rev 04 (excluding details of
            proposed internal window displays).
         3) Prior to first use of the AGC, the recommendations set out in Appendix C of
            Noise Assessment, ref PR2001_226_FINAL, dated 15/12/2025 shall be
            implemented. The recommendations shall be thereafter retained for the
            lifetime of the development.

         4) The approved use shall be operated in compliance with the measures
            specified within the ‘Operational Management Plan- Control Measures’ and in
            ‘Appendix E- Merkur Slots Operational Management Plan’ in the Noise
            Assessment, reference PR2001_226_FINAL, dated 15/12/2025 and
            ‘Secured by Design Measures’ document.

         5) Prior to first use of the AGC, a waste management strategy shall be
            submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
            agreed strategy shall be implemented in accordance with the agreed details,
            prior to first use of the AGC, and retained for the lifetime of the development.
            The waste strategy shall:

              ▪    specify those bins to be collected by the Council's waste contractor;

              ▪    specify those bins to be collected by a private contractor, to include
                   details of frequency of service provision and any need for on-site
                   management; and

              ▪    include the detailed design, location and appearance of bin stores and bin
                   presentation points.

         6) Prior to first use of the AGC, details of cycle parking shall be submitted to
            and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The approved cycle
            parking shall be implemented in accordance with the agreed details prior to
            first use of the AGC and shall be retained for the lifetime of the development.



                                             **END OF SCHEDULE**




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          11
