Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 July 2026
by A Hunter LLB (Hons) PG Dip MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1st October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010376
Former Hull Grammar School and Community Centre, Cottingham Road, Hull
HU5 2DH
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr S Hakim of Humber Estates Ltd against the decision of Kingston-Upon-
     Hull City Council.
•    The application Ref is 24/01144/FULL.
•    The development proposed is the change of use, extensions (first and second floor) to, and external
     alterations of former grammar school building to provide student accommodation (total of 37 beds);
     change of use of former stores to provide landlords office and store; together with parking and
     landscaping.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The description of development has been taken from the Council’s notice of
       decision, as the appellant has confirmed agreement for it to be changed.
3.     The National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was revised on 17
       August 2026. Both main parties have been given the opportunity to comment on
       how the changes affect their respective cases, and the responses received have
       been taken into account in my decision.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are:
       • the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of the
         buildings at the appeal site and the immediate area;
       • whether there is an unjustified loss of a community use;
       • the effect of the proposal on creating, or maintaining, a mixed and balanced
         community, having regard to the effects of the concentration of uses and the
         policies in the development plan; and,
       • the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of neighbouring
         occupiers, with particular regard to privacy.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010376


Reasons
Character and appearance
5.     The appeal site comprises an ‘L’ shaped main building (the subject of the
       proposed conversion to student accommodation) and a rectangular shaped
       building (proposed to be used as office and stores without extension or alteration)
       situated behind other properties. There are no objections raised by the Council to
       the re-use of the rectangular shaped building in terms of its effect on the character
       and appearance of the area, and I see no reason to disagree. My reasoning on
       this main issue is therefore focused on the ‘L’ shaped building only.
6.     That building features a long and altered part, immediately behind Our Lady of
       Lourdes and St Peter Chanel (Church) and includes a modern and nearly central
       first floor flat roof that is finished in render, which does not positively contribute to
       the character and appearance of the building or the immediate area, and is seen
       from nearby Scholars Drive to the western side. Along with a well-proportioned
       and wider two storey mainly brick part with a tiled hipped roof, which appears as a
       positive feature that is seen from within the appeal site, from surrounding
       properties and from Scholars Drive. The Marist Hall (outside of the appeal site) is
       located to the east of the altered part of the ‘L’ shaped building, between it and the
       rear sides of properties on nearby Falmouth Street.
7.     The appeal site is accessed between the Church and no’s 123-125 Cottingham
       Road, and has generous space to some of its sides, including to the western side
       (between it and Scholars Drive) and to the southern side between Falmouth Street
       and Scholars Drive. The immediate area contains a mixture of uses, but its
       predominantly residential in a variety of types, including flats, terraced, semi-
       detached and detached properties, mainly having pitched roofs and finished in
       brick. Given the narrow site entrance, the appeal site is not readily seen from
       Cottingham Road itself. I also saw that some of the hardstanding areas at the
       appeal site were being used for parking.
8.     The proposed first floor extension would significantly increase the scale and mass
       of what is an already unsympathetic flat roof addition to the building, creating an
       even more conspicuous and alien built form and exacerbating its unsympathetic
       appearance. This would be particularly noticeable given it would also have a
       higher eaves height than the existing pitched roof part, that it would be very close
       to. The additional areas of render, alongside what appear to be larger vertical
       openings at first floor level to those at ground floor level, would also add to this
       identified harm.
9.     As extended it would also leave little space between it and the Church and
       introduce a jarring inter-relationship between the two buildings. This proposed
       addition would clearly be seen from close -up views in front of the building on the
       western side, and from Scholars Drive, where it would appear as a significantly
       discordant feature and harm the character and appearance of the immediate area.
       Furthermore, the modern part of the building along its longer side facing into the
       appeal site at present, has some degree of symmetry and balance in respect of
       having a first-floor addition to either side of the central door along with the position
       of columns. However, the proposal would not respect that symmetry, and it would
       create an illegible form of development that would appear as a top-heavy addition



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010376


       to the building, further harming the character and appearance of the building and
       the immediate area.
10. The proposed dormer roof extensions at second floor level on the southern side
    are off-set from the centre of that part of the building and to one side of the roof
    slope, which would create a harmful contrast with the well-portioned and mainly
    symmetrical form of the building, including its fenestration. The resultant
    appearance of these high-level additions would be incongruous when seen in the
    context of the existing building from both within and outside of the appeal site and
    would harm the character and appearance of the immediate area. The proposed
    dormer extensions to the western side are positioned in the middle of that roof
    slope, however, the flat roofed middle dormer is significantly at odds with the
    hipped dormers to either side and would not create a harmonious relationship on
    that part of the building.
11. The proposed bricking up of openings on the western side would ensure the
    soldier courses above were retained, and there are not considered to be
    unacceptable effects from this on the character and appearance of the building
    and the immediate area, although this is a neutral factor that does not outweigh
    the above identified harm. It is acknowledged that the proposed development is
    said to have been an amended scheme with a reduced scale. Nevertheless, that
    does not alter my findings in this case, and whether some parts of the appeal site
    may not be prominent in the immediate area, this is not a reason to justify the poor
    design quality of the proposed development.
12. Part of the access into the appeal site from Cottingham Road is within the
    Newland Conservation Area (the CA). Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed
    Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act) requires when determining
    proposals in conservation areas that special attention shall be paid to the
    desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of that area.
    Policy HE4 of the Framework says heritage assets are an irreplaceable resource
    and should be conserved in a manner appropriate to their significance. Policy HE9
    adds that development within or affecting the significance of conservation areas
    should where possible retain and conserve buildings that make a positive
    contribution to the character and appearance of the conservation area and
    consider the area’s architectural or historic interest.
13. In this case, the gap between the buildings at the entrance to the site is narrow,
    and the buildings the subject of this appeal are not readily seen behind other
    buildings from within the CA. Even considering the scale of the alterations and
    extensions, I am content that due to the limited viewpoints from within the CA
    itself, there would not be harmful effects to the CA or its setting. As a result, and
    notwithstanding my above findings, I am content the proposed development would
    preserve the CA, consistent with the duty in the Act.
14. The Council has referred to no’s 123-125 Cottingham Road as being locally listed,
    which in the language of the Framework constitutes a non-designated heritage
    asset (NDHA). Policy HE7 of the Framework says where a development proposal
    would harm the significance of a non-designated heritage asset, this should be
    weighed against the benefits of the proposal and a balanced judgement made,
    having regard to the scale of any harm or loss and the significance of the non-
    designated heritage asset. The NDHA is a well-proportioned three storey property
    to one side of the access to the appeal site, it has buff coloured brick along with

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010376


       front projecting bays and has detailing on its window surrounds and eaves. Its front
       elevation is its most grander and significant side, and it is seen in both directions
       along Cottingham Road. The proposed development is not directly behind it, and
       views of them together would be limited and mostly be of the rear side of the
       NDHA, as such the proposed development would not be harmful to the character
       and appearance of the NDHA.
15. In view of the above, I conclude that the proposed development would be harmful
    to the character and appearance of one of the buildings at the appeal site and to
    the immediate area, and there would be conflict with Policy 14 of the Hull Local
    Plan 2016-2032, adopted November 2017 (HLP), insofar as it requires
    development to deliver a high-quality environment, including through its character,
    detailing, materials and scale, and its relationship with the surrounding built form.
    In addition, the proposed development would not comply with Policy DP3 (1) of the
    Framework in terms of it requiring new development to respond to their context
    (the history, character and features of their site and its setting), so that they
    integrate with and enhance their surroundings; such as through, the use of
    materials and architectural features.
Whether there is an unjustified loss of a community use
16. There is no dispute between the main parties that the buildings at the appeal site
    were previously used as a school, although there is some variance on the date the
    school closed, (said to be between 1988 and 2007) and the appeal site is said to
    have been either vacant or under-utilised since.
17. The appellant is understood to have acquired the property in 2020, said to
    previously have been owned by the Community Development Company Limited.
    There is disagreement between the main parties as to whether the buildings were
    used for community uses between 2007 and the appellant’s purchase of it, with the
    Council stating it was used by various community and voluntary groups.
18. It is understood that the main building is laid out as offices along with an events
    area, and to have been used for a variety of individual occupiers and small
    businesses, including as a local MP’s offices, by Plus Resources Ltd, and by the
    Stroke Active Group. The Council has listed a range of other uses it is said to have
    accommodated, including a dance studio, photography studio, physiotherapy
    studio, conference room and offices.
19. Whilst the appellant has said that the buildings at the appeal site have been used
    continuously for over 10 years for non-community uses, there is insufficient
    evidence before me to demonstrate a continuous uninterrupted use for non-
    community uses for the entire buildings at the appeal site, so I am unable to attach
    weight to that argument. Consequently without that evidence, and in the absence
    of any certificate of lawfulness or grant of express planning permission to change
    the use of the subject buildings since they were operated as a school, I must
    assess them as still having that use, which would now be Use Class F1 (a) for the
    provision of education of The Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order
    1987 (as amended) (The Order), to which there are no current permanent
    permitted changes of use without express planning permission.
20. In relation to the planning history at the appeal site, I have been made aware that
    a planning obligation was entered into in 2006 by the then owners of the appeal
    site and the Council when planning permission was granted for residential

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010376


       development to the western side of the appeal site, which required an on-site
       Multi-Use Games Area (MUGA) along with the community use of the buildings the
       subject of this appeal. That agreement was subsequently modified, partly to
       include a new owner, and to replace with the MUGA requirement with an off-site
       contribution and altered obligations that required a scheme to provide a community
       use of the buildings in question. Clause 3.6 of the initial obligation, which was still
       in effect, said the council will, after the obligations have been fulfilled, provide
       written confirmation and cancel all relevant entries in the Register of Local Land
       Charges.
21. Despite the Council now not being able to confirm that the obligations were fully
    discharged, both parties agree that it did in 2015 confirm that those land charges
    were removed, and the appellant bought the site without these obligations.
    Consequently, it appears to me that the obligations relating to community uses at
    the appeal site, no longer have effect, although I am not certain that they or any
    ensuing uses they may have created have lawfully changed the use of the appeal
    site from that of Use Class F1 of The Order.
22. HLP Policy 13 says development that would involve the loss of significant
    community facilities will not be supported unless it can be demonstrated that a) the
    site is no longer needed for community use, or the loss would not create or add to
    a shortfall in the provision of such uses within its locality; b) the land or buildings in
    question are no longer suitable to accommodate the current use, and cannot be
    retained or adapted to accommodate other community facilities; c) the community
    use is to be incorporated or replaced within a new development or redevelopment
    of the site; or d) existing nearby community uses can be improved to
    accommodate the loss, or suitable alternative facilities are provided close by. The
    supporting text to HLP Policy 13 states social and community facilities include
    schools. Against this background of local planning policy and supporting text, I am
    content that the school use of the appeal site, relates to a community use pursuant
    to HLP Policy 13.
23. My interpretation is that complying with any of the 4 no. criteria outlined above
    would satisfy HLP Policy 13. There is no definition within the policy of what
    constitutes “significant community facilities”. The buildings are large (said to be
    some 1,400 square metres in size) and if they were fully used for community uses,
    it is not inconceivable that their use would be significant at least in the local area. It
    is also noted that the buildings are not currently used as a community facility, but
    HLP Policy 13 does not say that they have to be.
24. In support of the appeal, the appellant’s Community Needs Statement says there
    is no demand for community uses at the appeal site. However, this is not
    supported with evidence of the marketing, offers or bids for the appeal property
    when it was available for purchase, so the actual interest from prospective
    community users is not known for certain. Moreover, as a rental proposition, it is
    unclear on what terms it has been offered and marketed for prospective
    community users. Whilst the policy does not explicitly require marketing, the onus
    is firmly on the appellant to produce evidence of a lack of demand, and no such
    evidence has properly demonstrated this.
25. The list of community uses said to be available nearby (including some adjoining
    the appeal site) are acknowledged. The details do not however, identify the
    particular range of community provision that they provide, their available times, nor

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010376


       do they confirm with any certainty that they fulfil the demand for such services or
       whether there is indeed a lack of demand for them. As such I cannot conclude
       from that information that the community need would be met from them without
       further and detailed information.
26. Whilst the buildings may need maintenance works, the appellant’s comments
    about how the condition and size of the buildings would make them undesirable for
    community uses are individual opinions, without adequate justification. The appeal
    site sits alongside a range of different community uses, and in an established
    urban context, it is not unreasonable to anticipate that there could be demand for
    such premises, particularly with it being within a well-connected area with parking
    provision. The maintenance costs could also be the subject of any rental terms, if
    appropriate. Nor has there been any compelling evidence provided of why it would
    be unviable to find a community user for these buildings. This information
    submitted has not demonstrated satisfactory compliance with any of the criteria
    cited above within HLP Policy 13 regarding the loss of community uses,
    accordingly the proposed development conflicts with that policy.
27. Notwithstanding the conflict with HLP Policy 13, Policy HC6 of the Framework
    says development proposals should not result in the loss of key community
    facilities and public service infrastructure unless it can be demonstrated that either
    there is no reasonable prospect of the use being retained, due to there being
    insufficient community support or because it is no longer viable or feasible to
    operate; the loss would be replaced by equivalent or better provision; or the
    decision-maker is satisfied that there is sufficient alternative provision in the local
    area. It adds that for the purpose of this policy, key community facilities and public
    service infrastructure means established services that are used (or which have
    been used) on a frequent basis in a local area such as local shops, public houses,
    places of worship, local health facilities, community halls and cultural venues.
28. In addition, the Glossary within Annex B of the Framework defines community
    facilities as “meeting places, public houses, places of worship, cultural venues,
    youth centres, allotments, cemeteries and burial grounds, and facilities for play,
    sport and informal recreation.” There is no mention of schools within Policy HC6 or
    within the definition of community facilities, consequently the existing use at the
    appeal site would not be regarded as a community use for the purpose of the
    Framework. Furthermore, paragraph 2 of Annex A para 2 of the Framework states
    development plan policies (or parts of those policies) which are materially
    inconsistent with national decision-making policies in the Framework, such as HLP
    Policy 13 in this case regarding a school as a community use, should be given
    very limited weight. The loss of the school use would therefore not be
    objectionable in terms of relevant policies of the Framework.
29. I therefore conclude that the proposed development conflicts with HLP Policy 13 in
    terms of the unjustified loss of the school use, which it regards as a social and
    community facility. However, the loss of the school use would not be in conflict
    with Policy HC6 of the Framework, which post-dates the HLP and is a significant
    material planning consideration, that would outweigh the conflict with HLP
    Policy 13 and mean the loss of the use was acceptable in this case.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6010376


Creating, or maintaining, a mixed and balanced community, and relevant development
plan requirements
30. The proposed development seeks permission for student accommodation totalling
    37 no. bedrooms. There is no use class within The Order that directly applies to
    student accommodation, which is often referred to as ‘purpose-built student
    accommodation’ (PBSA), it is therefore a ‘sui generis’ use. The site is said by both
    main parties to be outside of the Student Quarter as designated in the HLP, but
    close to it, which is said to cover parts of Cottingham Road. HLP Policy 13 is
    generally supportive of student accommodation within the designated University
    Quarter, and the upgrading of accommodation in adjoining areas. Whilst the
    proposed development of new accommodation in adjoining areas to the University
    Quarter is not explicitly supported by HLP Policy 13, the policy does not seek to
    resist student accommodation outside of the University Quarter. Also relevant, is
    HLP Policy 14 that more broadly seeks a high-quality environment for new
    development.
31. The Council says the accommodation is arranged like that of a large House in
    Multiple Occupancy (HMO) and has similar aspects of intensive and short-term
    occupancy, with individual en-suite study rooms and shared kitchen and laundry
    facilities. The proposed accommodation would be across three floors, and
    although there would be separate entrances, the layout indicates all
    accommodation would be accessible internally from either entrance, and there is
    no indication of it comprising smaller units or flats. As a result, the Council say it
    would be subject to mandatory licensing as an HMO, and HLP Policy 7 applies.
32. HLP Policy 7 says the conversion of a property into a house in multiple occupation
    (HMO) will not be allowed if it would: a) result in a concentration of similar uses
    adversely affecting local amenity and the character of the area; b)introduce a
    potential source of noise and disturbance greater than that normally associated
    with a dwelling to the detriment of neighbouring residential amenity, which could
    not be mitigated by careful planning of room layout and the use of sound
    insulation; or c) create unacceptable parking problems to the detriment of local
    amenity. Furthermore, as the appeal site is within an area that has an Article 4
    Direction, that prevents the creation of small HMOs, Policy 7 requires the
    concentration of HMOs and flats to not exceeds 50% in a specific street, with the
    exception of streets within the University Quarter.
33. The Council has referred to its SPD20: Houses in Multiple Occupation (HMOs)
    Supplementary Planning Document, adopted September 2022 (SPD), which aims
    to provide guidance for new HMOs and whilst it accepts that they provide a
    valuable supply of housing, it also says they can, particularly in high
    concentrations cause excessive noise and disturbance and general anti-social
    behaviour. It says the 50% threshold within Policy 7 is too high and it will be
    reduced in the new local plan, although no details of emerging policy have been
    provided. The SPD is not the development plan and its particular requirements for
    new HMOs goes beyond those set out in Policy 7, as such I attach limited weight
    to it in my decision.
34. Whilst the appellants did initially suggest the accommodation was partly
    comparable to HMO accommodation; it has since been argued that it is not an
    HMO. Policies 7 and 13 do not provide a definition of student accommodation or
    an HMO for the purposes of applying these policies.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6010376


35. What constitutes an HMO is clearly defined in statute within The Order; Use Class
    C4 which relates to houses in multiple occupation and covers use as such by not
    more than six residents. HMOs with more than six residents fall outside of any
    defined use class and are a sui generis use. The Interpretation section of Class
    C4 in the Use Classes Order states that a house in multiple occupation does not
    include a converted block of flats to which Section 257 of the Housing Act 2004
    (the Housing Act) applies but otherwise has the same meaning as Section 254 of
    that Act. It is not unreasonable to conclude that the definition in Section 254 of the
    Housing Act would also include sui generis HMOs.
36. Section 254 of the Housing Act sets out tests for determining whether a building,
    or part of a building, is an HMO. Section 254(2) relates to “the standard test”,
    which states that a part of a building meets the test if: it consists of one or more
    units of living accommodation not consisting of a self-contained flat or flats; the
    living accommodation is occupied by persons who do not form a single household;
    the accommodation is occupied by those persons as their only or main residence
    or are treated as so occupying it; their occupation of the living accommodation
    constitutes the only use of that accommodation; rents are payable in respect of at
    least one of those persons occupation of the accommodation; and two or more of
    the households who occupy the living accommodation share one or more basic
    amenities.
37. Section 254(4) sets out “the converted building test”, which requires: it is a
    converted building; it contains one or more units of living accommodation that do
    not consist of a self-contained flat or flats (whether or not it also contains any such
    flat or flats); the living accommodation is occupied by persons who do not form a
    single household; the living accommodation is occupied by those persons as their
    only or main residence or they are to be treated as so occupying it; their
    occupation of the living accommodation constitutes the only use of that
    accommodation; and rents are payable or other consideration is to be provided in
    respect of at least one of those persons' occupation of the living accommodation.
38. Schedule 14 of the Housing Act defines buildings which are not to be considered
    as HMOs for the purposes of the Housing Act. This definition includes buildings
    occupied by persons undertaking full time further or higher education at an
    educational establishment, provided that the building is managed or controlled by
    an educational establishment. It is accepted that the proposed development would
    not be managed or controlled by an educational establishment.
39. The appellant has not provided any compelling or substantiated evidence which
    would show that the proposed development would be outside the scope of the
    HMO licensing requirements. The Council’s Environmental Health team have
    stated that, due to the nature of the resulting development, an HMO licence would
    be required. Against this legislative background, and in the absence of any
    persuasive evidence to the contrary, it is not unreasonable to assume that the
    Council’s officers, who regularly deal with such matters, are correct on this point.
40. In the above context, and based on the drawings and other information provided, I
    consider it more than likely that the proposed accommodation would meet both the
    standard test in Section 254(2) and the converted building test in Section 254 (4)
    of the Housing Act. As such it would be licensable as an HMO, and HLP Policy 7
    is a relevant consideration. However, whether it is licensable as a HMO is not
    necessarily binding in terms of its planning use as PBSA.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6010376


41. Regarding the concentration of HMOs, the Council said Cottingham Road was 1.5
    miles long and it produced no evidence to show on the whole street basis that
    there would be conflict with the 50% threshold contained within Policy 7. Instead,
    the Council undertook calculations only of areas within the Article 4 designation,
    both with and without properties within the University Quarter included. These
    demonstrated that even including the proposed development, the concentration
    would not be above 43%. The Council also calculated the percentage over a
    smaller area, between Falmouth Street and Scholars Drive (only 17 no.
    properties), which would give a 47% concentration (including flats and HMOs), but
    it would be a 52.9% concentration when the proposed development was included.
42. However, the Council’s calculations and methodology are not those required by
    Policy 7, which relates to the entire street, there is also no distinction for long or
    short streets, or any requirement to exclude parts of the streets for whatever
    reason. As such, there is no evidence before me that the proposed development
    would breach the 50% threshold along the entire street (Cottingham Road), and on
    this basis I cannot find conflict with this part of Policy 7 and there is no substantive
    evidence, including my own site observations, that it would unbalance the mix of
    the community, or lead to an over-concentration of similar uses.
       Other HLP Policy 7 considerations
43. The immediate area was busy with a range of uses, including commercial and
    community uses, along with student accommodation and flats, and there was a
    constant flow of traffic along the road.
44. Policy DP3 criterion f. of the Framework, states public spaces should be safe,
    secure, and accessible. Furthermore, Policy P5 which states malicious threats and
    other hazards should be anticipated, which includes potential safety risks and the
    fear of crime, including for women and girls, and that proportionate mitigation in
    response to such risks should be considered. Finally, amongst other things, Policy
    HO9 of the Framework requires PBSA to be supported by a management plan.
45. The buildings already can be used in accordance with Use Class F1 (a). Whether
    or not the existing car park use of the appeal site is lawful, given the arrangement,
    boundary treatment and separation to adjoining properties, I am content it would
    not have harmful noise and disturbance effects, even taking into account that
    some of the adjoining properties are located on quieter roads away from
    Cottingham Road. Similarly, the movements to and from the buildings at the
    appeal site should be considered alongside its lawful use, where a degree of noise
    and disturbance could reasonably be expected. In addition, the Council’s
    Designing out Crime Officer (DOCO) has not raised objections to the proposed
    development, including in respect of noise and disturbance, indeed in their
    response they said that students can be a vulnerable group themselves, that can
    be victims of crime.
46. Subject to the proposed development being restricted to students of the University,
    and the condition suggested by the appellant regarding a management plan for the
    proposed accommodation, which amongst other things could address staffing,
    visitor controls, quiet hours, complaints, refuse management and use of external
    areas, I am not persuaded that the concentration of the proposed additional 37 no.
    room student accommodation alongside other HMOs and flats would cause



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6010376


       unacceptable noise and disturbance or harm the balance and mix of the
       community.
47. In terms of the other requirements of HLP Policy 7, no harm has been found above
    in regard to the effect of the proposed use itself on the character of the area.
    Subject to conditions, the Council did not identify any unacceptable highway
    impacts, and I see no reason to disagree.
48. I therefore conclude that the proposed development would be consistent with the
    objective of creating, or maintaining, a mixed and balanced community, having
    regard to HLP policies 7, 13, and 14, and satisfy their relevant requirements, which
    are set out above. In addition, the proposed development would accord with the
    relevant parts of Framework policies DM3, P5, and HO9, as outlined above.
Living conditions – neighbouring occupiers
49. The Council identified harm regarding privacy effects arising from the proposed
    first floor and second floor dormer windows in regard to the nearest properties on
    Scholars Drive (no’s 8-11) whose rear elevations abut the appeal site. No other
    unacceptable privacy effects were identified by the Council, and on the basis of the
    evidence before me and my own site observations, I see no reason to disagree.
50. Within this urban context behind other properties, the rear sides of existing
    properties already face onto the appeal site, with many nearby properties already
    having a back-to-back relationship where there is inevitably some degree of
    mutual overlooking. There are already large first floor windows on the side of the
    building in question that face towards the rear side of no. 8. I saw on my site
    inspection that no’s 8-11 are located on higher ground than the appeal site, and
    they all had boundary fences that enclosed their rear gardens from the appeal site.
    Immediately adjoining their rear boundaries with the appeal site is hardstanding,
    understood to be currently used for parking. At its closest the building in question
    is some 5.3 metres or so to the nearest rear boundary of those properties on
    Scholars Drive.
51. The proposed development includes 3 no. dormer roof windows on both the
    southern and western side of the pitched roof building; along with use of the
    existing first floor windows below them, and new first floor windows on the western
    side. These windows would serve bedrooms.
52. The submitted plans show that there would be a minimum 23.8 metre separation
    distance between the closest windows on the western side of the building and the
    rear sides of the nearest properties. The proposed dormer roof windows would be
    set within the roof space and farther back than the windows on the elevations
    themselves. In addition, the 3 no. proposed dormer windows on the southern side
    would be positioned on the side of the roof farthest from no’s 8-11 Scholars Drive,
    and they would not directly face them, only part of the end of their long rear
    gardens. Taking into account the separation distances, positions of those
    properties on Scholars Drive, the surrounding built context, and the intervening
    space between the building and their boundaries, there would not be unacceptable
    privacy effects arising, even from those windows at second floor level.
53. Apart from noise and disturbance issues, which could be the subject of a
    management plan condition (as set out above), no other harm was identified by
    the Council in regard to the effects of the proposed development on neighbouring

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
Appeal Decision 6010376


       occupiers, including whether it would be over-dominant; any increased sense of
       enclosure; overshadowing; loss of light; outlook; privacy effects, or the location of
       bin and recycling areas in relation to neighbouring properties. From my own site
       observations, and taking into account the separation distances, and arrangement
       of surrounding buildings and uses, I see no reason to disagree.
54. I therefore conclude that neighbouring occupiers would have satisfactory living
    conditions and the proposed development would comply with HLP Policy 14 that
    requires a high-quality environment, including through the layout of development
    and its relationship with the surrounding built form. The proposed development
    would also be consistent with Policy L2 of the Framework insofar as it requires
    acceptable living conditions for residents and neighbours in terms of privacy from
    redevelopment by creating additional floorspace.
Other Matters
55. Although I have limited information before me, local residents who have objected
    to the application have brought to my attention how the development at the appeal
    property could affect the health of neighbouring occupiers and users of nearby
    premises, including an occupier said to be susceptible to dust; an occupier
    recovering from a heart operation; an occupier’s ability to use their rear garden for
    physiotherapy; elderly and vulnerable persons attending church services in the
    adjoining premises; and the effects on occupiers of a neighbouring property which
    is said to accommodate vulnerable young people with complex mental health
    needs that need to be kept safe and can be susceptible to sensory overloads.
    Based on the information before me, this indicates they have a protected
    characteristic.
56. In light of this, I have had due regard to the Public Sector Equality Duty (PSED)
    contained in the Equality Act 2010, which sets out the need to eliminate unlawful
    discrimination, harassment and victimisation, and to advance equality of
    opportunity and foster good relations between people who share a protected
    characteristic and people who do not share it. In reaching my decision, I have kept
    these interests at the forefront of my mind. However, they are qualified rights and
    interference may be justified when in the public interest. The concept of
    proportionality is key. Any such impacts would weigh against the proposal in these
    respects.
57. The Council has not raised objection to the proposed development in terms of its
    effect on highway safety and parking provision, and the development of the appeal
    site behind the adjoining Church should not, subject to some possible temporary
    construction disruption, affect users of the Church gaining access to attend
    services. Where they park or how they travel to the Church is a separate matter to
    the planning merits of this proposed development. In the event the appeal were to
    be allowed a construction management condition could be imposed that could
    minimise noise, disturbance, hours of work, dust, construction parking and the
    storage of materials, to minimise the effects on the living conditions of
    neighbouring occupiers as reasonably as possible. I am also mindful that there is
    other environmental legislation to control noise complaints, separate from the
    planning system.
58. In my decision above, I found the effects of the proposed development would not
    be harmful to the living conditions of nearby occupiers, in terms of noise and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   11
Appeal Decision 6010376


       disturbance, and privacy. I am also not convinced that the proposed development
       would prevent neighbouring occupiers from using their garden for physiotherapy
       purposes or create unacceptable privacy issues due to the separation distances.
       The DOCO did not raise objections in respect of anti-social behaviour or noise and
       disturbance issues, and in any event a management plan condition would likely
       address any such issues. Furthermore, I have no substantive evidence that the
       proposed development would unacceptably add to the noise and activity in this
       area, or make it unsafe, or harm the quality of life for neighbouring occupiers,
       including vulnerable persons.
59. Having regard to the legitimate and well-established planning policy aims in
    respect of providing residential accommodation, making an effective use of land
    and buildings in well-connected areas, and ensuring satisfactory living conditions,
    a refusal of permission based on the issues that have been raised would not be
    proportionate and necessary or consistent with my PSED duty contained in
    Section 149 of the Equality Act 2010.
60. The Council has advised that its 2025 housing needs information showed it had
    3.16 years of deliverable housing supply, which is below the 5 years supply
    required by Framework Policy HO3. Whilst this weighs in favour of the scheme,
    there is no evidence of a need for PBSA in this area (outside of the University)
    Quarter, which policies HO7, and HO9 of the Framework require to be
    demonstrated. Moreover, the University itself has also stated that this proposed
    accommodation is not required and there is already more than enough student
    accommodation, which takes into account their current and projected student
    numbers. Even though the appellant has said the proposal could free other
    dwellings for family occupation, this is not certain, particularly noting the lack of
    identified need for the proposed development. In view of this, I attach only modest
    weight to this point as I am not certain it would address an unmet need for PBSA.
61. The appellant has said that the proposed development would not be unacceptable
    in flood risk and drainage terms; not be harmful to highway safety; that it would be
    more energy efficient; and subject to a condition have no harmful effects on living
    conditions. Nevertheless, these are likely to be requirements of the development
    plan and are neutral matters that neither weigh in favour or against the proposed
    development.
62. The appellant has also referred to parts of the development plan said to support
    the proposed development. However, the development plan must be read as a
    whole, and compliance with part of it does not mean that the proposed
    development would accord with it as a whole.
63. In addition, in support of the proposed development the appellant has also stated
    that it would ensure the buildings are occupied and maintained, along with
    improved permeable surfaces and that there would be increased employment, and
    support for local services, shops, and facilities during construction and operational
    phases of the development. These points are noted but even taking them together
    and considering the scale of the proposed development, the arguments raised in
    favour attract modest weight and are not outweighed by the identified harm and
    conflict with the development plan.
64. I note the petition objecting to the proposed development with 332 no. signatures
    and I have also had regard to objections from local residents and others received


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   12
Appeal Decision 6010376


       in addition to the issues above, including but not limited to, its effect on property
       prices and possible property damage; flood risk and drainage; the Council’s
       publicity of the application; the effect on the operation of the nearby community
       uses; wildlife impacts; pressure on local services; refuse provision; and highway
       safety. I note the Council did not find harm in respect of these matters, subject to
       conditions, as appropriate, and there is no compelling evidence before me that
       would lead me to come to a different conclusion to the Council on these matters. I
       am content that the Council publicised the application correctly. It is also unclear
       exactly how, if at all, the proposed development would affect the value of nearby
       properties or how such property could be damaged, as such I have not been able
       to attach any weight to those points. In addition, I am not convinced that the
       nearby community uses could not satisfactorily co-exist with the proposed
       development.
Conclusion
65. Although the proposed development would conflict with HLP Policy 13 in terms of
    the loss of a community use, this conflict would be outweighed by the Framework
    as set out above. There would also be no harmful effects on the living conditions of
    neighbouring occupiers, and the proposed development would ensure a suitably
    balanced and mixed community. However, it would be harmful to the character
    and appearance of one of the buildings at the appeal site and the immediate area.
    In view of the above findings, the proposal conflicts with HLP Policy 14 which I
    consider to be consistent with the Framework. As a result, I find there to be conflict
    with the development plan taken as a whole.
66. The Framework is an important material consideration, Policy DP3 b. supports
    materials which conserve energy and other resources, and which minimise risks
    from the impacts of climate change. Framework Policy CC2 promotes design
    approaches which conserve energy and says substantial weight should be given to
    the benefits of improving the energy efficiency of existing buildings, such as are
    proposed in this case. In addition, Policy CC3 of the Framework, advises that
    substantial weight should be given to the sustainable drainage and flood resilience
    measures. These factors weigh in favour of the proposed development, although it
    is noted that these benefits could likely apply to a more appropriately designed re-
    use of the appeal site.
67. Policy L2 of the Framework says amongst other things, substantial weight should
    be given to the benefits of making a better use of vacant and underutilised land
    and buildings, and also by creating floorspace within the airspace above buildings,
    both of which would apply in this case. However, in terms of using the air space,
    the policy also states that the development must be consistent with the overall
    streetscene and not harm the character of a building and its surroundings, which in
    view of the identified harm to the character and appearance of the area,
    significantly limits the weight afforded to that part of the policy in this case. In
    addition, Policy L3 of the Framework requires development to make an efficient
    use of land, but similarly it adds that the proposed development should be
    considered alongside any conflict with other policies in the Framework, such as the
    effect on the character of an area.
68. Notwithstanding the Council’s unmet housing position, as there is no demonstrated
    need for the PBSA in this location, I attach only modest weight to its provision, and
    not the substantial weight as advocated within Policy HO7 which relates to the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   13
Appeal Decision 6010376


       benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced
       accommodation needs of the community. For the same reason, the proposed
       development’s compliance with part of Policy HO9 of the Framework in regard to
       student accommodation carries limited weight.
69. In light of the harm identified on the main issue above, there would be conflict with
    Policy DP3 of the Framework insofar as it requires development proposals to
    respond to their context (the history, character, features of the site and its setting),
    so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings; such as through the
    use of materials and architectural features. Furthermore, section (2) of Policy DP3
    says where there is conflict with this part of the policy, without clear justification (as
    in this case) the development should be refused.
70. Policy S3 of the Framework has a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development, and Policy S4 says development within settlements should be
    approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any
    adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-making policies
    within the Framework. However, it further states that where there is conflict with
    one of the national decision-making policies which state that development
    proposals should be refused, this is likely to indicate the benefits are substantially
    outweighed by the adverse effects. The support for the proposed development
    including the substantial weights to be afforded as outlined above, along with the
    arguments made in support of the proposed development, even when taken
    together, are not considered to outweigh the conflict with Policy DP3 of the
    Framework related to the harm to the character and appearance of the area.
71. Accordingly, there are no other considerations, including the Framework and those
    points raised by the appellant, that indicate a decision should be made other than
    in accordance with the development plan. For these reasons, the appeal should be
    dismissed.



A Hunter
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   14
