Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by Richard Snow BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 10 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010557
15 Sextant Road, Leicester LE5 2JB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Dhami against the decision of Leicester City Council.
•    The application ref is 20251368.
•    The development proposed is 1 dwelling with associated landscaping, parking and fencing.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Application for costs
2.    An application for costs was made by Mr Dhami against Leicester City Council.
      This application is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.    The description of development differs between the application form and the
      decision notice. As I have no evidence that the appellant agreed to the amended
      wording, I have used the description set out in the application form.
4.    The council adopted the Leicester Local Plan (2020-2036) (the LP) on 9 June
      2026. The LP replaced the Leicester City Core Strategy (2014) and the saved
      policies of the Leicester Local Plan (2006) referred to in evidence. Both parties
      have had the opportunity to comment on the policies of the LP and their relevance
      to this appeal.
5.    On 17 August 2026 a new National Planning Policy Framework (‘the Framework’)
      was issued replacing the version of the Framework published in December 2024.
      The parties were invited to comment and the response received has been taken
      into account in the determination of the appeal.
Main Issues
6.    The main issues for this appeal are:
       • Whether future occupiers would be provided with adequate living conditions
         with particular regard to outlook, natural light and external private amenity
         space; and,
       • The effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010557


Reasons
Living conditions
7.    The proposal dwelling is a modest 1-bed bungalow. It is common ground that the
      internal floorspace accords with the Nationally Described Space Standards.
8.    The proposed bedroom includes a front-facing window, recessed within a covered
      area behind the front elevation of the dwelling designed to accommodate a parking
      space. It is likely that for the majority of the time that the room was occupied, a
      vehicle would be parked in front of this window, significantly reducing outlook and
      natural light for occupants. These effects would be compounded by the recessed
      nature of the window behind the walls and beneath the roof of the bungalow and
      would not be adequately compensated by the proposed pair of narrow, side facing
      obscure glazed windows, due to their close proximity to the proposed 2m high
      boundary fencing.
9.    The proposed living room window would front the retained hedgerow across the
      site frontage, at close proximity. The hedgerow falls outside of the ownership and
      therefore control of the appellant, and its maintenance to any given height could
      not therefore be assured. At the time of my site visit, the hedge was of a height
      significantly above that which would allow any views of the street from the living
      room window. This relationship would also limit natural light entering the living
      room. The limitations in outlook from, and natural light to, the living room window
      would fail to provide acceptable living conditions for occupiers.
10. Rooms to the rear of the proposed dwelling would be provided with windows fitted
    with obscure glazing. Whilst unproblematic for the bathroom, this glazing would
    prevent outlook from the main window of the kitchen, likely to be a well-used
    habitable room, and would consequently fail to provide acceptable living
    conditions. The glazing shown in the door within the side wall of the kitchen would
    not mitigate this lack of outlook due to its own close proximity to the proposed 2m
    high side boundary fence.
11. The appellant is concerned that the council did not commission a Daylight/Sunlight
    Assessment in assessing the proposal. Given the scale and nature of the proposal
    and the site characteristics, I am not persuaded of the need for such an
    assessment and find that overall, none of the main habitable rooms of the
    proposed dwelling would be provided with acceptable outlook, and that natural
    light to the front, south-facing windows would be unacceptably impeded as a
    consequence of the design and layout of the proposal described above.
12. The external site frontage would accommodate access to the front door, a parking
    space and a bin store. In practice, therefore, useable outdoor amenity space for
    future occupiers would be limited to the rear garden.
13. Due to the short separation distance between the host dwelling and the proposed
    bungalow, the proposed rear garden would be of shallow depth. Ground levels
    within the appeal site would be lowered and a boundary wall constructed to retain
    the higher ground of no 15’s rear garden. In combination, this retaining wall and
    the proposed 2m high boundary fence atop it, would result in a solid boundary
    structure of considerable height across the rear boundary of the appeal site
    relative to proposed ground levels. Given the shallow depth of the proposed


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010557


      garden, its enclosure by this dominant boundary screening would create an
      oppressive environment for occupiers.
14. Whilst the evidence of both parties refers to the council’s Residential Amenity
    Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) (2008), the SPD was not saved as part
    of the adoption of the LP. Accordingly, its guidance on garden sizes is no longer
    extant. Notwithstanding this, I find that the shallow depth of the rear garden and its
    proposed enclosure mean that the proposal would fail to provide acceptable
    external amenity space for occupiers.
15. Taking all of the above into account, the proposal would not provide acceptable
    living conditions for future occupiers due, in combination, to the poor outlook and
    natural light available internally, and the cramped nature of the external amenity
    space enclosed by oppressive and overbearing boundary treatment. Accordingly,
    the proposal conflicts with Policies DQP05 and DQP06 of the LP which collectively
    seek to ensure occupiers of new development are provided with appropriate living
    conditions, including in relation to light and outlook.
Character and appearance
16. The proposed dwelling would be sited within the rear garden of 15 Sextant Road
    and would address Thurncourt Road. The Thurncourt Road street scene is
    primarily formed of single storey properties although two storey houses are evident
    further to the south-east. To the immediate east of the appeal site, a terrace of 3
    bungalows fronts the street. To the west, the rear elevations and roofs of nos 9
    and 11 Sextant Road are visible above the roadside hedging. Opposite the site is
    a small crescent of bungalows formed around a central cul de sac in an
    arrangement repeated along the south-western side of the road.
17. The proposal would introduce a single storey property in general alignment with
    the existing bungalows alongside. It would feature a centrally projecting pitched-
    roofed porch, flanked by main ground floor windows. Each external elevation of the
    property would include vertical trellis green walls. The front-facing roof plane is
    shown to accommodate solar panels. The site frontage would be hard surfaced.
18. The proposed dwelling would display many of the design characteristics of nearby
    properties and would be of similar scale. In following the alignment of the adjacent
    bungalows, it would appropriately address the street and whilst closer to the road
    than those properties, the alignment of dwellings along the street varies and the
    proposed bungalow would not appear incongruous or unduly dominant in the
    street scene as a result.
19. The council considers that the size and massing of the proposal would be out of
    character with its surroundings. However, the proportions and height of the
    proposal would be generally reflective of other bungalows along the street scene
    and its width and proximity to site boundaries would be similar. The inclusion of
    design features differing from those of the terrace of 3 bungalows adjacent would
    add interest to the elevation and the failure to mimic the appearance of those
    properties would not cause unacceptable harm to the street scene. The council
    raises concern that the hard-surfaced nature of the frontage would render the
    property more prominent. I noted on my site visit that several properties in the
    vicinity of the appeal site similarly present hard surfaced frontages to the street. I
    am not persuaded that the treatment of the proposed frontage would therefore
    cause unacceptable harm to the character of the area.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010557


20. The retention of the boundary hedge across the frontage of the site cannot be
    assured for the reasons already addressed. However, given that the proposal
    would assimilate acceptably within the street scene, even if the hedge were
    removed, the proposal would not cause detriment to the character of the appeal
    site or its surroundings.
21. For the above reasons, the proposed dwelling would be generally reflective of the
    positioning, size, design and massing of existing properties in the vicinity and
    would accordingly appropriately reflect the character and appearance of the area.
    In this regard, it would meet the requirements of Policies DQP01 and DQP05 of
    the LP which, amongst other things, require new development to be appropriate in
    the context and character of its surroundings.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
22. I have found that the proposal conflicts with Policies DQP05 and DQP06 of the LP.
    These policies are consistent with the Framework in so far as it seeks well-
    designed places which provide appropriate living conditions for future occupiers.
    Therefore, the conflict with these policies should be given significant weight in this
    appeal.
23. Policy S3 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. For development within settlements, including new housing, this
    means that Policy S4 of the Framework should be applied. Policy S4 sets out that
    development proposals should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would
    be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework.
24. Policy L2 of the Framework advises that substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits where a development proposal would create additional homes within
    settlements, including additional units within residential curtilages. However, this
    support is contingent on development providing acceptable living standards for
    residents in terms of access to daylight, sunlight and external amenity space. For
    the reasons above, the proposal would fail to achieve acceptable living standards
    for future occupiers and therefore the proposal conflicts with Policy L2.
25. Taking account of all of the above, I find that the benefits of the proposal would be
    substantially outweighed by its adverse effects when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies of the Framework. As such, Policy S4 of the
    Framework does not point to permission being granted in this instance.
26. In the final balance, the proposal does not accord with the development plan as a
    whole and there are no other considerations that indicate I should take a decision
    other than in accordance with it. Accordingly, the appeal should be dismissed.



Richard Snow
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
