Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 27 July 2026
by P Eggleton BSc(Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010851
12 Belfairs Drive, Chadwell Heath, Romford RM6 4EB
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Anumi Properties Ltd against the decision of the London Borough of
    Redbridge Council.
•   The application reference is 3433/25.
•   The development proposed is a change of use from a dwellinghouse to a small house in multiple
    occupation for up to six people, along with provision of refuse/recycling to front garden area and
    bicycle storage facilities within the rear garden.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a change of use from
   a dwellinghouse to a small house in multiple occupation for up to six people, along
   with provision of refuse/recycling to front garden area and bicycle storage facilities
   within the rear garden at 12 Belfairs Drive, Chadwell Heath, Romford in accordance
   with the terms of the application, reference 3433/25, and the plans submitted with
   it, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: 283-01 to 09.
     3)       The development hereby permitted is a change of use to Use Class C4 and
              the occupancy shall be limited to a maximum of six residents, with the use of
              the four bedrooms shown on the plans only.
     4)       Notwithstanding the detail of the submitted Management Plan, prior to the
              commencement of the use, a revised Management Plan shall be submitted to
              and approved in writing by the local planning authority. This shall include
              management strategies and involvement in addressing anti-social behaviour,
              waste storage management and responsibilities; complaint record keeping;
              and off-street parking prevention measures. The approved Management Plan
              shall be implemented prior to the commencement of the use and shall be
              retained and operated for so long as the use continues.
     5)       Prior to the commencement of the use, secure and covered cycle storage
              provision for six bicycles, in general accordance with drawing 238-07, shall
              have been installed and shall be available for use at all times thereafter.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision: 6010851


Main Issue
2. The main issue is the effect on the housing mix with regard to the provision of
   family homes.
Reasons
3. This dwelling would originally have been a three-bedroom house with two larger
   bedrooms and a small bedroom. It has been extended to provide a further larger
   bedroom with en-suite bathroom within the roof space. The proposal would result in
   house in multiple occupation (HMO) for up to six persons using the four larger
   bedrooms. The smaller bedroom is shown as a store. The council’s concern relates
   to the loss of a family sized dwelling.
4. The Havering and Redbridge Local Housing Needs Assessment Update
   (November 2023) (SHMA) identifies that there is a need for all types of
   accommodation but over 68% of that need is for homes of three or more bedrooms.
   However, these figures do not calculate a need for this specific type of low-cost,
   HMO accommodation, although it is clear, that there is a requirement for one-
   bedroom units.
5. The council’s reason for refusal relates the overall mix of housing and to two
   policies in the Redbridge Local Plan 2018. Policy LP5 relates to housing mix on
   housing sites rather than changes of use such as this. It does not seek to prevent
   the creation of alternative household accommodation as it seeks a range of
   dwelling sizes and tenures, albeit focusing on the provision of larger family sized
   homes. This reflects the housing need figures of the SHMA. The proposal does not
   conflict with this policy but in so far as it is relevant, it can be considered to offer
   greater weight in favour of retaining larger dwellings over their use as HMO. Policy
   LP26 is a design policy that does not relate directly to preferences with regard to
   housing type or size.
6. Reference has been made to policies within the London Plan 2021 (LP). Policy
   H9D sets out that boroughs should take account of the role of HMO in meeting
   local and strategic housing needs. It advises that HMO are an important part of
   London’s housing offer, reducing pressure on other elements of the housing stock.
   The council recognise that the proposal would provide more housing options within
   the built-up area, in a location that offers good access to local services and facilities
   via sustainable transport options.
7. The Housing Design Supplementary Planning Document 2019 (SPD) provides
   criteria for assessing applications for HMO. It describes that the introduction of the
   Article 4 Direction, with regard to small HMO, would enable the council to manage
   them more effectively, particularly in relation to amenity, design, space standards
   and parking issues. It does not seek to prevent the provision of HMO on the basis
   of housing mix concerns other than whereby provision would exceed 20% of all
   properties along any road; or when there would be more than one HMO in a
   consecutive row of 5 units. The evidence with regard to the amount of similar
   accommodation in the locality is that there are two HMO in this street and a small
   number in surrounding streets. This represents a low percentage that is well below
   the maximum and they are positioned so as not to conflict with the SPD.
8. On the evidence provided, the proposal would not result in an overconcentration of
   HMO leading to an unacceptable mix of housing types within this particular area.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
Appeal Decision: 6010851


     On the basis of the development plan overall, there is support for all housing types,
     including HMO. The change to the housing mix would not be contrary to the
     policies of the development plan or the SPD.
Other matters
9. I am mindful of the representations received from local residents, particularly
   concerns with regard to the potential for anti-social behaviour by future tenants of
   the property. Concerns are described regarding the property’s current management
   and also regarding the nearby HMO at number 5. The proposal includes a
   Management Plan to address these concerns. I agree with the council that the
   Management Plan needs to be enhanced with regard to the requirements of the
   SPD including management strategies and involvement in addressing anti-social
   behaviour; waste storage management and responsibilities; complaint record
   keeping; and off-street parking prevention. A revised Management Plan can be
   required by condition. This should offer controls not currently available.
10. The use by up to six residents would be a more intensive use but would not be so
    different to that of a large family that it would result in unacceptable harm with
    regard to comings and goings and the impact on existing neighbouring living
    conditions.
11. Concerns have been raised with regard to waste and environmental health issues
    of other HMO including rubbish and food waste described as regularly left across
    pavements and gardens, bins overflowing, with rubbish blowing into neighbouring
    front gardens. The Management Plan should contain detailed strategies to tackle
    such issues.
12. With regard to parking pressure and access issues, this is a relatively accessible
    location, and it is not considered that the use would necessarily result in increased
    car usage compared to a large family use of the property. The provision of cycle
    storage would however need to be secured by condition to ensure alternative travel
    options would be available.
13. There will be no external changes to the appearance of the property, so the
    introduction of the proposed HMO would not be out of character. Despite the similar
    use of 5 and 28 Belfairs Drive, this proposal would not result in an over-
    concentration or undermine the balance of the community.
14. As it is accepted that the council are unable to demonstrate a five-year supply of
    housing land, the National Planning Policy Framework establishes that permission
    should be granted unless, in this case, any adverse impacts of doing so would
    significantly and demonstrably outweigh the benefits, when assessed against the
    policies in the Framework taken as a whole, having particular regard to key policies
    for directing development to sustainable locations, making effective use of land,
    securing well-designed places and providing affordable homes, individually or in
    combination.
15. The proposal would result in an effective residential use of the property which lies
    in a relatively sustainable location. It would also provide more affordable
    accommodation, of a good standard, which would be suited to a number of
    accommodation seekers. Even accepting a greater need for larger housing
    compared to HMO accommodation, it has not been demonstrated that there is not
    a need for this type of accommodation. On this basis and having regard to the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
Appeal Decision: 6010851


     published housing need, whilst there would be some harm from the loss of a single
     family dwelling, it would not significantly and demonstrably outweigh the benefits
     resulting from the provision of accommodation for up to six persons, when
     assessed against the policies in the Framework taken as a whole.
16. In conclusion, the proposal would not reduce the provision of residential
    accommodation overall and the harm from the loss of a single family dwelling would
    not significantly and demonstrably outweigh the benefits of a more intensive use of
    this property. As I have not found there to be other matters that weigh significantly
    against the proposal, I allow the appeal.
17. I have imposed conditions relating to the commencement of development and the
    details of the approved plans for the avoidance of doubt and in the interests of
    proper planning. I have imposed a condition setting out the use approved and the
    number of residents and bedrooms for the avoidance of doubt and to limit the scale
    of use to that proposed. I have imposed a condition to require the submission of a
    revised Management Plan to ensure that the amenities of neighbouring residents
    are protected as far as is practical and that the outdoor areas are maintained and
    waste is managed, to ensure that the proposal would not harm local amenities and
    would accord with the SPD. I have also required that bike storage provision is
    made in general accordance with the layout plan to ensure that alternative transport
    options are available. As I have referenced the number of bedrooms, the council’s
    suggested condition regarding future use of parts of the property is not necessary.

Peter Eggleton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       4
