Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 24 August 2026
by A Wright BSc (Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 08 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010228
Land east of 52 Exeter Road, Claydon, Ipswich, Suffolk IP6 0BP
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Duncan Foster of Omnicorp Ltd against the decision of Mid Suffolk District
     Council.
•    The application Ref is DC/25/05276.
•    The development proposed is use of land to store building materials for a temporary period of two
     years.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The site is already being used to store building materials. For the avoidance of
       doubt, I must determine the proposal on its merits based on the plans before me.
3.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
       August 2026. As this could affect the issues and matters in this case, the Council
       and the appellant were invited to make further comments. My decision reflects the
       latest version of the Framework, and the responses received on it.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues in this appeal are:
       •   whether the site is a suitable location for the proposed use, having regard to
           local and national planning policies;
       •   the effect of the proposed scheme on the character and appearance of the
           area;
       •   the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers,
           with particular regard to noise and outlook;
       •   whether the site is a suitable location for the proposed development, having
           regard to policies concerned with development in areas at risk of flooding; and
       •   the effect of the proposal on ecology.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010228


Reasons
Suitability of the location
5.       The appeal site lies in the countryside, outside the settlement boundary for
         Claydon identified on the Policies Map. Policy SP03 of the Babergh and Mid
         Suffolk Joint Local Plan – Part 1 2023 (JLP) sets out the approach towards the
         location of new development in the district.
6.       Outside settlement boundaries, Policy SP03(2) outlines that development will
         normally only be permitted where the site is allocated for development, or is in
         accordance with a made Neighbourhood Plan, one of the policies listed in Table 5
         or the policy in the Framework relating to isolated homes in the countryside.
7.       The appellant states that the Council has applied Policy SP03 in an unduly rigid
         manner and there is no policy in the JLP which prohibits temporary uses of the
         type proposed. However, whilst the site has already been used for storing building
         materials associated with the recently completed adjacent residential scheme1, the
         proposed use does not meet any of the types of development allowed by this
         policy. Therefore, the proposal conflicts with Policy SP03 of the JLP.
8.       The Framework sets out policies for development within and outside settlements.
         Its definition of settlement includes predominantly built-up areas and areas defined
         as such in the development plan. The site adjoins houses but does not contain any
         buildings or structures. Given the boundaries on the Policies Map and the situation
         on the ground, the site is not within a settlement for the purposes of applying
         policies in the Framework.
9.       Policy S5 of the Framework outlines that only certain forms of development should
         be approved outside settlements. The appellant considers that the use falls under
         that listed in Policy S5(1)(b), but the proposed storage of building materials is not a
         rural business or service where a location outside settlements is necessary.
10. Consequently, I conclude that the site is not a suitable location for the proposed
    use, having regard to local and national planning policies. This is contrary to Policy
    SP03 of the JLP. Further, the proposal does not provide the type of development
    supported by Policy S5 of the Framework.
Character and appearance
11. The site lies at the end of a residential cul de sac with woodland to the north and
    east. A public right of way (PROW) runs to the north of the site linking the housing
    area to a publicly accessible green corridor. The site is not within the boundary of
    the residential scheme though it is under the control of the applicant. The plans for
    the residential development did not indicate any works to the site such that it was
    to remain open and undeveloped. Nonetheless, it was fenced and used for storing
    construction materials related to the residential scheme.
12. The surfacing of the site, its use for storing building materials and surrounding it
    with close boarded fencing erodes the undeveloped, verdant character at the end
    of the cul de sac. It creates an isolated, enclosed parcel of land whose use is
    incompatible with the adjacent residential and recreational uses. The fencing along
    the northern boundary gives the adjacent PROW a tunnel-like and urban

1
    Originally approved under planning application ref: DC/20/00674 but subsequently amended ‘the residential scheme/development’


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  2
Appeal Decision 6010228


       appearance, especially when approached from Exeter Road, significantly at odds
       with the green and previously open character at this end of the road.
13. The proposal is for the continuation of the existing use for two years which the
    appellant states is to enable unneeded building materials to be sold and reused
    rather than wasted. However, the residential development has now been
    completed and occupied, and even on a temporary basis, the proposal adversely
    affects the residential and recreational character.
14. Therefore, I conclude that the proposed scheme harms the character and
    appearance of the area. This is contrary to Policy LP24 of the JLP which amongst
    other things requires proposals to safeguard existing character, including by being
    compatible with its location. It also conflicts with Policy DP3 of the Framework
    where it requires proposals to respond to their context so that they integrate with
    their surroundings.
Living conditions
15. The appeal site immediately adjoins the residential property at 52 Exeter Road (No
    52) and is close to the rear garden at 27 Exeter Road (No 27). Vehicular access to
    the site is via Exeter Road and other streets on the housing estate.
16. The proposal is for the general storage of building materials and there is no
    certainty that it would not be used commercially, nor that the amount of materials
    stored would progressively decrease.
17. No details have been provided of how frequently materials would be transported
    onto and off the site, and how they would be moved to, from and within the site,
    including the types of vehicles and equipment to be used. In the absence of this
    information, the Council’s Environmental Health Officer is concerned about
    potential noise from the proposed operation. As the proposal could involve the use
    of heavy goods vehicles and industrial type equipment in a residential area for two
    years, I share these concerns.
18. Furthermore, there is no information on the height at which materials would be
    stored. Without this, I cannot be certain that the proposal would not harm the
    outlook from rear gardens and rooms at Nos 52 and 27.
19. The appellant states that the Council did not formally request additional
    information, but there is no requirement for it to do so. The appellant has not
    sought to provide these details with the appeal documents but instead considers
    that these matters could be dealt with via the Council’s suggested condition 3.
    However, without this information, I cannot be satisfied that the proposed scheme
    would not adversely affect the living conditions of nearby residents.
20. Consequently, there has been a failure to demonstrate that the proposal would not
    harm the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers, with particular regard to
    noise and outlook. This would be contrary to Policy LP24 of the JLP where it
    requires proposals to protect the health and amenity of occupiers and surrounding
    uses by avoiding development that is overbearing or results in unacceptable levels
    of noise. It would also conflict with Policies DP3 and P3 of the Framework where
    they seek liveable communities and require proposals to be appropriate for their
    location, taking into account likely effects on living conditions.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010228


Flood risk
21. Policy LP27 of the JLP requires proposals in areas at medium or high risk from
    flooding to demonstrate that the development can be made safe for its lifetime.
    Further, details appropriate to the scale of development should be provided
    showing how on-site surface water drainage will be managed so as not to cause or
    increase flooding elsewhere.
22. This broadly aligns with Policy F7 of the Framework which requires developments
    in locations known to be at risk from flooding to meet certain conditions. These
    include the development being safe throughout its lifetime taking account of the
    vulnerability of its users, and demonstration that flood risk will not be increased
    elsewhere.
23. Policy F4 of the Framework sets out the circumstances in which a site-specific
    flood risk assessment (FRA) should be provided. An FRA is required for all
    development proposals identified in the strategic flood risk assessment or the
    Flood Map for Planning as being at risk of flooding from any source, whether now
    or in the future. The FRA should be appropriate to the scale, nature and location of
    the development.
24. The flood map shows that the site is at risk from surface water flooding now or in
    future, with a high risk of such flooding along parts of the northern and western site
    boundaries. The area at risk of flooding increases when climate change is taken
    into account, also extending along the southern boundary.
25. I acknowledge that the site is mostly laid with shingle, a permeable material, and
    that the proposal is for temporary development. Nevertheless, Policy F4 of the
    Framework does not exempt such development from the requirement to provide
    an FRA, and in the absence of this, it has not been demonstrated that the proposal
    would be safe for its lifetime and avoid increasing flooding elsewhere.
26. The appellant suggests that this could be addressed via a condition. However,
    without an FRA I cannot be certain that the proposed scheme meets the local and
    national flood risk policy requirements or what mitigation, if appropriate, may be
    required.
27. Consequently, I conclude that the site is not a suitable location for the proposed
    development, having regard to policies concerned with development in areas at
    risk of flooding. This is contrary to Policy LP27 of the JLP. It also contravenes
    Policies F4 and F7 of the Framework, the latter of which indicates that the
    development should be refused.
Ecology
28. Various species, including great crested newts (GCN), are a European Protected
    Species protected by law2. Public authorities also have a statutory duty to
    conserve biodiversity3.
29. The government’s standing advice for GCN (standing advice) states that
    developers should submit information with their planning application on how their
    proposal avoids or mitigates harm to GCN. Further, the government advice for

2
    Under the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 and the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (as amended)
3
    Under section 40 of the Natural Environment and Rural Communities Act 2000


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 4
Appeal Decision 6010228


         local planning authorities on protected species and development (government
         advice) outlines the need to consider the full impact of the proposal on protected
         species before granting planning permission. It indicates that planning conditions
         that ask for surveys should not usually be attached.
30. The standing advice sets out criteria for when a survey is required for GCN. This
    includes where there is a suitable water body such as a pond within 500m of the
    development.
31. There is evidence of large populations of GCN using ponds within 275m of the
    site. Whilst it is already used as a fenced storage compound, the site includes a
    substantial row of trees along the southern boundary with woodland to the north
    and east which the government advice identifies as likely habitat for GCN.
32. I note that the Framework’s decision-making policies seek only the minimum
    information necessary to enable a decision and this should be proportionate to the
    scale of development and its potential impact. Nonetheless, in the absence of a
    preliminary ecological assessment or walkover survey, and based on the
    information before me, the presence of GCN on the site cannot be ruled out and I
    cannot be certain as to the extent to which they are affected. Further, if protected
    species are affected, I cannot be certain as to what mitigation, if appropriate, may
    be required.
33. The Council accepts that the proposed development may be exempt from
    mandatory biodiversity net gain4. However, there is insufficient information for me
    to conclude that the proposal does not adversely affect GCN.
34. Overall, I conclude that there has been a failure to demonstrate that the proposal
    does not harm GCN. This is contrary to Policies SP09 and LP16 of the JLP which
    amongst other things require development to conserve biodiversity, including
    priority species. It also conflicts with Policy N2 of the Framework which requires
    proposals to minimise any adverse impacts on biodiversity.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
35. The proposal enables building materials to be reused, but the site is not a suitable
    location in terms of the proposed use or in respect of policies for development in
    areas at risk of flooding. Further, the proposal harms the character and
    appearance of the area and there has been a failure to demonstrate that it would
    not harm the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers or GCN. In this case, the
    benefits of the proposal are substantially outweighed by the adverse effects, so it
    does not meet the requirement for development outside settlements in Policy S5 of
    the Framework.
36. For the reasons given above, the proposal conflicts with the development plan and
    the material considerations, including the Framework, do not indicate that the
    appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it. Therefore, the appeal
    should be dismissed.

A Wright
INSPECTOR

4
    Under paragraph 13 of Schedule 7A of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               5
