Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 16 September 2026
by J D Clark BA(Hons) DpTRP MCD DMS MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2nd October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010548
Manton Quarry, Manton, North Lincolnshire DN21 4JT
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 17, Class B of
     the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as
     amended).
•    The appeal is made by Ashcourt Lincolnshire Ltd against the decision of North Lincolnshire Council.
•    The application Ref is PA/2025/1217.
•    The development proposed is Prior Approval under Schedule 2, Part 17, Class B of the Town and
     Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 for the installation and
     operation of a mobile concrete batching plant.

Decision
1.    The appeal is allowed and prior approval is granted under the provisions of Article
      3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 17, Class B of the Town and Country Planning (General
      Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) for the installation
      and operation of a mobile concrete batching plant at Manton Quarry, Manton,
      North Lincolnshire DN21 4JT in accordance with the application PA/2025/1217
      and the details submitted with it including Plan Nos 0726-4-6 Rev A & 0726-4-7.
Application for costs
2.    An application for costs was made by Ashcourt Lincolnshire Ltd against North
      Lincolnshire Council. That application is subject to a separate decision.
Preliminary Matter
3.    The provisions of the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted
      Development) (England) Order 2015 as amended (GDPO 2015), under Article 3(1)
      and Schedule 2, Part 17, Class B, Paragraph B.2 (1). requires the proposed
      development to be assessed solely on the basis of its siting, design and external
      appearance. Where development is permitted under Class B, paragraph B.2. (2)
      states that prior approval may not be refused or granted subject to conditions
      unless the mineral planning authority are satisfied that it is expedient to do so
      because (a) the proposed development would injure the amenity of the
      neighbourhood and modifications cannot reasonably be made or conditions
      reasonably imposed in order to reduce that injury; or (b) the proposed
      development ought to be, and could reasonably be, sited elsewhere. My
      determination of this appeal has been made on the same basis.
Main Issues
4.    The main issues are whether the proposal is permitted development under
      Schedule 2, Part 17, Class B of the Order and if so, the effect of the siting, design

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010548


          and external appearance of the proposed plant on the amenity of the
          neighbourhood or, whether it ought to be, and could reasonably be, sited
          elsewhere.
Reasons
5.        The proposed concreted batching plant would be located within an existing
          working limestone quarry. The quarry includes access to a parking area, a single
          storey building for offices and staff use and tracks sloping downwards to the
          operational area of the quarry. Here there is plant and machinery for sorting and
          washing excavated materials. Bunded areas provide separate storage for sand
          and aggregates. The proposed plant would be sited close to these workings.
6.        Part 17 of the GDPO relates to mining operations. Class A applies to extensions,
          alterations etc ancillary to mining operations and Class B applies to other
          developments ancillary to mining operations1. Under Class B, the carrying out, on
          land used as a mine or on ancillary mining land of operations for the erection,
          installation, extension, rearrangement, replacement, repair or other alterations of
          any (a) plant or machinery, (b) buildings, or (c) structures or erections are
          permitted development. B.1. sets out when development is not permitted under
          Class B. In particular, (b) states that, if the principal purpose of the development
          would be for any purpose other than – (i) purposes in connection with the
          operation of the mine; (ii) the treatment, preparation for sale, consumption or
          utilisation of minerals won or brought to the surface at that mine; or (iii) the storage
          or removal from the mine of such minerals, their products or waste materials
          derived from them.
7.        The appellants case is that the proposed concrete batching plant falls within Class
          B, paragraph B1 (ii). I concur for the following reasons. The proposal would involve
          the installation of plant on land used as a mine, Class B (a), and the principal
          purpose of the development would fall under the description of the treatment,
          preparation for sale, consumption or utilisation of minerals won or brought to the
          surface of the mine, B.1. (b) (ii). With regard to the latter, although some additional
          material would be brought in, the larger part of the end product, that is concrete,
          would be taken from the mine itself. The appellant states that about 10 – 15 % of
          the total mix would comprise a binding powder which would be mixed with the
          sand and aggregates produced on site. This would generate 2 to 3 vehicles per
          week bringing in the mixing product (cement). Proportionally, I consider that the
          amount of brought in material would be modest with the greater part of it being
          sourced directly from the quarry.
8.        The concrete batching plant would not be part of the mining operation and, as the
          Council state, this would carry on regardless. The production of concrete could
          take place elsewhere and need not be dependent on the mining operation at this
          site. However, materials would have to be brought onto an alternative site,
          including those of the type produced at this quarry. Utilising those materials on the
          site upon which they were extracted and processed through sorting and washing,
          would make use of the extracted materials at their point of extraction. I am
          satisfied that whilst the proposal could comprise a separate operation in its own
          right, and clearly not all concrete batching plants are used within quarries, the
          proposed location within the quarry and the use of materials sourced from it

1
    (there is also Class C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, JA, K, KA, L and M).


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                       2
Appeal Decision 6010548


      together could reasonably be considered ancillary to the mining operations at the
      quarry.
9.    I note the high court judgement South Glamorgan County Council v Hobbs
      (Quarries) Ltd 2 which is referred to by the appellant. This too relates to a concrete
      batching plant in a limestone quarry. The legislation has changed since then with
      the GDPO being worded differently to the then relevant Town and Country
      Planning General Development Order 1977 (GDO). The judge considered the role
      of the said plant ‘in connection with the treatment or disposal of such minerals’,
      that is, the limestone from the quarry, and concluded that it did not fall into either
      category. Rather he assessed that the concrete batching plant involved the
      utilisation of the limestone. The GDO at the time did not include this in its wording
      and so he did not find it to be permitted development. The wording in the GDPO
      has now changed and paragraph B.1. states that development is not permitted if
      the principle purpose of the development would be for any purpose other than (b)
      (ii) the treatment, preparation for sale, consumption or utilisation of minerals won
      or brought to the surface ….. This revised wording would seem to address this
      matter and therefore include the operation of a concrete batching plant as
      permitted development.
10. I have not been referred to any more recent judgements and the Council are silent
    on this matter. I note decisions by other local planning authorities which have
    considered proposals similar to that before me as being permitted development3.
    On the basis of the evidence before me, I therefore conclude that the GDPO
    permits the proposed concrete batching plant, subject to conditions and limitations
    as set out in the Order.
11. The reason for refusal is that the proposal would not be permitted development
    and no further comments have been made by the Council as to its acceptability
    should it be found to be permitted development. I note that a number of
    representations have been received from the occupiers of properties nearby as
    well as the Parish Council. These mostly relate to existing operations at the quarry
    but include concern about the proposed use and any increase in traffic, noise, and
    dust arising from the proposed plant. However, from my observations and the
    consultation responses submitted, these matters would be addressed by
    conditions already in place for the mining operations4. This would include taking
    the appropriate enforcement action if appropriate.
12. Furthermore, the quarry is set below the level of the surrounding landscape and
    that of nearby roads. The plant would not be any more intrusive in the landscape
    than the existing plant and equipment and as long as the proposal remained
    ancillary to the operations at the quarry, as to remain permitted development, then
    I see no harm arising to the local neighbourhood. I also see no reason why this
    proposal ought to be sited elsewhere given that any noise, general activity, vehicle
    movements etc would appear as part and parcel to the mining operations at the
    quarry.
13. For the above reasons, I conclude that the proposal is permitted development
    under Schedule 2, Part 17, Class B of the Order and its siting, design and external
    appearance of the proposed plant would not have a harmful effect on the amenity

2
  South Glamorgan County Council v Hobbs (Quarries) Ltd [1980] EGLR 121 [1980] JPL 35.
3
  Oxfordshire County Council Ref: MW.0068/19 & Cambridgeshire County Council Ref: CCC/25/026/PRIO.
4
  Planning Application Ref: MIN/2016/556.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            3
Appeal Decision 6010548


         of the neighbourhood and there is no need for me to consider whether it ought to
         be, and could reasonably be, sited elsewhere.
Conditions
14. The Council’s Highways consultee suggests including conditions included on the
    planning approval for the quarry5 and the Environmental Protection Team also
    quotes the conditions applicable to the quarry. Given that the quarry is already
    subject to conditions and the installation and operation of the proposed batching
    plant would be ancillary to that, I do not see any need for additional conditions
    other than those limitations and conditions set out in the GDPO.
Conclusion
15. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed and prior approval is
    granted.



J D Clark
INSPECTOR




5
    Planning Application Ref: MIN/2016/556.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      4
