Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 September 2026
by M J Francis BA (Hons) MA MSc MClfA
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 11 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010825
Shaws Lane Top Farm, Shaws Lane, Triangle, Sowerby Bridge, Calderdale
HX6 3EZ
•      The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
       1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•      The appeal is made by Mr Andrew Lawson against the decision of Calderdale Metropolitan Borough
       Council.
•      The application Ref is 26/00173/LBC.
•      The works proposed are a porch which is an ‘extrusion’ of a previously approved rear extension to
       the property.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       For concise reasons, I have amended the description of development from the
         application form in the banner heading above.
3.       On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
         Framework) was published, and the main parties have been consulted on the
         implications of the revised Framework on the appeal.
4.       As the appeal relates to a listed building, I have had special regard to the duty set
         out in section 16(2) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
         1990.
Main Issue
5.       The main issue is whether the proposal would preserve the grade II listed building,
         known as Shaw’s Lane Top Farmhouse1, or its setting or any features of special
         architectural or historic interest that it possesses.
Reasons
6.       The appeal site is a former farmhouse of early to mid-17th century date,
         refurbished in the 20th century. Built of coursed stone with a stone slate roof, the
         main range is single storey with an attic and has two cells with a through passage.
         On the front elevation an imposing porch has stone benches and an arched
         doorway. There is also a large porch to the rear. To the left is a two-storey bay
         with a modern porch. Dormers have been added to the front, and rooflights to the


1
    List entry number: 1134470

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010825


       front and rear. A mono-pitched utility room extension was added to the rear
       following permission in 2011.
7.     The special interest and significance of the building, insofar as it relates to this
       appeal, derives from its historical and architectural interest. The building overlooks
       open countryside and within this rural setting, it represents an example of a 17th
       century farmhouse and the agricultural use of the surrounding land during that
       period. The building has several stone chamfered mullion windows, some of which
       have been renewed, many with surviving hoodmoulds. These, together with the
       front porch with its stone finial, as well as the cross-passage and fireplaces with
       monolithic lintels, all point to the architectural interest of the building.
8.     The existing simple, stone-built, utility extension, with a modern mullion window
       and a stone slate roof, extends to the junction between the single storey and two
       storey elements of the building. The western elevation of the proposed porch
       would be built in matching stone, and the southern ‘wall’ would have black
       aluminium framed glazing, as found throughout the existing house, with a half-
       glazed door.
9.     I appreciate that the lead flashing for the new line of the roof, which would be in
       stone slates to match the existing, would be scored into an existing mortar bed.
       However, whilst the existing extension is set back behind the junction with the two-
       storey element, the porch would overlap onto the two-storey building. Attaching it
       to a traditionally designed extension, which is sympathetic to the historic character
       of the house, would visually disrupt the natural evolution of the house and the clear
       legibility that currently exists at the rear.
10. Moreover, whilst the proposed glazing panels would identify it as a modern
    extension to the building, there are no other glazing panels of this size and shape
    on the property. Therefore, this would undermine both the traditional design of the
    building and the existing modern extensions and would appear somewhat
    incongruous in this location. Although the appellant has stated that the quoin
    stones would be visible above the porch and through the glazing, there is no
    evidence before me that the rest of the wall, which would become internal to the
    porch, would be visible and not plastered over.
11. I appreciate that the proposed extension would not extend beyond the soil pipe
    and therefore it would not physically affect the four-light window with hood mould
    which is a key feature of the rear wall of the two-storey element. However, the
    window currently has room around it so that this architectural feature can be
    appreciated. Building the porch close to it, would ‘encroach’ onto it and detract
    from its significance.
12. Given the above, I find that the proposed works would fail to preserve the listed
    building and its setting and any features of special architectural or historic interest
    which it possesses. This would harm the significance of the heritage asset, to
    which I must give considerable importance and weight.
Other Matters
13. The appellant refers to the Council’s determination of the application. Whilst I
    understand their concerns, these are matters between the main parties and do not
    affect my determination of the appeal which is based on the planning merits of the
    case.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010825


Public Benefits and Balance
14. Policy HE4 of the Framework advises that heritage assets are an irreplaceable
    resource and should be conserved in a manner appropriate to their significance.
    Harm to the significance of heritage assets should be avoided and any harm
    should have a clear and convincing justification.
15. Policy HE6 of the Framework states that substantial weight should be given to the
    asset’s conservation which is irrespective of whether any potential effect amounts
    to a positive effect, harm, substantial harm, or total loss of its significance. I find
    that the proposal would cause harm to the listed building and would be a low level
    of harm. Nevertheless, any harm to a designated heritage asset will be a matter of
    considerable importance and weight. Where a development proposal would harm
    the significance of a designated heritage asset, Policy HE6 states that the effect
    on the asset and its significance should be weighed against any public benefits
    resulting from the proposal.
16. The appellant has stated that the rear door into the utility room is the entrance
    most used by the owners, and the porch would provide a buffer from the weather.
    Furthermore, they consider that the visual impact of the porch would be negligible
    as it is at the rear of the house and concealed from the road by the existing ground
    level and the retaining walls to west and north. However, listed buildings are
    safeguarded for their inherent architectural and historic interest irrespective of
    whether public views of the building can be gained.
17. I saw on the day that I visited that the site is exposed and the landscape is open.
    However, the existing extension is at the rear of the site and would be somewhat
    sheltered from the bank behind it. Moreover, the rear door where it is proposed to
    add a porch, provides access into a utility room. This is a room that generally
    provides a functional space between the outdoors and the rest of the house.
    Indeed, there is an internal door between this room and the adjoining dining room
    and kitchen, which already provides a buffer between the outside and the main
    body of the house. In addition, there is also a modern closed porch at the front of
    the house, with an internal door between it and the adjoining kitchen.
18. Only part of the ground floor plan is shown, therefore, I have no evidence as to
    which room the large covered historic porch on the front provides access, or which
    part of the building is accessed from the porch on the rear. Despite this, from the
    evidence that I do have, two of the existing entrances do not provide direct access
    into principal rooms, which means that draughts and heat loss are minimised from
    entering the main body of the house. Consequently, constructing another porch on
    the property would represent a private benefit only. Therefore, based on my
    assessment above, I consider that the proposal would harm the significance of the
    designated heritage asset and the benefits that have been set out do not outweigh
    the harm.
19. Given the above and in the absence of any public benefit that would outweigh the
    harm that would be caused, I conclude that, on balance, the proposal would fail to
    preserve the special historic interest of the grade II listed building.
20. This would fail to satisfy the requirements of the Act and Policy HE6 of the
    Framework. It would conflict with Policy HE1 of the Calderdale Local Plan
    2018/19-2032/33, 2023, which requires development proposals to conserve
    heritage assets in a manner appropriate to their significance.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010825


Conclusion
21. For the above reasons and having regard to all other matters raised, I conclude
    that the appeal should be dismissed.

M J Francis
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
