Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 26 August 2026
by E Worley BA (Hons) Dip EP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 09 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010036
Emmaus School, School Lane, Staverton, Wiltshire BA14 6NZ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Noel Hannan against the decision of Wiltshire Council.
•    The application Ref is PL/2026/00464.
•    The development is security fencing.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for security fencing at
   Emmaus School, School Lane, Staverton, Wiltshire BA14 6NZ in accordance with
   the terms of the application, Ref PL/2026/00464, and the plans submitted with it.
Preliminary Matters
2.    The description of development in the banner heading and decision above is taken
      from the application form; however, I have removed the superfluous wording that
      does not refer to acts of development.
3. The security fencing has already been installed; the appeal is therefore being
   considered retrospectively. Notwithstanding the development is already in situ, I
   have dealt with the appeal on its planning merits.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the development on the character and appearance
   of the area, including the host building, which is a non-designated heritage asset.
Reasons
5. The appeal site comprises a Victorian school which benefits from a recently
   constructed extension of a contemporary appearance. It is situated between the
   railway line which runs along the rear boundary of the site and School Lane to the
   front. Beyond the side boundary of the site lies a prefabricated pre-school building,
   an enclosed play area and Staverton Church of England Primary School. There is
   residential development opposite the site, which includes semi-detached dwellings
   set back from the road, with parking and front gardens between them and the
   highway.
6. The appeal scheme seeks retrospective permission for the erection of black metal
   bow top fencing 2m in height adjacent to the newly extended part of the school and
   a 3m high, black-coated open mesh steel fence which encloses an area of
   playground (MUGA) between the side elevation of the school building and the small
   car park adjacent to the B3105. The Council’s submissions indicate it has no

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010036


     objection to the 2m high fence that has been installed, based on my own
     observations at my site visit, I have no reason to reach a different view.
7. There are a range of boundary treatments in the area of various heights and
   designs, including chain link fencing supported by concrete or wooden posts,
   boundary walls and hedges, bow top railings, close boarded timber fencing and
   metal palisade fencing. While greater in height than other boundary treatments
   nearby, the 3m high fence is a relatively lightweight structure, finished in a
   recessive colour. Moreover, a fence of such a height and design is not an
   uncommon feature of an educational facility and therefore not entirely at odds with
   the existing appearance of the site.
8. Taking these factors into account, notwithstanding its position close to the entrance
   of School Lane, the fence does not appear as an unduly incongruent feature or a
   visually conspicuous addition to the street scene when viewed within the context of
   the site. In that regard it does not conflict with advice in the Wiltshire Design Guide,
   2024, insofar as it expects development to incorporate high-quality detailing which
   matches or otherwise complements the existing detailing. Accordingly, the 3m high
   fence does not detract from the overall character and appearance of the area.
9. The school is identified by the Council as a non-designated heritage asset (NDHA).
   It is of modest significance given its age, architectural interest and use of traditional
   materials including Bath stone. Considering this and given its prominent position on
   School Lane, the building contributes positively to the character and appearance of
   the area. Although positioned close to the building at the nearest point, the 3m high
   fence does not affect the form or fabric of the NDHA. Furthermore, like other
   additions, it is ancillary to the building’s function and does not unduly disrupt its
   architectural integrity.
10. However, despite the relatively lightweight and open design of the fence, which
    does not preclude views of the side elevation of the building and the open
    countryside beyond, it is nevertheless readily apparent in the foreground of views
    towards the NDHA, whereby, by virtue of its 3m height, position and extent, it
    appears as an imposing and visually prominent feature. Consequently, it interrupts
    views of the asset and diminishes the ability to appreciate its significance. Whilst
    the effect is limited in extent, the fence nonetheless causes harm to the significance
    of the NDHA as experienced through its setting.
11. Given the effects are limited to views of only part of the site, and considering the
    modest significance of the heritage asset, the degree of harm to the significance of
    the NDHA is less than substantial in this case. In such circumstances, Policy
    HE7(2) of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) sets out that
    this harm should be weighed against the benefits of the proposal and a balanced
    judgement made, having regard to the scale of any harm or loss and the
    significance of the NDHA.
12. The 3m high fencing provides a secure and safe environment for pupils and staff,
    enclosing the school's only outdoor play and recreation area. It also reduces the
    likelihood of balls leaving the MUGA and entering adjacent roads, and potential
    harm to highway safety, while supporting the continued and potential future use of
    the facilities for physical education, recreational activities and wider community use.
    When balanced against the modest significance of the NDHA, the benefits are of



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010036


     considerable weight which outweigh the less than substantial harm to its
     significance.
13. In light of the foregoing considerations, I therefore conclude that the security fence
    does not harm the character and appearance of the area. In that regard it does not
    conflict with the aims of Core Policy 57 of the Wiltshire Core Strategy, adopted
    January 2015 (WCS), which seek development of a high standard of design, which
    is complimentary to the locality. While I have found that it does give rise to harm to
    the setting of the NDHA and therefore its significance, and thus conflicts with Core
    Policy 58 of the WCS, which amongst other things requires development to protect,
    conserve and where possible enhance the historic environment, including non-
    designated heritage assets, this is outweighed by the benefits of the scheme.
Other Matters
14. While I acknowledge concerns regarding the removal of the original stone wall to
    the front boundary of the site, this work did not require planning permission and is
    thus not a matter before me in the context of this appeal. Moreover, while the
    development may differ from the original proposals to extend the school, I have
    determined the appeal on its own merits, based on the evidence before me.
15. Whether or not the development that has been carried out is in accordance with
    conditions attached to an earlier planning permission is a matter for the parties to
    resolve outside of the appeal process.
Conditions
16. Since the appeal scheme seeks retrospective planning permission, a condition
    relating to the implementation of the permission is not necessary.
Conclusion
17. For the reasons set out above, while the development does not harm the character
    and appearance of the area, it causes less than substantial harm to the significance
    of the NDHA. However, I have found that the less than substantial harm in this
    instance is outweighed by the benefits arising from the development. As such it
    accords with the development plan when read as a whole and the Framework.
18. I therefore conclude that the appeal should be allowed.



E Worley
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
