Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 August 2026
by David Wyborn BSc(Hons) MPhil MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 03 September 2026


Appeal A - Ref: 6010808
Footpath outside 1a Colman House, High Street, Penge SE20 7EX
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Group Plc against the decision of the Council of the
     London Borough of Bromley.
•    The application Ref is 26/00372/FPA.
•    The development proposed is the installation of new BT Street Hub and associated display of
     advertisement panels to both sides of the unit.

Appeal B - Ref: 6010810
Footpath outside 1a Colman House, High Street, Penge SE20 7EX
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Group Plc against the decision of the Council of the
     London Borough of Bromley.
•    The application Ref is 26/00402/ADV.
•    The advertisement proposed is the installation of new BT Street Hub and associated display of
     advertisement panels to both sides of the unit.

Decisions
1.     Appeal A is allowed and planning permission is granted for the installation of new
       BT Street Hub and associated display of advertisement panels to both sides of the
       unit at footpath outside 1a Colman House, High Street, Penge SE20 7EX in
       accordance with the terms of the application Ref 26/00372/FPA and subject to the
       conditions in the attached schedule.
2.     Appeal B is allowed and express consent granted for the installation of new BT
       Street Hub and associated display of advertisement panels to both sides of the
       unit at footpath outside 1a Colman House, High Street, Penge SE20 7EX in
       accordance with the terms of the application Ref 26/00402/ADV, subject to the five
       standard conditions set out in Schedule 2 of the Regulations and the following
       additional conditions set out in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
3.     Both appeals concern the same scheme for a free standing street structure, a BT
       Street Hub, with digital advertisements, which would be sited on the footway within
       the High Street. The BT Street Hub would also provide, amongst other things,
       environmental sensors, small cell mobile connectivity, free public wi-fi and an
       emergency messaging service. In particular, Appeal A seeks planning permission
       for the structure itself with its other facilities. Appeal B seeks advertisement

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6010808 and 6010810


       consent for the two digital advertisement screens, one on either side of the
       structure.
4.     In relation to the appeal for advertisement consent (Appeal B), Regulation 3(1) of
       the Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements) (England) Regulations
       2007 (the Regulations) states that a local planning authority shall exercise its
       powers under these Regulations in the interests of amenity and public safety,
       taking into account the provisions of the development plan, in so far as they are
       material, and any other relevant factors.
5.     The reason for refusal for both appeals is essentially the same and concerns the
       effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area, especially
       because it is argued that the structure with advertisements would add an intrusive
       feature and unacceptable street clutter to the public realm. I will consider both
       appeals together under this issue. In terms of the advertisement proposal, the
       Council has not raised issue with its effect on public safety and I have found no
       reason to disagree.
6.     On 17 August 2026, the Government published a revised National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework). This latest version of the Framework has introduced
       plan-making and national decision-making policies. It is effective from the day of
       publication and I sought comments on the revised Framework from the main
       parties on the implications for these appeals.
Main Issue
7.     The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of
       the area.
Reasons
8.     This part of the High Street within Penge lies beyond the Conservation Area, and
       on a fairly straight section of road. It is lined on both sides by ground floor
       commercial premises, which have a typical range of advertisements. Some of the
       advertisements are illuminated reflecting that some of the premises, including
       restaurants and take away uses, are open in the evening and form part of the night
       time economy. The High Street is a through route and often busy with traffic
       including cars and buses.
9.     The footways along the wider length of this part of the High Street, while not giving
       the impression of being especially cluttered, have a variety of road signs, street
       lighting columns, rubbish bins, phone kiosks and digital advertisements. They all
       combine with the road, commercial premises and their advertisements, and some
       outside seating areas, to provide a busy High Street atmosphere and scene.
10. The appeal site presently consists of a phone kiosk which would be removed and
    replaced by the BT Street Hub. The existing phone kiosk looks somewhat tired in
    its appearance and has a blank, grey elevation facing south east along this section
    of the footway. This gives a rather functional appearance when approaching the
    kiosk along this part of the footway. The site lies outside a coffee shop, which has
    an outside seating area, and adjoins a convenience store. Nearby on the footway
    is a black rubbish bin and a lighting column with flower baskets. It is therefore an
    environment with activity, a mix of structures and advertisements and has a
    generally commercial character.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6010808 and 6010810


11. The BT Street Hub would be positioned closer to the road than the phone kiosk
    and the width of the available footway towards the coffee shop would be increased
    albeit to a modest extent. Nevertheless, this would be a small benefit for those
    using the footway.
12. In this area, with the removal of the phone kiosk, the BT Street Hub would not
    especially add to street clutter but be a replacement of an existing feature, albeit
    higher and wider. The structure, with the digital advertisements on both sides,
    would be prominent but would be seen and experienced in the context of the
    commercial frontages, the busy High Street and outside seating area. It would not
    look out of place or overly dominant in these surroundings.
13. There are other similar digital advertisements on other hub structures further along
    this side of the road to the broadly north west. The nearest other hub structure is
    about 20m to the north west and outside the McDonalds restaurant. This hub has
    a digital advertisement on the side facing the appeal site. In some parts of the
    street scene it would be possible to see together, in similar views, this existing
    digital advertisement and the proposed digital advertisements on the BT Street
    Hub. However, these adverts would be fairly well separated in this section of the
    road. In the context of other advertisements and the busy High Street features,
    and even cumulatively, there would not be a clutter of digital advertisements or
    features along this side of the footway that would be distracting or over dominant.
14. In the light of the above analysis, I conclude that the addition of the BT Street Hub
    in this location would not add unacceptable street clutter to the public realm. It
    would replace an existing phone kiosk and with its advertisements would not look
    out of place or be harmful when seen in the wider context with other digital
    advertisements and other structures on the footway. There would be no adverse
    effect on the character and appearance of the area. The advertisements would
    therefore not harm the amenity of the area and the BT Street Hub structure would
    comply with Policy D8 of the London Plan (2021) and Policies 37 and 102 of the
    Bromley Local Plan (2019) which concern, in this respect, the approach to design
    principles, the public realm and advertisements.
15. The appellant has indicated the removal not only of the phone kiosk that stands on
    the appeal site, but also another kiosk in the vicinity of the junction with Penge
    Green. However, this other kiosk is away from the appeal site and does not fall
    within the red or blue lines of the application plans. I am not satisfied that the
    removal of this other phone kiosk can reasonably be controlled or required as part
    of a condition attached to any approval. In any case, the scheme is acceptable on
    its own merits.
Conditions
16. I have had regard to the conditions suggested by the Council in its appeal
    statement and those conditions listed by the appellant in its Planning Supporting
    Statement.
17. With regard to the planning proposal under Appeal A, there is a need for the
    standard time limit and a list of plans in the interests of certainty. Most of the
    necessary requirements that should be controlled for the development concern the
    advertisements and would be covered by conditions attached to the advertisement
    consent. These requirements and conditions do not need to be repeated on the
    planning approval.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6010808 and 6010810


18. The application was accompanied by a Street Hub Anti-Social Behaviour
    Management Plan (version 3) which explains how the appellant would address, as
    it explains, the few users in limited locations who abuse the Street Hub service.
    The Council in its recommended condition seek the submission of an updated
    Management Plan with the requirement that the BT Street Hub include an
    integrated CCTV camera, as well as confirmation of the removal of the phone
    kiosks on this site and the one near Penge Green.
19. Firstly, an integrated CCTV camera is not part of the scheme and it does not
    appear reasonable on the limited justification available from the Council, who had
    regard to the advice of the Designing Out Crime Officer and Policy 37 of the
    Bromley Local Plan, to expand the development in this respect. Secondly, the
    existing kiosk is sited on part of the same footing as the proposed BT Street Hub
    and by necessity undertaking the appeal development would incorporate the
    removal of the existing kiosk. A requirement to remove the existing phone kiosk is
    not, therefore, necessary. I have concluded above that it could not be reasonably
    controlled, or necessary, to seek to remove the other kiosk near Penge Green by
    planning condition. The suggested condition is therefore not reasonable and
    would, accordingly, not meet with the requirements of Policy DM6 of the
    Framework.
20. A condition, as suggested by the Council, to require the material used for the
    external surfaces of the BT Street Hub to be as set out in the application is not
    necessary as the materials are already specified in the application details.
21. In terms of Appeal B, concerning the advertisement consent, the appellant has set
    out a series of conditions to address how the digital displays shall operate. These,
    include the form of the transition, the length of display before change, the lack of
    moving images, the brightness and that no content shall resemble a traffic sign. I
    have combined some elements into a reduced number of conditions but these are
    important and necessary requirements that the advertisements should meet in the
    interests of highway safety and protecting the amenity of the area.
Conclusion
22. In terms of Appeal A, the provision of the Street Hub would comply with the
    development plan when considered as a whole and material considerations do not
    indicate a decision should be made otherwise. In relation to Appeal B, the
    advertisements would have an acceptable impact on amenity and public safety.
    Consequently, I conclude that both appeals should succeed.



David Wyborn
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decisions 6010808 and 6010810




                                    Appeal A – Schedule of Conditions
    1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
       the date of this decision.
    2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
       following plans: Street Hub – BRL-02 Rev A 002 - Proposed Site Plan, Street
       Hub BRL-02 Rev A 004 – Proposed Site Elevation and Street Hub Dimensioned
       Elevations Drawing Number: STH-001.


                                    Appeal B – Schedule of Conditions


    1) The intensity of the illumination of the two digital display screens shall not
       exceed 600 candelas per square metre (cd/m2) between dusk and dawn, in line
       with the maximum permitted recommended luminance as set out by The Institute
       of Lighting Professional's 'Professional Lighting Guide 05/23: The Brightness of
       Illuminated Advertisements including Digital Displays'.
    2) The minimum display time for each piece of content on the digital display
       screens shall be 10 seconds. The digital display screens shall not display any
       moving, or apparently moving, images (including animation, flashing, scrolling,
       three dimensional, intermittent or video elements). The interval between each
       piece of content on the digital display screens shall take place over a period no
       greater than one second; the complete screen shall change with no visual
       effects (including swiping or other animated transition methods) between
       displays and the display shall include a mechanism to freeze the image in the
       event of a malfunction.

    3) No content on the digital display screens shall resemble traffic signs, as defined
       in section 64 of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       5
