Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 1 September 2026
by N Teasdale BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010157
2 North Field, Newby Bridge, Ulverston, Westmorland and Furness LA12 8NE
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant full planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Ms Lucy Mayo against the decision of Lake District National Park Authority.
•    The application Ref is 7/2025/5543.
•    The development proposed is a boat house.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The Government published a revised version of the National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework) on 17 August 2026. I have considered its
       amendments against the December 2024 version. Although there have been
       significant amendments made, the changes relevant to this appeal are not
       substantive or determinative to the outcome of my decision. I have therefore not
       gone back to the parties to seek any comment.
3.     A screening direction was issued under the Town and Country Planning
       (Environmental Impact Assessment) Regulations 2017 (the EIA Regulations). In
       exercise of the powers conferred by Regulation 14 (1) and 7 (5) of the EIA
       Regulations, the Secretary of State directed that the development is not EIA
       development.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues of the appeal are:
           •    The effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance
                of the area, including whether it would conserve the natural beauty and
                special qualities of the Lake District National Park and the English Lake
                District World Heritage Site; and
           •    The effect of the proposed development on flood risk.
Reasons
Character and appearance
5.     The appeal site relates to land located to the eastern edge of Newby Bridge to the
       south of Windermere. It sits on the shores of Windermere as it narrows to form the
       River Leven. The land is associated with No 2 North Field which is a detached

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010157


       dwelling located to the east of the appeal site which sits amongst a small group of
       dwellings. The River Leven bounds the site to the north where there is lakeshore
       access from the appeal site and there is a timber platform/dock adjacent to the
       water. Other plots of land along this stretch also provide for private lakeshore
       access, some of which contain single storey boathouses. Across the river there
       are jetties and moorings to the east of the Swan Hotel, and that side of the
       shoreline has a higher degree of development and activity. In contrast, the side
       where the appeal site is located is less developed in terms of buildings than the
       opposite side of the shore. The general character of the land on the appeal side is
       dominated by landscape and has a rural feel. At my site visit, I observed very little
       built development along this particular stretch of shoreline, and the area has a soft,
       green character. The absence of built form contributes to its attractive character
       and there is a clear sense of tranquillity. The boathouses that do exist nearby are
       condensed in a cluster to the west of the appeal site and are single storey, of
       discrete siting and appearance nestled within existing landscaping.
6.     The proposed development seeks consent for a new standalone detached
       boathouse that is situated over two levels. The lower level would be open to the
       river for boat storage, with a walkway around the space, and a small store to the
       rear. The upper level would provide a day room with a toilet, small kitchen area
       and seating area.
7.     The National Park considers the site to be located within the open countryside in
       planning policy terms rather than being part of Newby Bridge. Based on the
       evidence before me and my own observations onsite, I have no compelling reason
       to disagree.
8.     Policy 02 of the Lake District National Park Local Plan, 2020-2035, 2021 (LP) sets
       out the spatial strategy for the area. It explains that development will be supported
       provided that it is in accordance with the table which covers proposals in the open
       countryside and that it is of a scale and nature appropriate to the character and
       function of the location in which it is proposed as well as other criteria.
9.     Policy 24 of the LP relates to lakeshore development and seeks to protect the
       landscape and character of lakes and lakeshores. It explains that lakeshore
       development will only be permitted where amongst others, the scale, siting, and
       design of the development enhances or maintains the character of the lake and its
       lakeshore location, including undeveloped stretches of lakeshore.
10. The appeal site is situated in the Lake District National Park which is afforded
    protection for its landscape and scenic beauty. Policy N4 of the Framework
    explains that development proposals within Protected Landscapes should be
    limited in scale and extent and sensitively located and designed to avoid harm to
    the statutory purposes and special qualities of the Protected Landscape.
    Substantial weight should be placed on the importance of conserving and
    enhancing the natural beauty of these areas, and to conserving and enhancing
    wildlife and cultural heritage in National Parks and the Broads. The site is also
    situated within the English Lake District World Heritage Site, an area recognised
    as being of international importance as a landscape of exceptional beauty. As set
    out, the site lies on the shores of Windermere as it narrows to form the River
    Leven. Windermere is the National Park’s biggest and most well-used lake with
    millions of people taking to the water each year.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010157


11. Policy HE5 of the Framework explains that assessments of the potential effects of
    development proposals on the significance of heritage assets (including through
    effects on their setting) should identify whether proposals would be likely to: a.
    have a positive effect, which is where the significance of a heritage asset would be
    enhanced, or better revealed; or b. have no effect on the significance of a heritage
    asset; or c. result in harm to the significance of a heritage asset, either from work
    affecting the asset itself or from development within its setting. This policy explains
    that the degree of harm should be identified. Policy HE6 of the Framework
    explains that when considering the potential effect of a development proposal on
    the significance of a designated heritage asset, substantial weight should be given
    to the asset’s conservation (and the more important the asset, the greater the
    weight should be). This is irrespective of whether any potential effect amounts to a
    positive effect, harm, substantial harm, or total loss of its significance.
12. Policy HE8 of the Framework specifically relates to World Heritage Sites. It
    explains that to secure the long-term future of World Heritage Sites and support
    the conservation of their significance and Outstanding Universal Value,
    development proposals that affect a World Heritage Site should, a. be designed in
    a way which pays particular regard to the significance and Outstanding Universal
    Value of the World Heritage Site (including any contribution made by its setting
    including any buffer zone); b. retain and conserve buildings and other features
    which make a positive contribution to the significance and Outstanding Universal
    Value of the World Heritage Site where possible; c. have regard to the World
    Heritage Site management plan; and d. be supported by an assessment of the
    impact, including any potential cumulative impact, on the significance and
    attributes of Outstanding Universal Value of the World Heritage Site. This should
    be informed by appropriate information such as visual impact assessments and
    natural environment, archaeological or historical data.
13. The appeal site is an area of land with lakeshore frontage, and the proposed
    development would be highly visible from the lake itself and when viewed from the
    opposite side of the shore. Views presently from such vantage points are that of
    largely undeveloped land, woodlands and trees with the small cluster of dwellings
    also visible but set further back into the landscape, away from the lakeshore and
    unobtrusive in public view. The attractive character of the site, its rural feel and
    clear sense of tranquillity contribute positively to the natural beauty and special
    qualities of the National Park and World Heritage Site.
14. The proposed boathouse would be two storeys located on the water’s edge and
    much closer than the existing cluster of properties. It would comprise a large
    amount of glazing to the upper floor on the lakeside elevation, together with a deep
    balcony. The proposed development, because of its size, siting and appearance
    would be a substantive and assertive intervention in this landscape setting and be
    out of keeping with the character of the immediate area. The narrowness of the
    lake at this point is such that two-storey development would be dominant and
    imposing in public view. The proposed development would have a more domestic
    character rather than simple storage function as evidenced by historic single
    storey boathouses.
15. In my view, the proposed development would not maintain local distinctiveness or
    contribute to a sense of place and tranquillity. It would fail to conserve the
    character and quality of the local landscape and would fail to conserve the natural
    beauty and special qualities of the National Park. This would be harmful to the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010157


         character of the area to the detriment of the landscape and scenic beauty of the
         Lake District National Park and World Heritage Site. This harm would be
         experienced by the wide range of recreational users of the lake, including at close
         distance, and from the opposite shore of the lake, including from the boat
         moorings and in the vicinity of The Swan Hotel. While a day room would be more
         convenient for the appellant when actively using the lake, I agree with the National
         Park that the need is questionable due to the close proximity of the existing
         dwelling.
16. In coming to such findings, I have had regard to the existing land level and how the
    boathouse would be set into the rising bank. However, the proposed development
    would still read as a two-storey addition particularly from the direct north which
    would be prominent in this setting. The landscaping would not sufficiently mitigate
    against this as it would still be clearly visible. Whilst the appellant argues that
    large, glazed windows and balconies are characteristic of Windermere
    boathouses, I observed that such features are largely absent from the immediate
    surroundings of the appeal site and this specific section of shoreline.
    Consequently, the proposed development would appear unduly prominent when
    viewed in its local context, thereby exacerbating its visual impact.
17. The appellant refers to a fall-back position which relates to permission granted for
    a detached boat store1. However, that scheme is different in its overall design and
    is set further back from the lakeshore. I do not therefore find that scheme to be
    directly comparable to the scheme I am considering nor would it justify the
    proposals.
18. My attention has also been drawn to other boathouses approved in the National
    Park. However, they do not relate to this appeal site, and I do not have all the
    information that was before the decision maker in those schemes including their
    site-specific context. I note from the National Park’s Statement of Case that the
    closest example, Alloa2 was granted in 2018 under a previous iteration of the LP
    and on a site that is different to the appeal site. That site sits closer to the hotels
    and is on a bend in the river where the eyot of the Kid Haw provides containment,
    softening and screening. That example is not therefore directly comparable, and I
    have determined this scheme based on its own merits and site-specific context.
19. The National Park raise concern regarding external lighting and light spillage
    including potential for adverse effects on nocturnal species. However, details
    regarding lighting are not before me to come to a firm conclusion on this matter nor
    did the effect on nocturnal species form part of the reasoning for refusal. As I am
    dismissing the scheme for other reasons, I do not find it necessary to consider
    these matters further.
20. For the above reasons, the proposed development would unacceptably harm the
    character and appearance of the area. It would fail to conserve the natural beauty
    and special qualities of the Lake District National Park and the English Lake
    District World Heritage Site. Given the scale and prominence of the proposals, it
    would result in a high level of harm.
21. Policy HE4 of the Framework explains that any harm to, or loss of, the significance
    of a designated heritage asset (including from development within its setting)

1
    7/2025/5258
2
    7/2017/5749


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010157


       should have a clear and convincing justification. Policy HE6 of the Framework
       explains that any harm to a designated heritage asset will be a matter of
       considerable importance and weight. It goes on to explain that where a
       development proposal would harm the significance of a designated heritage asset,
       the effect on the asset and its significance should be weighed against any public
       benefits resulting from the proposal.
22. The benefits associated with the scheme are largely of a private nature to the
    occupiers of No 2 North Field by allowing for boat storage and a day room. I note
    the energy efficiency measures put forward, and Policy CC2 of the Framework
    requires substantial weight to be given to such benefits. The proposed
    development would however result in a high level of harm to the significance of the
    World Heritage Site. In accordance with the Framework, this harm is afforded
    substantial weight. The magnitude of the benefits associated with the scheme
    taking into account the nature and scale of proposals are not sufficient to outweigh
    the identified heritage harm, to which considerable importance and weight must be
    given. The harm is not therefore justified having regard to Policies HE4 and HE6 of
    the Framework. Consequently, the planning balance weighs against the proposal.
23. The proposed development would be contrary to Policies 01, 02, 05, 06, 07 and 24
    of the LP which together, amongst other matters, seek to achieve design
    excellence in all development, to be inspired by and contribute to local
    distinctiveness.
24. For the same reasons, the proposed development would also be contrary to
    chapters 14, 19 and 20 of the Framework relating to achieving well-designed
    places, conserving and enhancing the natural environment and conserving and
    enhancing the historic environment.
Flood risk
25. The proposed development would be located within Flood Zones 2 and 3 and is
    within 20 metres of a main river. Chapter 18 of the Framework relates to managing
    flood risk and coastal change where the objective is to minimise risks to
    development arising from all sources of flooding and coastal change, taking into
    account the impacts of climate change, by steering development away from areas
    of risk, ensuring that development will be safe for its lifetime without increasing
    flood risk elsewhere, and incorporating sustainable drainage systems where
    appropriate.
26. Policy F4 of the Framework explains that to inform the assessment of flood risk
    and, where relevant, appropriate mitigation, a site-specific flood risk assessment
    should accompany all development proposals in Flood Zones 2, 3a, and 3b. Policy
    F7 explains that development proposals should not present a risk from flooding to
    potential occupiers, users, or visitors, and should not increase flood risk
    elsewhere. It goes on to explain that where development is proposed in a location
    known to be at risk from any form of flooding, now or in the future, it should be
    refused unless: a. within the site, the most vulnerable development is located in
    areas of lowest flood risk, unless there are overriding reasons which justify a
    different arrangement; b. the development will be safe throughout its lifetime taking
    account of the vulnerability of its users; c. any residual risk can be safely
    managed, and safe access and escape routes are included where appropriate, as
    part of an agreed emergency plan; d. the development is appropriately flood


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010157


       resistant and resilient such that, in the event of a flood, it could be quickly brought
       back into use without significant refurbishment; and e. it can be demonstrated that
       flood risk will not be increased elsewhere.
27. A Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) was submitted with the application and appeal,
    but it is very basic in its detail. It sets out that the site is understandably located
    within a higher category Flood Zone designation due to its water-compatible use
    and that the proposals are not considered at risk from surface water flooding and
    does not increase flood risk elsewhere within or adjacent to the site.
28. I have had due regard to the consultation response provided from the Environment
    Agency which explains that they are not satisfied that the FRA meets the minimum
    requirements to be acceptable, and that the development would be safe without
    exacerbating flood risk elsewhere. The consultation response identifies a series of
    issues with the FRA including an allowance for climate change and based on the
    evidence before me, these have not been adequately addressed.
29. The appellant has suggested that matters relating to flood risk could be sufficiently
    overcome via suitably worded planning conditions. However, there is not sufficient
    information before me to be satisfied that the proposals would be safe in the event
    of flooding and would not result in an increased risk of flooding elsewhere. Planning
    conditions would not therefore be an appropriate solution in the particular
    circumstances of this case.
30. For the above reasons, I conclude on this issue that the proposed development
    would be unacceptable with regard to flood risk and would therefore be contrary to
    Policy 03 of the LP which amongst other matters, seeks to increase the resilience
    of the Lake District to all types of flood event, including river, surface water and
    coastal flooding.
31. For the same reasons, the proposed development would also be contrary to
    chapter 18 of the Framework relating to managing flood risk and coastal change.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
32. The proposed development would unacceptably harm the character and
    appearance of the area. It would fail to conserve the natural beauty and special
    qualities of the Lake District National Park and the English Lake District World
    Heritage Site. Additionally, the proposed development would also be unacceptable
    in terms of flood risk. I attribute substantial weight to such matters.
33. Policy S3 of the Framework explains that decisions on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. Policy S5 of the
    Framework explains that only certain forms of development should be approved
    outside settlements and includes amongst others, development for outdoor sport
    and recreation. It is explained that these should be approved, unless the benefits
    of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
34. Policy S5 of the Framework identifies circumstances where the adverse impacts of
    a proposal are likely to outweigh its benefits. These include situations where a
    proposal would fail to comply with one of the national decision-making policies
    which state that development proposals should be refused in specific
    circumstances. Policy DP3 (3) of the Framework explains that development


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6010157


       proposals should be refused if, without clear justification, they conflict with the key
       principles for well-designed places or with any explicit design standards set out in
       the development plan (including those in locally, specific policies, guides, codes or
       masterplans). Further, Policy F7 explains that where development is proposed in a
       location known to be at risk from any form of flooding, now or in the future, it
       should be refused unless it meets certain criteria as set out above. Given my
       findings in terms of character and appearance matters and flood risk, such policy
       considerations weigh strongly against the grant of planning permission.
35. Notwithstanding the above, the benefits of the scheme would also be substantially
    outweighed by the adverse effects identified, when assessed against the national
    decision-making policies in the Framework. The presumption in favour of
    sustainable development is therefore not engaged.
36. Bringing everything together, the proposed development would conflict with the
    development plan when considered as a whole. There are no material
    considerations, either individually or in combination including the provisions of the
    Framework, that would outweigh the identified harm and associated plan conflict. I
    conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

N Teasdale
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
