Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by Andrew Owen MA BA(Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 4th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010315
The Green Man, The Green, Clophill, MK45 4AD
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Zoe Klinnert of Green Man Developments Ltd against the decision of Central
     Bedfordshire Council.
•    The application Ref is CB/26/00472/FULL.
•    The development proposed is erection of 1 No. detached dwelling on land to rear of Green Man PH,
     with associated parking, landscaping and access from High Street.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for erection of 1 No.
       detached dwelling on land to rear of Green Man PH, with associated parking,
       landscaping and access from High Street at The Green Man, The Green, Clophill,
       MK45 4AD in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref
       CB/26/00472/FULL, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.     Amended plans were submitted with the appeal. They show the window serving
       bedroom 1 to be obscurely glazed, and rooflights inserted in both roof slopes of
       the rear facing gable end to serve this bedroom. Although these changes are not
       substantial in extent, the provision of additional windows, particularly into the side
       facing the rear garden of the neighbouring dwelling at 50 Readshill, is significant in
       consequence as the occupiers of No. 50 will not necessarily have had the
       opportunity to comment on the alteration. As such I have not accepted the
       amended plan as it could prejudice interested parties if I were to do so.
3.     As the appeal site is partly in a conservation area and close to a listed building, I
       have had special regard to sections 66(1) and 72(1) of the Planning (Listed
       Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are:
           i)    the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the local
                 area bearing in mind the special attention that should be paid to the
                 desirability of preserving the setting of The Green Man PH which is a
                 Grade II listed building, and the extent to which it would preserve or
                 enhance the character or appearance of the Clophill Conservation Area;
           ii) the effect of the development on the living conditions of neighbouring
                 occupiers with respect to their privacy; and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010315


              iii)    whether the development would provide suitable living conditions for its
                      future occupiers with regards to their privacy, outlook and amenity
                      space.
Reasons
Character and appearance
5.     The appeal site forms, what is understood to be, the former car park of The Green
       Man in the centre of the village of Clophill. The former pub itself is currently being
       converted into residential accommodation, and planning permission has already
       been granted for the erection of a dwelling on the appeal site. It is not disputed that
       that permission has been implemented.
6.     To its north are the dwellings on Readshill and a small flatted development in
       Beverley Court. To the south is the former pub and the other properties that front
       the High Street. To the east is the rear garden of 3a High Street and to the west
       are two dwellings, 17 and 19 High Street, which appear as modern backland
       development behind Nos. 11 and 13. The character of the area is therefore
       transitional between the regular housing to the north and the more haphazard
       arrangement of dwellings to the south and to each side of the site.
7.     There is a public footpath that links High Street with Beverley Court. This utilises
       the vehicular access to the site, and to the two houses opposite. The land slopes
       from south up to north, and so when approaching the site from the north via the
       footpath, the former pub appears quite low down.
       Conservation Area
8.     The main part of the appeal site, on which the proposed dwelling would be built, is
       adjacent to the Clophill Conservation Area (CCA), whilst the vehicular access is
       within the CCA. The CCA covers an area encompassing the historic core of the
       village and it is roughly linear in shape. Its significance is informed by the string of
       historic buildings along the High Street with occasional narrow driveways in
       between the buildings to the land behind.
9.     The vehicular access to the proposed dwelling is a narrow driveway between the
       flank walls of The Green Man and the building at No. 15. The use of this access by
       the development would reflect its existing use by the residents of the houses at
       Nos. 17 and 19 opposite, the future occupiers of The Green Man, and the historic
       use of the appeal site as a car park.
10. The proposed dwelling would be distinct from the buildings within the CCA as it
    would not address High Street and would be detached from them. Moreover, the
    proposal would be most prominent from positions to the north and from here only
    the rear of the buildings in the CCA that face towards the High Street would be
    seen. As such, the main significance of the CCA would not be harmed. Indeed, the
    relationship between the appeal proposal and the CCA would be comparable to
    that of the two houses opposite the site which are also adjacent to, but outside of,
    the CCA.
11. As such, the proposal would preserve the character and appearance of the CCA
    and thus would preserve its significance.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
Appeal Decision 6010315


       Listed building
12. The Green Man is a Grade II listed public house, dating from the 18th century. Its
    special interest is largely informed by its historic value and functionality as a key
    community facility at the heart of the village. The setting of the building is primarily
    informed by its position amongst other listed buildings and buildings of local
    interest along the High Street and around The Green, and this setting contributes
    to its special interest as a key part of the High Street. The appeal site provides
    very little contribution to the setting of the listed building.
13. The dwelling would be two storeys but with accommodation partly within the roof
    slope with three half dormers on the front elevation. Although the front section of
    the listed building has two storeys plus a roof, the rear section is slightly lower and
    has accommodation over two floors, but with the first floor within the roof. It would
    therefore not be dissimilar to the appeal development.
14. The proposed building would be broadly the same height as the front part of The
    Green Man, but would appear to be taller as a result of the higher ground level.
    However in terms of its design it would not be as large in scale as the front part of
    the listed building. It would have a greater scale and bulk than the rear elements of
    the listed building, but the development would retain a substantial gap to that
    building. Indeed, the gap would not be much less than the gap to the house at 50
    Readshill. As such, the house would reflect a transition, in terms of scale as well
    as height, from the shorter building on the lower land to the south and the taller,
    fully two-storey houses at 48 and 50 Readshill on the higher land to the north.
15. It is also notable that the new house erected at 1a High Street is positioned closely
    to The Green Man, such that the listed building wraps around the south and west
    sides of that house. From positions to the north, No. 1a is clearly taller than the
    rear element of the listed building it runs parallel to. The eaves height of the
    proposal would be somewhere between the eaves of the listed building and that of
    No. 1a and its roof would be of a similar mass.
16. The materials to be used would be mostly red brick and tiled roofs. The listed
    building is distinctive insofar as the front part is white painted bricks and render.
    The rear part however is red brick with a small section of black painted horizontal
    wooden cladding. All parts have clay roof tiles. From the plans, the proposal would
    be largely finished in red brick and tiles that would be comparable to those used at
    the listed building, as well as at No. 1a. As such, although the proposal would not
    mimic the design of the listed building, it incorporates some elements of it. In any
    case, the separation between the proposed dwelling and the listed building means
    that a degree of difference would not detract from the setting of the listed building.
17. The development would not be harmful to the setting of the heritage asset.
    Therefore, the proposal would preserve the setting and therefore the special
    interest of the Grade II listed building.
18. Overall, the development would preserve the significance of both heritage assets.
    This would satisfy the requirements of the Act, policies HE4 and HE6 of the
    National Planning Policy Framework and would not conflict with policy HE3 of the
    Central Bedfordshire Local Plan (2021) (CBLP) that seeks, among other things, to
    ensure development preserves the setting of heritage assets and their historic
    significance.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010315


19. It would also be in accordance with CBLP policy HQ1 which aims to ensure that
    proposals relate well to the local surroundings in terms of size, massing and
    materials and generally reflect the existing character of the surrounding area, and
    CBLP policy HQ8 which broadly seeks the same but with specific reference to
    backland development.
Living conditions - neighbours
20. The first-floor window serving bedroom 1 would be around 3.3 metres from the
    rear boundary which separates the site from the rear garden at 3a High Street.
    The boundary is comprised of a close-boarded fence around 2 metres in height
    but, due to the slightly lower ground level within the site, the fence would appear to
    be around 2.5 metres tall from here. No. 3a has a large rear garden and this part
    closest to the appeal site is the furthest from the dwelling. As such, although there
    would be a direct and close view into the rear garden of this neighbouring property,
    I do not consider the privacy of its residents would be unacceptably affected as
    they have ample space elsewhere in their rear garden which would be useable
    and not adversely overlooked by the development.
21. The window would also provide an angled view over the rear garden at 52
    Readshill. Although this would also be at close range it would be off to one side,
    which is a common arrangement in built up areas. Moreover there is an area of
    side garden at No 52 which would be at a very acute angle to the proposal so
    would not be readily overlooked by the facing first-floor window in the dwelling.
22. As such, the development would not be likely to result in a loss of privacy at
    adjacent properties such that it would unacceptably harm their living conditions.
    The proposal would therefore accord with policies HQ1 and HQ8 of the CBLP
    which together seek to ensure that development provides a good standard of
    amenity for existing occupants, including in terms of privacy.
Living conditions – future occupiers
23. There is a first floor window in the gable end of 1a High Street which closely and
    directly overlooks the appeal site. From the evidence before me this window
    serves a bedroom. The view from this window allows a direct and close view over
    almost all of the garden at the appeal site. However the rear garden for the
    dwelling subject of the extant permission at the appeal site would be of a similar
    size and position. The privacy of the future occupiers of the site would therefore be
    no worse in the current scheme than in the extant scheme.
24. The outlook from the kitchen window in the proposal would be towards the
    boundary fence. Whilst this would restrict the view, the kitchen would also be
    served by patio doors on its south side which would face into the garden. This
    would allow sufficient light into, and outlook from, this room.
25. The depth of the garden towards the east boundary would be below the standards
    set out in the Central Bedfordshire Design Guide. However the main part of the
    proposed garden would be above this standard when measured from the patio
    doors serving the kitchen to the south boundary, and generally the garden is of a
    sufficient area.
26. Overall, the proposal would provide its future occupiers with acceptable outlook
    and amenity space, and therefore the living conditions would be suitable. The


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010315


       development would therefore accord with policy HQ8 which advises that proposals
       will be expected to secure a good standard of amenity for future occupants of
       buildings, and HQ1 which expects development to be of the highest possible
       quality.
27. Although the privacy at the appeal site would be poor and would result in conflict
    with these policies, the fact that it would be comparable to the garden which would
    result if the extant permission were completed is a material consideration that
    outweighs the conflict with the development plan policies in this respect.
Other Matters
28. The parish council raise a number of concerns, most of which have been
    addressed above. In respect of their concerns regarding the access, I note that the
    two dwellings at Nos. 17 and 19 are accessed from the same point and that there
    are other parking spaces here behind No. 15. As such this area, whilst also being
    a pedestrian route, is clearly well used by vehicular traffic. Moreover, as this
    access would most likely have been used to access the car park for The Green
    Man, local residents would be well used to finding slow moving traffic. It is also a
    consideration that the extant planning permission would involve traffic in this area,
    so it is unlikely that the proposal would result in any material increase in traffic
    using this area or using the access point onto the High Street, over and above that
    which could already take place were the dwelling subject of the extant permission
    completed and occupied.
Conditions
29. I have considered the suggested conditions against the advice in the Planning
    Practise Guidance and the National Planning Policy Framework. Where
    necessary, I have slightly amended the wording of some conditions to better reflect
    that guidance.
30. In the interests of certainty I have imposed the standard commencement condition
    and a condition specifying the approved plans. In order to ensure the character
    and appearance of the area is retained, I have imposed conditions requiring the
    submission of samples of finishing materials, details of boundary treatment, and a
    landscaping scheme. As suggested by the appellant, it is not necessary that these
    conditions require compliance before commencement of any development.
31. I have included a condition requiring the north facing window is obscurely glazed
    and that no part of it below 1.7m above the floor level of the room it serves is
    openable. This is to ensure there would be no adverse overlooking to the
    neighbouring property. For the same reason a condition is included to prevent the
    insertion of any further windows on the flank elevations of the dwelling. Also, to
    protect the amenity of nearby residents, a condition is included requiring
    compliance with the Council’s Construction Code of Practice.
32. In the interests of biodiversity, conditions are imposed to require an Ecological
    Enhancement Plan and compliance with the Council’s Environmental Code of
    Practice.
33. Two conditions were suggested relating to waste receptacles and bin storage and
    collection areas. I consider by imposing the latter, the former is superfluous.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010315


34. I have included a condition requiring compliance with the cycle parking as shown
    on the approved plans, as I see no reason why its location would conflict with the
    position of the garden gate.
35. The Council suggested a condition requiring the provision of visibility splays of
    2.4m x 43m. As this would be commensurate for an access onto a road with a
    30mph speed limit, rather than a public footpath, I have imposed a condition
    requiring visibility splays more appropriate to the location are provided.
36. From the plans provided, it is clearly not possible for vehicles to turn such that they
    would not need to cross over the pedestrian route, as was required by a suggested
    condition. Moreover, as set out above, there are already a number of parking
    spaces in this area that would necessitate cars and service/delivery vehicles
    manoeuvring across the pedestrian route. In that context, it is only necessary for
    details to be provided to demonstrate that vehicles can turn within the appeal site
    boundary, which includes much of the public footpath, so as to avoid vehicles
    reversing onto the High Street, which would be dangerous. It would be necessary
    for such details to be submitted for approval as the appeal site boundary in the
    current proposal differs from that in the subject of the extant planning permission.
Conclusion
37. The proposal would accord with the development plan taken as a whole and there
    are no other considerations to indicate a decision other than in accordance with
    the development plan. Therefore, for the reasons given above, the appeal is
    allowed.

Andrew Owen
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6010315


Schedule of Conditions
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: OAKPL-52A, OAKPL-52B dated 05/02/2026,
              OAKPL-52C dated 05/02/2026 and OAKPL-52D.
     3)       No development above slab level shall take place until samples of all external
              facing materials have been submitted to and approved in writing by the local
              planning authority. The development shall be carried out in accordance with
              the approved sample details.
     4)       Prior to the occupation of the dwelling hereby approved, a plan indicating the
              positions, height, design, materials and type of boundary treatment to be
              erected shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
              authority. The boundary treatment shall be completed as approved before the
              building is occupied and retained as such thereafter.
     5)       No development above slab level shall commence until a scheme of hard
              and soft landscaping and a scheme for landscape maintenance for a period
              of five years has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local
              planning authority. All planting, seeding or turfing comprised in the approved
              details of landscaping shall be carried out in the first planting and seeding
              season following the occupation of the building. The landscaping shall be
              maintained in accordance with the approved landscape maintenance scheme
              and any trees or plants which within a period of 5 years from the completion
              of the development die, are removed or become seriously damaged or
              diseased shall be replaced in the next planting season with others of similar
              size and species.
     6)       The dwelling hereby permitted shall not be occupied until the first floor
              window in the north elevation has been fitted with obscured glazing, and no
              part of that window that is less than 1.7 metres above the floor of the room in
              which it is installed shall be capable of being opened. Once installed, the
              obscured glazing shall be retained as such thereafter.
     7)       Notwithstanding the provisions of the Town and Country Planning (General
              Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (or any order revoking and re-
              enacting that Order with or without modification), no windows/dormer
              windows, other than those expressly authorised by this permission, shall be
              constructed on the north and south elevations of the dwelling.
     8)       No development shall take place until an Ecological Enhancement Plan
              displaying details of bat and bird box installation has been submitted to and
              approved in writing by the local planning authority. The details shall be
              implemented as approved and retained as such thereafter.
     9)       The dwelling hereby approved shall not be occupied until details of the bin
              storage and collection areas have been submitted to and approved in writing
              by the local planning authority. The bin storage/collection areas shall be
              implemented in accordance with the approved details before the
              development is occupied and shall be retained as such thereafter.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6010315


     10)      The dwelling hereby permitted shall not be occupied until space has been
              laid out within the site in accordance with drawing no. OAKPL-52A for three
              bicycles to be parked and that space shall thereafter be kept available for the
              parking of bicycles.
     11)      The dwelling hereby permitted shall not be occupied until the vehicle parking
              area shown on drawing no. OAKPL-52A has been provided with visibility
              splays of 2.0m x 2.0m. The splays shall be provided at each end of the
              parking area shown and be measured from the edge of the public right of
              way. The splays shall be maintained as such thereafter and kept free of all
              obstructions to visibility.
     12)      The dwelling hereby permitted shall not be occupied until details of a turning
              space for vehicles, including servicing and delivery vehicles, within the
              appeal site boundary has been submitted to and approved in writing by the
              local planning authority. The approved turning space shall be provided before
              occupation of the development and retained thereafter for that purpose.
     13)      The development hereby permitted shall be undertaken in full accordance
              with the local planning authority’s adopted ‘Construction Code of Practice for
              Developers and Contractors’:
              https://www.centralbedfordshire.gov.uk/info/44/planning/674/codes_of_practi
              ce_for_planning.
     14)      The development hereby permitted shall be undertaken in full accordance
              with the local planning authority’s adopted ‘Environmental Code of Practice’
              https://www.centralbedfordshire.gov.uk/info/44/planning/674/codes_of_practi
              ce_for_planning/3.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
