Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026 by E Clifford BA (Hons) MA
Decision by B Plenty BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 3 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010507
14-16 Lingwood Road, Hackney, London E5 9BN
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Schreiber against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
    Hackney.
•   The application Ref is 2026/0155.
•   The development proposed is joint first floor rear extension at Nos. 14 and 16.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. Having reviewed the most recent changes to the National Planning Policy
   Framework, I am satisfied that they do not affect the substance of the main issue in
   the appeal. Since they would not therefore be prejudiced, I have proceeded
   without further consultation with the main parties.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
   appearance of the area.
Reasons for the Recommendation
5. The appeal relates to two dwellings which form part of a larger terrace (hereafter
   referred to as the appeal site). Both of the properties have had previous alterations
   and extensions, including large front and rear box dormers to the roof level and
   substantial rear extensions at basement and ground floor levels.
6. These alterations are characteristic of the wider terrace, along which rear
   extensions and large dormers are a common feature. Whilst these alterations have
   created an element of variety in the appearance of Lingwood Road, the terrace still
   shares features such as the rear facing bay windows and brickwork details to
   create an overall cohesive appearance. The terrace backs onto the Spring Hill
   Recreation Ground, a large public open space from which long ranging views of the
   rear elevation of properties along Lingwood Road are possible.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010507


7. The Residential Extension and Alterations Supplementary Planning Document
   (2025) (SPD) sets out the expectation that two-storey and above extensions will
   only be approved where they form part of the dominant character of the area.
   Whilst I acknowledge that there are some limited examples of first floor extensions
   in the vicinity, this has not created a dominant character. The SPD further advises
   that an extension should respect the original design and architectural features of
   the building, with a roof form that would complement the main building.
8. The SPD further requires that extensions are set one storey down from the eaves.
   Regardless of whether this is interpreted literally, the proposal in this instance
   would have an overly dominant visual effect by virtue of its stacked appearance on
   top of the existing large rear extensions. It would also lack the necessary
   subordinacy to assimilate well with the host dwellings given its excessive bulk and
   mass.
9. Furthermore, the appeal properties both benefit from substantial rear box dormers,
   which have largely concealed the original roof forms. The introduction of another
   storey, built on top of the existing large rear extensions, would interact poorly with
   this roof form and give the properties a monolithic and bulky appearance. The
   finished result would be far removed from the original design of the buildings, and
   indeed from those in the rest of the terrace, contrary to the guidance in the SPD.
10. The appellant notes that the recently adopted SPD states that the “prominence of
    properties whose rear can be seen from adjoining streets and side streets remain
    an additional consideration”. It further states that while extensions can generally be
    accommodated at the rear of existing houses, they must be “designed to respect
    the character and size of the original house”. As established, the proposal would
    not abide by this guidance, and furthermore, the orientation of the dwellings and the
    scale of the proposal, when experienced in conjunction with the existing
    extensions, would be very prominent in views from the recreation ground and would
    disturb the overall cohesive appearance of the wider terrace.
11. Overall, the proposal would have a harmful effect on the character and appearance
    of the area. In that regard, it would fail to comply with Policies D1, D3 and D4 of the
    London Plan (2021) requiring development to have regard to the urban form and
    structure of the area, enhance local context and deliver high-quality design and
    placemaking. It would also be contrary to the requirements of Policies LP1 and
    LP17 of the Hackney Local Plan (2020) to respond to local character and context
    and be of a high-quality of design, with particular reference to the guidance of the
    SPD.
Other Matters
12. My attention has been drawn to other schemes in the area, and I have been
    provided with the delegated report for two schemes, at nos. 35-37 Spring Hill and
    no. 46 Lingwood Road, albeit without the benefit of any drawings. However, I note
    that these two schemes were approved prior to the adoption of the SPD which is a
    material consideration of this appeal. I have therefore based my recommendation
    on the most up to date guidance.
13. Whilst the appellant has provided the addresses of other permissions granted in the
    area, I do not have the benefit of further details such as drawings or delegated
    reports to understand the circumstances under which planning permission was
    granted. I am thus unable to consider this further.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010507


14. The appellant has drawn my attention to the matters which are not in dispute with
    the Council such as the effect on living conditions of neighbouring occupiers,
    sustainability, drainage, biodiversity and the principle of development. Whilst that
    may be the case, and the delegated report supports this position, these matters can
    only be neutral factors in any planning balance and do not overcome the harm that
    I have found elsewhere in the scheme.
Conclusion and Recommendation
15. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I
    recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

E Clifford
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
16. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

B Plenty
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
