Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by David Troy BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 10 September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6010352
Footpath outside 3 Millbrook Place, London, NW1 2JA
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Group PLC against the decision of the Council of the
    London Borough of Camden.
•   The application Ref is 2026/0295/P.
•   The development proposed is Installation of 1 No. BT Street Hub Unit and Associated Advertisement
    Panels on either Side of the Unit.

Appeal B Ref: 6010353
Footpath outside 3 Millbrook Place, London, NW1 2JA
•   The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
    Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
    consent.
•   The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Group PLC against the decision of the Council of the
    London Borough of Camden.
•   The application Ref is 2026/0442/A.
•   The advertisement proposed is Installation of 1 No. BT Street Hub Unit and Associated
    Advertisement Panels on either Side of the Unit.

Decisions
1. Appeals A and B are dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. Appeal A concerns the refusal of planning permission to erect a BT Street Hub Unit
   (Hub). Appeal B concerns the refusal of express consent to display advertisements
   on the Hub. I have considered each on its individual merits, however, as they raise
   similar issues I have combined both decisions into a single decision letter.
3. With respect to Appeal B, Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements)
   (England) Regulations 2007 (the Regulations) specify that decisions must be based
   solely on considerations of amenity and public safety. Therefore, while I have taken
   the development plan policies referred to by the Council into account, they have not
   been determinative in respect of Appeal B.
4. Since the determination of the application an updated and revised National
   Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026.
   The main parties have been consulted and provided with an opportunity to provide
   comments on it in relation to these appeals. I have therefore considered the
   development against the relevant policies in the Framework.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6010352 and 6010353


Main Issues
5. The main issues in relation to Appeal A are the effect of the proposed development
   on (i) the character and appearance of the area, including the Camden Town
   Conservation Area (CA) and the setting of the Grade II listed Mornington Cresent
   station, (ii) highway safety, and (iii) community safety and security.
6. The main issue in relation to Appeal B is the effect of the proposed advertisements
   on the amenity of the area, having regard to heritage assets.
Reasons
Appeals A and B - Character and Appearance/Amenity
7. The appeal site comprises of a pedestrian footpath outside No. 3 Millbrook Place, a
   four storey commercial premises in a prominent corner position at the junction of
   Millbrook Place and Hurdwick Place. It is located a busy road interchange, adjacent
   to the Grade II listed Mornington Cresent underground station, surrounded by a
   range of retail and commercial units within Camden Town Centre, that provides a
   busy and vibrant commercial character to the area.
8. The public realm in the vicinity of the appeal site is defined by the wide and open
   nature of the footway, with street trees nearby. The existing street furniture and
   other structures are limited and well spaced, including a street tree, wayfinder sign,
   bins, seating, cycle racks, traffic lights and lamp posts. This enables a good degree
   of openness within the footway, with a relatively uncluttered pedestrian area. Whilst
   the proposed removal of an existing BT kiosk nearby would remove some clutter, it
   is however, positioned away from the proposed Hub and the open areas of the
   footway, as such its removal would limit the benefits in this particular location.
9. The new Hub would be in an open and prominent position and would be clearly
   visible to passing pedestrians and motorists. Due to its height, width and overall
   solidity it would be the most prominent feature within its immediate setting and
   would contrast unfavourably with the open feel that is a characteristic of the
   footpath. Despite the commercial town centre location, it would have an undue
   presence in its setting, appearing as an incongruous and uncharacteristic feature,
   which I consider would adversely harm rather than positively contribute to the
   character and appearance of the area.
10. The adjacent commercial units display advertisement signage typical of a town
    centre location, with modestly sized fascia signage and projecting signs that are
    proportionate to the scale of the shopfronts. The double-sided illuminated
    advertisement display screens integrated with the Hub would be an uncharacteristic
    and prominent feature that would detract from the public realm and the open
    character and appearance of the footway. Whilst I acknowledge the proposed use
    of anti-glare glass and planning conditions could be used to control the level of
    illumination and frequency of image changes, such measures would not overcome
    the harm I have found to the visual amenity of the area.
11. Given the location of the appeal site within the CA, which contains the Grade II
    listed Mornington Cresent station, together with the Grade II listed Camden Palace
    Theatre and the Grade II listed statue of Richard Cobden on the opposite side of
    Millbrook Place, special attention must be paid to considering the impact of the
    development on the significance of the designated heritage assets and to the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6010352 and 6010353


     desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of the CA and
     the setting of the listed buildings/statue.
12. The historic and architectural significance of the CA with its older more traditional
    19th and 20th Century buildings of varying styles in the surrounding streets and the
    elaborate maroon glazed ceramic frontage with arched sashes to the listed
    underground station can be readily appreciated within the immediate vicinity of the
    site. The historic and architectural significance of the symmetrical Baroque pastiche
    style façade of the listed Theatre building and the large listed statue on the
    opposite side of the road can also be viewed from the appeal site.
13. I consider that the proposed Hub and advertisement, by virtue of their siting and
    design, would have a negative material impact on how the CA and the listed station
    building are viewed and appreciated and as such would fail to preserve or enhance
    the CA and the setting of the listed building at Mornington Cresent station. The
    proposed Hub would be located a short distance from the listed Theatre building
    and listed statue and would be separated by the wide and busy carriageway along
    Millbrook Place. Consequently, I do not find harm in relation to this aspect and the
    setting of the listed Theatre building and listed statue would be preserved.
14. Whilst the degree of harm resulting from the proposed Hub and advertisement on
    the significance of the CA and the listed station building would be at the lower level,
    in accordance with Policy HE6 (4) of the Framework, that harm should be weighed
    against any public benefits of the proposals.
15. I have considered the appellant’s comments regarding the substantial weight to be
    given to the benefits of improving telecommunications infrastructure in line with the
    policies in the Framework and the various public benefits put forward by the
    appellant. These benefits include the upgrading of communications infrastructure
    through providing free calls; free wi-fi and device charging; wayfinding; access to
    emergency services; air quality sensors; pedestrian flow monitoring; in-built CCTV
    cameras as well as the Hub being powered by renewable energy. The appellant
    has also highlighted the potential for advertising for local businesses, free services
    to the council, including the ability to obtain data from the Hub.
16. Nonetheless, whilst given substantial weight in line with the Framework, given the
    limited scale of the proposals, these benefits would be modest. I therefore find
    insufficient public benefits arising from the proposals to offset the identified harm to
    which I attach substantial weight.
17. Accordingly, for these reasons, I conclude for Appeal A that the proposed
    development would have an unacceptably harmful effect on the character and
    appearance of the area, including the CA and the setting of the adjacent Grade II
    listed station building. It would therefore be contrary to Policies D1 and D2 of the
    Camden Local Plan 2017 (CLP), which, amongst other things, seek to ensure that
    developments are designed and sited so as to respect the local character, preserve
    or enhance the historic environment and the significance of designated heritage
    assets and their settings.
18. With regard to Appeal B, I conclude the proposed advertisements would have an
    unacceptable harmful effect on visual amenity. Though not determinative, I have
    taken account of Policies D1, D2 and D4 of the CLP, which in addition to above,
    seek to preserve the character and amenity of the area and resist advertising that
    contributes to street clutter in the public realm.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6010352 and 6010353


Appeal A - Highway Safety
19. The proposed Hub would be positioned in the centre of the wide pavement, set
    back from the existing street tree, seating and other street furniture within the
    footpath. Millbrook Place and Hurdwick Place are principal commercial shopping
    streets leading toward Camden High Street and it was apparent from my site visit
    on a weekday that the footpath is relatively busy. Although this was just a snapshot
    in time, I am mindful of the Council’s Transport Officer’s comments regarding the
    high footfall in this location and that it is likely to be materially greater, particularly at
    peak times and weekends.
20. I note the appellant’s comments that around 5.0m of unobstructed footpath width
    would remain available in front of the adjacent cafe at No.3 Millbrook Place (No.3)
    and in excess of 5.0m to the kerb edge of the adjacent road. However, this does
    not take into account the seating and other structures outside the adjacent cafe at
    No. 3 and the layout of the street furniture nearest to the road, which means the
    actual space available is less than that identified. I observed that many pedestrians
    naturally moved to the central area of the pavement to avoid the existing street
    furniture and other features and walk across the position of the proposed Hub,
    which formed a natural desire line for pedestrians in this location, in particular to the
    nearby signal-controlled crossing road points to the north-east of the appeal site.
21. Consequently, given the use of the space available on the footpath and the
    potential footfall in this busy location, I consider, in my view, that the proposed Hub
    in this position would cause an undue obstruction to pedestrians and impede the
    free flow of pedestrian movements, including those using the nearby underground
    station and pedestrian crossings.
22. Therefore, for the reasons given, I conclude with regard to Appeal A that the
    proposed Hub would have a harmful effect on highway safety with particular regard
    to the free and safe movement of pedestrians. Consequently, the proposal would
    be contrary to Policies G1, A1, C6 and T1 of the CLP, insofar as they relate to
    ensuring the delivery of high quality development that meets the highest practicable
    standards of accessible and inclusive design and prioritises walking (among other
    sustainable means of transport) by providing high-quality footpaths of adequate
    width for the number of people expected to use them.
Appeal A - Community Safety and security
23. The Council has described installations such as telephone kiosks and
    communication hubs as “crime generators” and focal points for anti-social
    behaviour. The Council state that they have experienced a rise in crime and anti-
    social behaviour as a direct result of the existing InLink kiosks in areas such as
    Camden Town. These activities include increased loitering, as well as the usage of
    the free calls facility at the InLink kiosks to coordinate drug dealing. This, however,
    is couched in general ‘area’ terms rather than specifically related to the appeal site.
24. The Metropolitan Police’s Crime Prevention Design Advisor commented that the
    locations around the existing InLink kiosks in Camden often see higher levels of
    crime and anti-social behaviour, particularly linked to the night-time economy, and
    that the proposed Hub is larger than the previous InLink kiosks and as such would
    create a larger space for possible concealment. They also noted that, due to the
    openness of the proposed Hub, it could offer opportunities for would-be criminals to


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decisions 6010352 and 6010353


     observe people using or charging their phones at the appeal site and would be
     vulnerable to opportunistic phone thefts.
25. However, while I do not seek to downplay the harmful impacts of street crime and
    anti-social behaviour, there is limited substantive evidence before me, including
    recent site-specific crime data, to demonstrate that these issues would be
    increased as a result of the proposed Hub in this particular location. If I had been
    minded to allow this appeal, a condition requiring the proposed Hub to be operated
    in accordance with the appellant’s submitted Anti-Social Behaviour Management
    Plan would be necessary.
26. As such, there would be no significant adverse effect on community safety and
    security. I therefore find no conflict with Policy C5 of the CLP, which seeks to tackle
    crime and anti-social behaviour, and to promote safer streets and public areas.
Other Matters
27. In support of the appeals the appellant has stated that the proposed development
    includes the removal of 2 no. existing telephone kiosk outside the Mornington
    Crescent Station on Hurdwick Place. However, I observed on my site visit that one
    of the kiosks has already been removed and as such cannot be considered a direct
    benefit of the appeal scheme. The other kiosk to be removed is not within the
    appeal site. Therefore, I am not satisfied this would mitigate the harm arising from
    the appeal proposals, nor that the proposed condition to secure its removal would
    meet the tests outlined in Policy DM6(1) of the Framework and advice contained in
    the Planning Practice Guidance.
28. The appellant has also referenced to similar structures installed across the local
    authority area and in other parts of the country, together with a range of appeals
    that include the replacement of kiosks and advertisements. However, I have not
    been provided the full details of these to know how directly comparable they are to
    the current proposals. This in turn limits the relevance of the appeals highlighted. In
    any event, I have determined the appeals before me on their own merits.
29. I acknowledge the existing illuminated advertisements on bus shelters in the locality
    highlighted by the appellant. However, they appear to have different locational and
    development characteristics to the appeal scheme and as such are not directly
    comparable to the appeals before me. As a consequence, whilst I have taken this
    into account, it does not materially alter my conclusions on the appeal proposals.
30. In light of my findings on the main issues, it is unnecessary to consider the need for
    a maintenance plan for the proposed Hub by way of a Section 106 legal
    agreement, as it would not be determinative.
31. The appellant states that the proposals would contribute towards improving
    telecommunications infrastructure in line with the Framework and the Code of Best
    Practice on Wireless Network Development in England 2022. I have considered the
    various other public benefits put forward by the appellant in the main issues above,
    including the removal of the existing telephone kiosk. However, the above
    combined benefits would not be sufficient to outweigh the harm I have identified in
    this case and there is no indication that they could not be achieved in a less
    harmful manner than proposed.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decisions 6010352 and 6010353


Conclusion
32. For the reasons given above, I conclude Appeals A and B should be dismissed.

David Troy
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
