Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by F Harrison BA(Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 02 September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6010457
Footpath Outside Aldi, 106A Newport Road, Middlesbrough TS1 5JF
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Safia Rana-Jaswal of BT Group Plc against the decision of
    Middlesbrough Council.
•   The application Ref is 26/0109/FUL.
•   The development proposed is the installation of 1 No. BT street hub and associated display of
    advertisement panels to both sides of the unit.
Appeal B Ref: 6010458
Footpath Outside Aldi, 106A Newport Road, Middlesbrough TS1 5JF
•   The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
    Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant
    express consent.
•   The appeal is made by Safia Rana-Jaswal of BT Group Plc against the decision of
    Middlesbrough Council.
•   The application Ref is 26/0108/ADV.
•   The advertisement proposed is the installation of 1 No. BT street hub unit and associated display of
    advertisement panels to both sides of the unit.

Decision
1. Appeal A is dismissed.
2. Appeal B is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
3. The two appeals are for related proposals on the same site. I have considered each
   appeal on its individual merits, however, as they raise similar issues, I have
   combined both decisions into a single decision letter.
4. The decision notice refers to the emerging Middlesbrough Publication Local Plan
   (March 2025) (the PLP). Despite being at an advanced stage of preparation, I have
   limited substantive information regarding the PLP, including whether there are any
   unresolved objections relating to relevant policies or any required modifications
   which limits the weight to be attached to them.
5. In respect of Appeal B, the Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements)
   (England) Regulations 2007 (the Regulations) stipulate that control may be
   exercised only in the interests of amenity and public safety. Therefore, while the
   policies referred to on the decision notice are not determinative, I have taken them
   into account where relevant.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6010457, 6010458


6. Since the appeals were submitted a new version of the National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework) came into effect, but there are no material changes in
   policy emphasis relevant to the substance of the appeals.
Main Issues
7. The main issues in Appeal A are the effect of the proposal on highway safety and
   the creation of safe places.
8. The main parties agree that the advertisements would not have a harmful effect on
   amenity. From the evidence, together with my site visit observations, I have no
   clear reason to disagree. Therefore, the main issue in Appeal B is the effect of the
   proposed advertisements on public safety.
Reasons
Highway safety and public safety
9. The appeal site is adjacent to Newport Road, a busy thoroughfare with a speed
   limit of 30 miles per hour (mph) comprising two traffic lanes in either direction. At
   the appeal site location there is also a filter lane for eastbound cars to turn right into
   the Aldi store car park. A short distance to the east of the appeal site is a signalised
   junction at a busy crossroads where the main east/west traffic flows into and out of
   the town centre meet the north/south flows heading to and from the A66.
10. The proposal would be at the roadside edge and would be proximate to the junction
    with the car park. It would be in a section of Newport Road that is sensitive to
    distraction or confusion. Considering the hub’s siting, height and width it would
    have a detrimental effect on westbound vehicle visibility for those motorists exiting
    the car park in either direction. It would also partially block the view of the car park
    junction for westbound traffic in the nearside lane. This would be exacerbated when
    the hub was in use. In the absence of any detailed evidence to demonstrate that
    the proposal would fall outside of the eastern visibility splay of the car park junction
    there are limited assurances that site lines would not be diminished. Furthermore,
    the photomontages have a narrow focus which do not show the likely viewpoints of
    motorists, particularly those who would be exiting the car park.
11. The Planning Practice Guidance1 states that advertisements at points where
    drivers need to take more care are more likely to affect public safety.
    Notwithstanding the site’s commercial context, and even though visibility along this
    section of Newport Road is good and the hub would not obscure traffic signals, the
    illuminated displays would have the potential to distract motorists and other road
    users at a section of highway where concentration is required. In particular it would
    be a distraction to right turning vehicles exiting the car park who would have to
    cross two lanes of traffic to join the eastbound carriageway, which the Council’s
    highway officer indicates has regular queuing and slowing traffic. Those traveling in
    a westbound direction would also be affected and it would be a distraction to
    motorists on the eastbound carriageway filter lane turning right into the car park.
12. The imposition of conditions to control the illumination levels and changing of
    images of the proposed advertisements would not adequately address the harm to
    public safety. Even if the advertisements were not allowed, the hub would still harm
    highway and public safety, therefore both elements are unacceptable.
1 1
      Paragraph 067 Reference ID: 18b-067-20140306


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             2
Appeal Decisions 6010457, 6010458


13. The appellant has drawn my attention to a recent appeal decision elsewhere in
    Middlesbrough where a similar hub was allowed. However, the Southfield Road
    case2 was not located adjacent to a complicated road where drivers need to have
    more concentration or take more care and so is not directly comparable to this
    appeal site. In any event, I have considered this appeal on its own merits as is
    required of me.
14. To conclude, the proposal would unacceptably harm highway safety and would be
    in conflict with Policy DC1 of the Core Strategy (2008) and PLP policies CR2 and
    IN7. Amongst other things, these policies require all development proposals to not
    have an adverse effect on highway safety and digital infrastructure equipment to be
    positioned to avoid a negative impact on highway safety. As such, it follows that the
    proposed advertisements would harm public safety in conflict with the above
    policies, and PLP Policy CR8 insofar as it requires advertisements to avoid
    reducing visibility or adding notable distraction for users of the highway or
    compromising highway safety.
Safe places
15. I have no reason to doubt the comments from Cleveland Police and the Council’s
    neighbourhood safety and police officers regarding the misuse of existing kiosks
    and hubs with freephone services in the town centre that has led to crime and anti-
    social behaviour. However, while in a commercial location and nearby to retail
    units, the proposal would not be in the town centre. Taking account of the wide
    footpath and open qualities of the appeal site locality, it has different characteristics
    and is not directly comparable to a town centre site.
16. While there may be existing problems with anti-social behaviour at the nearby Aldi
    store there is no substantive evidence in the particular circumstances of this case
    that the proposal would undermine the creation of safe places. Moreover, the
    proposal is accompanied by an anti-social behaviour management plan which
    amongst other things covers automatic recognition of misuse and blocking of
    identified numbers. The plan could be secured through the imposition of a condition
    to manage any misuse of the hub. The proposed hub would therefore make
    sufficient provision required for public safety and security, a key objective of the
    Framework. It would therefore be in line with Framework Policy P5 which includes a
    requirement for proposals to anticipate and address potential safety risks and the
    provisions of Policy TR4 in relation to the arrangement of streets helping to create
    places that are safe, inclusive and attractive for all users.
17. As such, I conclude that the proposed hub would not have an unacceptable effect
    on the creation of safe places and would be in accordance with CS Policy CS5,
    insofar as it requires proposals to contribute to achieving a safe environment where
    crime and disorder or fear of crime does not undermine quality of life.
Other Considerations
18. There is support in the Framework for the expansion and upgrading of
    telecommunications infrastructure, in recognition that advanced, high quality and
    reliable communications are essential to meet changing technological, social,
    business and security requirements.


2
    Appeal refs 6003065 and 6003067


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6010457, 6010458


19. The proposed hub would be part of a network of apparatus said to tackle the digital
    divide, providing a range of services including access to ultra-fast public and
    encrypted Wi-Fi, public services and device charging. It is also indicated that it
    could provide improved 4G and 5G coverage to local communities if required by
    operators and would be powered by 100% renewable carbon free energy. These
    are all clear benefits which count in favour of Appeal A.
20. There is limited clear evidence that the displays would be likely to be used for
    community and emergency awareness messaging, provide free advertising for the
    Council or house environmental sensors. In any event, matters not relating to
    amenity and public safety fall outside the scope of Appeal B, as defined in the
    Regulations. Several other appeal examples elsewhere in the country have been
    provided where visual amenity was a main issue, however in this case it is not
    disputed that the proposal would sit comfortably with the character and appearance
    and visual amenity of the area. While it is indicated that two kiosks are to be
    removed in the wider area to reduce street clutter there is no mechanism to secure
    their removal as part of this appeal. These are therefore neutral matters that weigh
    neither for nor against the case.
21. Overall, while there would be benefits from the scheme, given its scale as a single
    hub, and since there are other existing hubs in the wider area, this limits the weight
    afforded to them, which in practical terms would be modest. As such, the benefits
    do not provide justification for allowing a scheme that would cause the harms
    identified under the main issues above.
Conclusion
22. For the reasons given above, and having regard to all other matters raised, I
    conclude that Appeal A should be dismissed, and Appeal B should be dismissed.



F Harrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
