Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 2 September 2026
by A Knight BA PG Dip MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010408
Pigeon Farm Cottage, Cold Harbour Lane, Bobbing, ME9 8NN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr R Deacon against the decision of Swale Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/502501/FULL.
•    The development proposed is temporary change of use of land to store plant machinery and
     equipment (Use Class E(g)(iii) for three years.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The description of development in the banner heading above is taken from the
       application form. I note that on the decision notice it was given as “Temporary
       change of use of residential garden land to store plant machinery and equipment
       (Use Class B8) for three years (retrospective) with associated landscaping and
       boundary treatments”.
3.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was issued on 17
       August 2026. The main parties have been given the opportunity to comment on
       any implications for the appeal, and I have taken their responses into account in
       reaching my decision.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are:
           •    whether the appeal site is a suitable location for the proposed development
                having regard to the development plan and the Framework; and
           •    the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of
                the area.
Reasons
Location
5.     The appeal site is in the countryside for planning purposes. Policy ST3 of the
       Swale Borough Local Plan (2017) (the Local Plan) sets out the Council’s strategic
       approach and prohibits development in such locations unless supported by
       national planning policy.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010408


6.     The proposal is intended to support the appellant’s business. Local Plan Policy
       DM3 supports the sustainable growth and expansion of business and enterprise in
       the rural area if applicable tests set out at 1(a) to (f) are satisfied. Pertinently to the
       appeal, these include, at (b), that proposals “firstly consider the appropriate re-use
       of existing buildings or the development of other previously developed land, unless
       such sites are not available or it is demonstrated that a particular location is
       necessary to support the needs of rural communities or the active and sustainable
       management of the countryside”.
7.     Policy S5 of the Framework addresses the principle of development outside
       settlements, providing support only in defined circumstances. These include, at
       S5(1)(b), development for rural businesses and services… where a location
       outside settlements is shown to be necessary and, at S5(1)(j), development which
       would address an evidenced unmet need.
8.     For the purposes of the appeal, I do not consider there to be any material
       inconsistency between the Local Plan and the Framework; In both cases, policy
       support depends on whether it is necessary for the business to operate from the
       appeal site and, if not, on the availability of suitable alternative sites.
9.     I see no reason to find that there is anything inherent in the nature of the business
       which means it can only operate at or near the appeal site. Whilst the appellant
       highlights the proximity of main roads and of Sittingbourne, as well as the space
       available on site, I do not find any of those attributes to be unique to the appeal
       site. Indeed, it is not clear that cited potential alternative locations for the business,
       which I shall address shortly, do not possess the same characteristics.
10. Moreover, I am told that the purpose of the proposal is to allow the appellant three
    years to secure alternative premises elsewhere. That he has such an intention
    confirms me in the view that there is no evident necessity for the business to
    operate from the appeal site.
11. I have been provided with estate agents details for available commercial premises
    in Sittingbourne. Premises as varied as an open concrete yard and a range of
    enclosed units are labelled as unsuitable, but quite why is unclear. I cannot
    discount any of those units as I have insufficient information as to which business
    needs would be left unmet.
12. Whilst some options are described as too expensive, I cannot discount any of
    them as I have no evidence of the rental outlay the business can sustain. Whilst I
    recognise there may be a minimum size requirement, I have very little evidence as
    to what that is, and why. As such, I cannot discount those options described as too
    small.
13. Some are described as too large, but not as too expensive. It is not clear why
    having more space than required would be prohibitive. If the size of the larger units
    does equate to a prohibitive cost, I have no evidence that the appellant has
    explored renting only part of them.
14. Even though the list is described as showing “currently available commercial sites
    within reasonable proximity of the [appeal] site” several of the options are
    nevertheless said to be too far away from the appeal site and, in one case, from its
    employees.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6010408


15. It is not clear that proximity to the appeal site should be a factor; I recognise that
    the business has its office alongside the site but see little to suggest its
    administrative base need be in the same place that its machinery and equipment
    are stored.
16. Insofar as the employees of the business are concerned, a list provided by the
    appellant shows all but one of them to live in much the same postcodes as the
    available commercial premises. I have no reason to think they would be affected
    should the business relocate.
17. Based on the above, it is not clear that the business is prevented from occupying
    one of the alternative available commercial premises.
18. I recognise that the business employs 12 people and that any risk to its operations
    may cast doubt on their employment. They may travel further afield for work
    should they have to leave the appellant’s business. I do not doubt that the
    business contributes to the local area through its work, or that it is well-regarded. I
    also recognise the objectives of the Framework to enable businesses to invest,
    expand and adapt, and to support economic growth.
19. However, as it is not clear that the business is prevented from relocating to nearby
    vacant premises, is it also not clear that the business would be at risk if I dismiss
    the appeal. I therefore attach minimal weight to that contention.
20. The appellant argues that the temporary nature of the proposal weighs in its
    favour, and that permission is only required whilst he sources alternative premises.
    However, I have very little indication of what he expects will be different in three
    years’ time. Indeed, it is not clear why he would be any better positioned to
    relocate at that time than he is now, much less that he has begun arrangements to
    do so. I have little reason to feel that the proposed use is inherently temporary and
    attach minimal weight to the point.
21. My attention is drawn to a range of services and facilities between 0.3 and 1.9
    miles of the site. In the main, however, the significance of these is unclear. I see
    no obvious benefit to having the likes of a veterinary surgery, hotel, schools, or
    village hall nearby. That facilities of this type may have led the Council to view the
    area as sustainably located for the purposes of a new dwelling has little bearing on
    my determination, as those facilities would have different implications for
    residential development.
22. As referenced above, the site is adjacent to the administrative office for the
    appellant’s business. Local Plan Policy CP1 supports the extension of an existing
    employment site, but only where the spatial plan strategy is not significantly
    compromised and sites listed in criterion 5 of that policy cannot be found. My
    findings above indicate that neither is true in this instance. I see little reason to feel
    the proposal has the support of Policy CP1.
23. I recognise that the site is reasonably accessible on foot or by bicycle, including by
    way of a 13-minute walk along Bobbing Hill from the nearest bus stops. That said,
    I have little evidence as to how well connected the alternative commercial
    premises within the settlement boundary are. I cannot be certain, therefore, that
    locating the business at the appeal site would not result in a greater likelihood of
    car dependency than the alternatives.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010408


24. Ultimately, the Framework is clear in Policy S5(4) that proposals which do not fall
    within one of the categories set out in that policy should only be approved in
    exceptional circumstances, where the benefits of the proposal would substantially
    outweigh the adverse effects. The considerations listed above do not comprise
    such exceptional circumstances.
25. Overall, the proposal does not have the support of the Local Plan in that it does
    not adequately consider the appropriate re-use of existing buildings, nor
    demonstrate that the proposed use of the appeal site is necessary. It therefore
    conflicts with Local Plan Policies ST3 and DM3 in those respects. Furthermore, it
    has not been shown that locating the proposed development outside of a
    settlement is necessary, or that doing so would address an evidenced unmet
    need. As such, the proposal does not have the support of the Framework.
26. The appeal site is not a suitable location for the proposed development having
    regard to the development plan and the Framework.
Character and appearance
27. The appeal site is at the far end of land behind a residential dwelling. Beyond it is
    a railway line. To the north, south, and west are agricultural fields. There are a
    range of commercial or industrial land uses to the east. Whilst I recognise that
    these exert an influence on the character and appearance of the area, none of
    them have planning permission save for those related to an historic permission for
    the change of use of redundant farm buildings1, and I note that enforcement action
    has commenced against some unauthorised land uses. An application to
    redevelop the land north of the site2 is undetermined.
28. Given the planning status of the land around the appeal site, I have no reason to
    believe the current level and spread of commercial activity will remain. I also
    cannot be certain that the land north of the railway line will be developed. I
    therefore proceed on the basis of current authorised land uses.
29. In that context, the proposal would mark the introduction of an incongruous
    commercial activity to an otherwise open area largely surrounded by rural fields.
    To the extent that there is lawful commercial development to the east of the site,
    the proposal would mark its westward spread towards the fields. In both respects
    the proposal would harmfully erode the openness and rural character of the area.
30. I recognise that the site is not directly visible from the road. Whilst this is partly
    attributable to solid boundary fencing, it also depends upon mature greenery along
    the western edge of the site. I cannot be certain the greenery will remain in place
    rather than be lost due to ill health, wind, or preference. Any replacement planting
    would likely take some considerable time to reach maturity.
31. In any event, the site is visible from the land around it, including from Pigeons
    Farm Cottage. Whilst a fence has been erected along the southern edge of the
    site, I found that items stored within were nevertheless visible over the top of the
    fence and at the access point. The proposed land use would be visible from within
    the site itself, as would its incongruity with its surroundings.


1
    Application Ref SW/88/1160
2
    Application Ref 22/503654/EIOUT



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010408


32. Moreover, the movement of vehicles, equipment, and machinery across the
    access track and along Cold Harbour Lane would be evident, highlighting the
    proposed land use within the local area. I see no reason to think that the activities
    associated with the proposal would be comparable in these respects to those
    undertaken at the office adjacent to the site.
33. The proposed development would have a harmful effect on the character and
    appearance of the area and, in that respect, would conflict with Local Plan Policies
    ST3, DM3, DM14 and CP4.
Conclusion
34. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
35. The appeal is dismissed.

A Knight
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
