    Appeal Decision
    Site visit made on 5 August 2026
    By G Powys Jones FRTPI
    an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
    Decision date: 4 September 2026


    Appeal Ref: 6010492
    65A Brookhill Road, London EN4 8SF
    •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as
        amended) against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    •   The appeal is made by Mr D Binnington against the decision of the Council of the London
        Borough of Barnet.
    •   The application Ref is 26/0793/FUL
    •   The development proposed is described as a first floor rear extension.

This decision is issued in accordance with section 56(2) of the Planning and
Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 as amended and supersedes that issued on 19
August 2026.
Decision
1. The appeal is allowed, and planning permission is granted for a first floor rear
   extension at 65A Brookhill Road, London EN4 8SF in accordance with the terms of
   application Ref 26/0793/FUL, subject to the conditions set out in the accompanying
   Schedule.
Preliminary matters
2. The appeal property forms part of a terrace of five properties. Shops formerly
   occupied all the ground floors, but only two shops remain, at Nos 59 & 61. Nos 63,
   65 and 67 are now comprised of 2 residential flats, one above the other in each
   property.
3. Whilst three storeys facing Brookhill Road, the properties also have basements and
   are four storeys at the rear. Nos 65 & 67 have been outwardly extended at the
   rear, at basement and ground floor levels. Planning permission1 was recently
   granted for a similar development at No 63, although the extension is yet to be
   built.
4. No 65 is comprised of two flats. The appellant, who occupies the top two floors, at
   65A, proposes the erection of what is described as a first floor extension directly
   above the existing rear extension.
5. Since the extension would be built at the rear of the property, the Council
   acknowledges that it would have no discernible impact on the public realm, and no
   objection is raised on this score. I share the Council’s view on this aspect.


1
    25/0044/FUL

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6010492


6. The Council’s concern centres on the alleged impact of the development on
   neighbouring living conditions, and this is reflected in the main issue.
Main Issue
7. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of
   neighbouring residents at 63 & 67a Brookhill Road with reference to visual impact,
   outlook and sense of enclosure.
Reasons
8. The Council, in its decision, placed considerable reliance on the guidance provided
   in its adopted Supplementary Planning Document: ‘Residential Design Guidance’
   (SPD). The officer report quotes from the SPD as follows: two storey rear
   extensions which are closer than 2 metres to a neighbouring boundary and project
   more than 3 metres in depth are not normally considered acceptable.
9. However, the use of the word ‘normally’ in the above quotation strongly implies that
   a level of discretion is allowed in the application of the guidance, depending on
   local circumstances.
10. The Council has, however, clarified that the SPD has since been superseded by
    the Sustainable Design and Development Guidance (SDDG) SPD. The Council
    says that its new guidance in respect of extensions such as this is consistent with
    that of the superseded SPD. I note however that the quotation used by the Council
    at paragraph 4.4.6 of its Statement ends with: ‘...unless the site context indicates
    otherwise.’ This indicates to me a level of discretion is permitted in applying
    empirical guidance, depending on circumstances.
11. The extension would share a boundary with No 67 and would be within 2m of the
    boundary with No 63. The extension’s maximum depth, according to the Council’s
    calculations, is 0.57m, or half a metre or so more than advised in guidance. The
    main implication I draw from the officer report, and the Council’s statement, is that if
    the extension had been designed to be 0.5m or so less deep, it would have been
    acceptable.
12. In the case of No 67, apart from non-compliance with empirical guidance, the main
    alleged harm identified by the Council is in relation to the impact on a window in the
    upper flat’s (67A) rear elevation, described in the officer report as a ‘principal
    window’. However, the officer report is silent as to whether this window, which is
    sited next to the flat’s only entrance, serves a habitable room. The appellant says
    that the window serves a hall and stairs.
13. As to the effect on No 63, it’s objection in this regard is solely directed to the failure
    to comply with the empirical guidance of the SPD, and the alleged harm said to
    follow from non-compliance. To my mind, however, the windows and openings in
    No 63’s rear elevation are sufficiently distant from the proposed extension as not to
    be directly affected by the proposal. Neither No 63 nor 67 has any external
    amenity area which would be affected.
14. In my view, the extension, at a little more than 0.5m deeper than advised in the
    SPD and its successor, would not harm the living conditions of neighbouring
    residents in the terms suggested by the Council. It appears to me that the
    Council’s decision was principally based on its strict application of the SPD’s
    empirical formulae when the SPD, and its successor, are clearly meant to act as

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          2
 Appeal Decision 6010492


     guidance, to be applied using professional judgment taking account of local
     circumstances or site context. Although not conclusive in my considerations, I note
     that no neighbouring resident objected to the proposal.
15. In conclusion, I find the proposed development to be acceptable and compliant with
    those provisions of policy D3 of the London Plan (2021) and Policies CDH01 &
    CDH05 of the Barnet Local Plan (2025) requiring development to ensure to provide
    a good standard of amenity for, and not to adversely affect, adjoining occupants.
Conditions
16. Conditions regarding materials and that the development shall be carried out in
    accordance with the approved plans shall be imposed in the interests of amenity
    and certainty respectively.
17. The Council has suggested two further conditions designed to protect the privacy of
    adjoining neighbours. These are imposed for that reason.
18. No other matter raised is of such strength or significance as to outweigh those
    considerations leading me to my conclusions.

G Powys Jones
INSPECTOR


SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS
     1)     The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
            date of this decision.
     2)     The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
            the following approved plans: Drawings No 1787/00; 1787/01; 1787/02;
            1787/03; 1787/04 & 1787/05.
     3)     The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
            development hereby permitted shall match those of the existing building.
     4)     Notwithstanding the provisions of any development order made under
            Section 59 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (or any Order
            revoking and re-enacting that Order) no windows or doors shall be placed at
            any time in the side elevation(s) facing 67 and/or 63 Brookhill Road.
     5)     The roof of the extension hereby permitted shall only be used in connection
            with the repair and maintenance of the building and shall at no time be
            converted to or used as a balcony, roof garden or similar amenity or sitting
            out area.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
