 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 28 August 2026
 by Victor Callister BA(Hons) PGC(Oxon) DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 28 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010339
 52 Eaton Drive, Romford, Havering RM5 2ND
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Tom Blewitt against the decision of the London Borough of Havering Council.
 •    The application Ref is P1538.25.
 •    The development proposed is the demolition of the existing garage and the erection of a pair of semi-
      detached dwellings (Use Class C3), with associated parking, private amenity space and other
      ancillary works.



Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. Subsequent to the decision made by the Council on the application to which this
   appeal relates, the Government published a revised National Planning Policy
   Framework (August 2026) (the Framework). I have sought comments from the main
   parties on the revised Framework in relation to the appeal. It will therefore not
   prejudice any party by making my decision with regard to the revised Framework.
Main Issues
3. The main issues are the effect on:
     •    The character and appearance of the local area; and
     •    The living conditions of neighbouring residential occupiers.
Reasons
Character and Appearance
4. The appeal site is currently occupied by a two storey end of terrace house that sits
   on one corner of the crossroads junction of Eaton Drive and Gelsthorpe Roads with
   Carter Drive. To the rear of the house is a long garden, at the bottom of which is a
   single storey detached garage/outbuilding and hard surfacing with space for off
   street parking, these are accessible through a gate on Carter Drive.
5. Eaton Drive is fronted by terraced properties similar in design and scale to the
   existing dwelling on the appeal site, as are the surrounding residential streets.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6010339


     These all have generously long, although reactively narrow, rear gardens. The long
     gardens in the local area constitute a clear spatial characteristic resulting in the area
     having a sense of spaciousness, despite the predominance of terrace houses, and
     make a significant contribution to its character and appearance.
6. The character of this part of Carter Drive is defined by the long rear gardens of
   houses on corner plots, including the appeal site, which are bounded by the street.
   This part of Carter Drive has no houses fronting on to it. To the rear of the garden at
   the appeal site, beyond an unmade access lane at the rear of the gardens of houses
   in the terrace, there is a large, locally listed detached church in verdant grounds.
   Along with the long rear gardens of the houses in the area, this contributes to the
   sense of spaciousness that is defining characteristic of the immediate local area.
7. The proposal is to subdivide the appeal plot into 3 approximately equal parts,
   substantially reducing the garden space associated with the existing house on the
   appeal site, this would allow for a pair of two storey semidetached dwellings with
   predominantly side gardens with off street parking that would front onto and be
   accessed from Carter Drive. To the rear, the proposed houses would sit in close
   proximity to the side boundary fence of the garden of the adjacent terraced house to
   the appeal site at 50 Eaton Drive (No.50).
8. The proposed dwellings would be relatively simple and plain, in a traditional style
   with a single shared pitch roof form with gable ends. However, they would stand
   somewhat isolated from other houses, within an otherwise open rear garden
   context, where their two storey scale would be in contrast to the single storey
   outbuildings in neighbouring and surrounding gardens. This would be evident in
   street views and in views from surrounding houses and gardens.
9. In combination with the proposed subdivision of the appeal site into 3 plots, and
   their proximity to the fence on the boundary with No.50, their two storey height
   would result in the proposed houses appearing overbearing and cramped on their
   plots. As such the proposed houses would appear as incongruous in this regard.
   This would result in them standing in contrast with and interrupting the local spatial
   characteristic of houses with long gardens that contributes significantly to the quality
   and character and appearance of the local area.
Living Conditions
10. The gardens of the houses in the terrace of which the existing house on the appeal
    site forms part, although long, are not orthogonal with their houses. Including at the
    appeal site, the gardens angle from Carter Drive. Due to this angle and the proximity
    of the proposed houses to the boundary fence with No.50, they would appear more
    directly rather than purely tangentially in views from the rear rooms at No.50 and
    garden area nearest to the house.
11. The proximity of the proposed two storey houses to the boundary fence with this
    neighbouring property would also result in them appearing directly in views from the
    rest of the garden to No.50. As such, the proposed houses would have a visually
    intrusive and overbearing presence when experienced not only from the garden of
    this adjoining house, but to a lesser extent from the existing house on the appeal
    site and its proposed retained garden area, as well as from gardens of nearby
    houses in the terrace. This would result in a loss of outlook from these neighbouring
    dwellings and gardens.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         2
 Appeal Decision 6010339


12. The proximity of the proposed houses to the boundary with No.50 and their angled
    orientation would also result in a significant degree of overlooking of the house at
    No.50 and its rear garden from the first floor windows in rear elevations of both
    proposed houses, Although there are some trees in the garden of the neighbouring
    dwelling at No.50 and in the appeal site that would provide some screening, this is
    partial, somewhat seasonal and not guaranteed to be present in the longer term.
13. As such, the views out from the rear of the proposed houses would not reflect the
    degree of overlooking to be expected in a developed residential area of this type.
    The proposal would produce a degree of overlooking that would be intrusive and
    result in a significant loss of privacy of the occupiers of this neighbouring property.
    In combination with the overbearing and dominating presence of the proposed
    houses identified above, this loss of privacy would result in the proposed houses
    being experienced as oppressive by the occupiers of No.50 and would have a
    significant detrimental effect on their living conditions.
14. For the reasons given above, the proposal would result in moderate harm to the
    character and appearance of the local area and substantial harm to the living
    conditions of neighbouring residential occupiers. This would fail to accord with
    Policies 7, 10 and 26 of the Havering Local Plan 2016-2031 (2021) (the Local Plan,
    and Policy L2 and DP3 of the Framework. Collectively these seek, development
    that, amongst other matters, is of high quality design, respects and compliments the
    distinctive qualities, identity and character of the local area so that they are
    consistent with the overall street scene, integrate with and enhance their
    surroundings; such as through the arrangement of development plots and buildings,
    and reflect the principle of liveability, ensuring and protecting the amenity and
    quality of life of neighbouring residents, including from unacceptable outlook and
    loss of privacy.
15. The Council’s decision finds that the appeal development is contrary to Policy 34 of
    the Local Plan. As this policy relates to managing pollution, and not the reasons for
    refusal and main issues of this appeal, I have not come to this same conclusion.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
16. According to the Government’s Housing Delivery Test: 2025, the London Borough of
    Havering continues to have a significant projected housing shortfall on that required.
    This position has not changed since the Council made its decision. The proposal
    would help to address this unmet need for additional housing.
17. Under the provisions of Policy S4 of the Framework, the proposal would have the
    benefit of creating 2 new dwelling houses in an existing defined settlement, through
    the additional development on an existing plot. Collectively small housing
    developments in such circumstances make a significant contribution to the delivery
    of new housing, to which I have given substantial weight, although the creation of 2
    new houses in isolation would make only a small contribution to the delivery of
    housing in the Council area.
18. The Framework sets out that such housing developments should be approved
    unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse
    effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies of the
    framework. As such, I find that the benefits of 2 additional new houses as proposed
    does not substantially outweigh the collective adverse effects of the proposal that


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
 Appeal Decision 6010339


     would result from the moderate harm to the character and appearance of the local
     area, and the substantial harm to the living conditions of neighbouring residential
     occupiers. Consequently, I do not find that the proposal would result in sustainable
     development. Consequently, and for the reasons given, I conclude that the appeal
     should be dismissed.



Victor Callister
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        4
