Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 6 August 2026
by R Gravett BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010397
41a Liverpool Road, Birkdale, Southport, Merseyside PR8 4AG
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Mr Kelvin Bacon against the decision of Sefton Metropolitan Borough
       Council.
•      The application Ref is DC/2025/01256.
•      The development proposed is two bedroomed flat above existing retailing property – hairdresser’s.

Decision
1.       The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a two bedroomed flat
         above existing retailing property – hairdresser’s at 41a Liverpool Road, Birkdale
         Southport, Merseyside PR8 4AG in accordance with the terms of the application,
         DC/2025/01256, and the plans submitted with it, subject to the following
         conditions:
        1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
                 date of this decision.
        2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
                 the following approved plans:
                 •    LR/ADA/01/A Rev A Existing Building Elevation, Layout & Location Plans
                 •    LR/ADA/02/A Rev G Proposed Building Layout Plans
                 •    LR/ADA/03/A Rev D Proposed Building Elevations
        3)       The private outdoor amenity space shall be implemented in full, and the
                 privacy glass screen installed prior to the first occupation of the dwelling and
                 shall thereafter be retained as such.
Preliminary Matters
2.       A new National Planning Policy Framework (‘the Framework’) was published in
         August 2026. The Framework is a material consideration of critical importance
         which should be taken into account from the day of publication. Both main parties
         had the opportunity to comment on any implications for the appeal.
3.       The ‘Procedural Guide – Planning Appeals – England’1 advises that if an appeal is
         made the appeal process should not be used to evolve a scheme. It is important
         that what is considered by an Inspector at appeal is essentially the same scheme
         that was considered by the Local Planning Authority and by interested parties at
         the application stage. To seek to address the Council’s reason for refusal, the

1
    For appeals relating to applications dated on or before 31 March 2026. Updated 16 July 2026

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010397


         appellant has submitted an ‘Expert Review Report’ and solar shadow drawings.
         These do not involve a substantial difference or a fundamental change to the
         proposed development, and the Council has had the opportunity to comment on
         them as part of the appeal process.
4.       However, although neighbours were notified that an appeal had been lodged, I am
         not confident that this additional information has been seen, particularly by the
         neighbour at 41 Liverpool Road. The correspondence received from interested
         parties in respect of the appeal refers only to the report prepared by Dr Jack
         Rostron (of October 2025) submitted with the planning application. Therefore, I
         cannot be certain that accepting the information would not deprive those who
         should have been consulted of the opportunity of such consultation. I have
         therefore based my decision on the information submitted to the Council with the
         planning application, and on which the decision was made.
Main Issue
5.       The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the operation of solar
         panels on the neighbouring property at 41 Liverpool Road (No 41).
Reasons
6.       41a Liverpool Road (No 41a) is a single-storey commercial building which is at one
         end of a short part two-storey terrace along the eastern side of Liverpool Road.
         The proposed first-floor extension and roof dormer would not extend in depth
         beyond the existing solar panels, which generate electricity for the Post Office, and
         are located on the south facing roof slope of No 41’s rear outrigger.
7.       I appreciate that the appellant has tried to ascertain details, but very little
         information has been provided as to the actual performance specification or
         technical characteristics of these solar panels. The JEL Renewables Ltd (JEL)
         information submitted with the application assumes a 13-panel row which it
         assesses as having a shade factor of 0.833. However, it is unclear whether this
         means that the panels would receive 83.3% of the unshaded solar irradiance now,
         or after the proposed extension to No 41a is built, and if the latter, what the
         percentage increase in shading would be.
8.       Based on the positioning shown on the plans in the Solar Path Analysis, 2 a small
         part of the row of solar panels (closest to the principal rear elevation of No 41)
         appears to be outside the ‘minimum unobstructed sunlight path’ shown in the
         horizontal axis, but the degree to which the proposal obstructs this sunlight path (in
         both the vertical and horizontal axis) is not known.
9.       JEL suggest that the panels would incur shading from the proposal but only at later
         times in the day. However, I have insufficient information before me, including
         dates and times of assessment, duration of shading throughout the day and year,
         and the predicted effect on annual solar irradiation to be able to ascertain the full
         effect on the operation of the solar panels. I note the appellant refers to the
         proposal maintaining a 90% ‘level of performance efficiency’ (kWh) for the existing
         solar panels, but I have little evidence in respect of how this has been calculated.
         Whilst the appellant suggests that the assessment adopts a recognised technique,
         it does not rely on Building Research Establishment guidance in respect of the

2
    Drawing ref 1213-05


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010397


      calculation of loss of solar radiation to solar panels. Nor has any other specific
      guidance been referred to.
10. However, I am mindful that Policy DM2 of the Framework states that additional
    information required in determining development proposals should be
    proportionate to the scale of the development and its potential impact. Based on
    the evidence before me, there would be some shading and loss of solar irradiation
    but given the relative siting of the proposed extension and the length and position
    of the solar panels on No 41’s first-floor south facing roofslope, there would
    unlikely be a total, or even significant, loss in operation or performance.
11. Nevertheless, I conclude that the proposed development would have a moderate
    harmful effect on the operation of solar panels on the neighbouring property at 41
    Liverpool Road. It would conflict with Policy SD2 of ‘A Local Plan for Sefton’ (2017)
    which states that development proposals will be assessed against several
    sustainable development principles, which includes responding to the challenge of
    climate change and encouraging best use of resources and assets.
Other Matters
12. The appeal property is within the Birkdale Village Conservation Area (‘the CA’),
    which encompasses the local centre of Birkdale and extends along Liverpool Road
    broadly between the junction with Crosby Road and St Peters Road in the south
    and Weld Parade in the north. In so far as relevant to this appeal, the CA is
    significant as an example of a mid-Victorian residential suburb. It is characterised
    by semi-detached and detached villas, with later-Victorian commercial properties
    close to the station typically terraced and more tightly developed, with a limited
    material palette including red brick, white render and Welsh slate.
13. The appeal property forms part of a short commercial terrace which the Council
    suggest may have originated as a mid to late C19 pair of semi-detached dwellings,
    with extensions added to the front and side to create shop units in the mid C20. It
    is identified in the Birkdale Village Conservation Area Appraisal (2011) as being a
    building that contributes to the character of the area.
14. The proposed first-floor extension has been designed to closely match the
    adjoining property at No. 41 in respect of its front building line, ridge height and
    roof form, fenestration details and proportions, and materiality. Whilst it would alter
    the historic plan and symmetry of the original semi-detached pair, it would
    nonetheless appear a modest and sympathetic addition to the terrace.
    Accordingly, I am satisfied that the proposal would preserve the character and
    appearance of the CA. This would meet the requirements of Section 72(1) of the
    Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990, and I note that the
    Council raised no concerns in this respect either.
15. In addition to the matters dealt with above, issues have been raised regarding
    parking and highway safety impacts. Whilst I can understand the concerns, there
    is no compelling evidence before me that the proposal would exacerbate parking
    demands or problems, particularly given the accessibility of the location to public
    transport and local services. Accordingly, I have no reason to take a different view
    to the Council’s Highways Officer on this matter.
16. The proposed first-floor terrace would meet the Council’s minimum amenity space
    standards. To each side of the roof terrace would be a 1.8m privacy glass screen

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010397


      which would ensure there would be no overlooking towards the terrace or windows
      of No 41. The screen would be set off the boundary with No.41 so that it would not
      appear overbearing when viewed from the facing windows on the south elevation
      of the outrigger. Moreover, the proposed terrace and rear dormer window would be
      at an oblique angle to the nearest dwelling on Bolton Road and would be sufficient
      distance away to prevent any overlooking and therein loss of privacy to its garden
      or rear windows.
17. Noise, disturbance and disruption associated with the construction of the
    development itself would be for a finite period and would not in itself justify refusal
    of the appeal. Matters relating to fire escapes or access would be controlled by
    separate regulatory regimes. Issues relating to land ownership, rights of way,
    rights of access, party wall agreements or easements are civil matters outside of
    the planning process. It is not therefore necessary or appropriate for me to
    consider these matters further.
18. Finally, any effect of the proposal on property values is not a matter for me to
    consider, as the planning system operates in the public interest and does not seek
    to protect private interests.
The Planning Balance
19. The appeal property is within Southport, an identified settlement. Policy S4 of the
    Framework states that in such circumstances development proposals should be
    approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any
    adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies.
20. For the reasons I have given above, the proposal would have a harmful effect on
    the operation of solar panels on the neighbouring property at 41 Liverpool Road,
    but I have found the harm to be moderate. In this regard, it would fail to accord
    with Policy CC2 paragraph 2 of the Framework which requires that substantial
    weight be given to the benefits of improving the energy efficiency of existing
    buildings, including through the installation of solar panels.
21. I understand that a harmful effect (whether significant or not) on the operation of
    the solar panels would increase the electricity costs associated with running the
    Post Office, which provides a valuable service to the community. However, I have
    little compelling evidence before me that the proposal would result in the closure of
    the Post Office, or cause harm to the vitality and viability of the wider local centre.
    In giving substantial weight to supporting the overall vitality and viability of centres,
    Policy TC2 of the Framework also recognises that this can be achieved through
    the diversification of uses, intensification and provision of residential
    accommodation. Together these would likely drive footfall and custom.
22. Furthermore, the proposal would accord with Policy L2 of the Framework which
    gives substantial weight to the benefits of creating additional homes within
    settlements by using the airspace above existing commercial premises, and where
    they would be consistent with the overall street scene, maintain safe access and
    egress for occupiers and acceptable living standards for residents and neighbours.
23. On balance, I find that the benefit of creating an additional home in this location
    would not be substantially outweighed by the harmful effect on the operation of the
    solar panels. Therefore, although I have found conflict with the development plan,
    the Framework is a material consideration of critical importance which indicates

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010397


      planning permission should be granted in this instance, and my decision should be
      made other than in accordance with the development plan.
Conditions
24. I have considered the suggested conditions from the Council and have had regard
    to Policy DM6 of the Framework and the Planning Practice Guidance in terms of
    the use of conditions.
25. In the interests of certainty, I have imposed a condition that specifies that the
    development is carried out in accordance with the approved plans. These specify
    the materials, so it is not necessary to impose a further condition requiring the new
    windows to be a timber finish.
26. To ensure satisfactory living conditions, it is necessary to impose a condition which
    requires that the private outdoor amenity space has been implemented in full prior
    to occupation of the dwelling. To protect the living conditions of neighbouring
    residential properties, it is also necessary to impose a condition requiring the
    privacy glass screen shown around the outdoor amenity space to be installed prior
    to occupation and thereafter retained as such. I have combined these conditions in
    the interests of precision.
27. Policy DM7 of the Framework is clear than planning decisions should not seek to
    duplicate or extend controls imposed by separate regulatory regimes other than
    where there is a development plan policy in place applying optional technical
    standards for the development proposed. In the absence of evidence of such a
    policy, I have not imposed a condition requiring a scheme of sound insulation as
    this would be controlled by Building Regulations.
Conclusion
28. For the reasons given above, whilst the proposal would conflict with the
    development plan, material considerations – particularly the Framework - indicate
    that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it. Therefore, I
    conclude that the appeal should be allowed.

R Gravett
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
