Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 27 July 2026
by P Hatch BA (Hons) Ad. Dip MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17th August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010426
Wharfedale Cottage, Wath Lane, Ulleskelf LS24 9DR
•     The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
      to grant planning permission.
•     The appeal is made by Mr Ashley Moss against the decision of North Yorkshire Council.
•     The application Ref is ZG2026/0114/PIP.
•     The development proposed is permission in principle for new 2 storey detached single dwelling with
      garage.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. The proposal is for permission in principle. The Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)1
   advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for housing-
   led development. This consent route has 2 stages: the first (permission in principle
   (PiP) stage) establishes whether a site is suitable in-principle and the second
   (technical details consent (TDC) stage) is when the detailed development
   proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first of those 2 stages.
3. The scope of the considerations for PiP is limited to location, land use and the
   amount of development permitted. All other matters are considered as part of a
   subsequent TDC application if PiP is granted.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is whether the site is suitable for residential development, having
   regard to its location, the proposed land use and the amount of development.
Reasons
       Location
5. Access to the appeal site is taken from the junction of Busk Lane, Church Fenton
   Lane and the B1223 which is on the entrance to the village of Ulleskelf. I observed
   from my site visit that these roads serve as busy routes into and out of the village.
   There is a national speed limit of 60mph at the junction, however this reduces to
   30mph just north of the junction to allow vehicles to reduce speed when entering
   the village itself.



1
    Permission in principle - GOV.UK

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010426


6. Access to the appeal site is taken at a point where there is a shallow bend in the
   road, with the proposed access being on the inside of that bend. Visibility at the
   access point is therefore restricted due to its positioning on the bend but also due
   to the position of a shallow, low-level hedgerow which obscures views of vehicles
   approaching the junction from the south.
7. With regard to visibility splays, the starting point for achieving an appropriate
   visibility splay for a national speed limit road is set out in the Design Manual for
   Roads and Bridges (DMRB), specifically in regard to Stopping Sight Distances
   (SSD). With regard to providing an acceptable ‘Y’ distance, the DMRB identifies
   that the SSD for roads which have a 60mph national speed limit, the distance
   should be no less than 215m.
8. During my site visit I observed the speeds of vehicles travelling past the junction,
   particularly those approaching the outer limits of the village from the South. Whilst it
   was clear that vehicles had begun to decelerate due to the presence of the junction
   and the reduction of speed limits coming into the village, it was also apparent that
   vehicles were still approaching the access point of the appeal site at a considerable
   speed. Given the bend in the road, drivers would not necessarily be anticipating
   vehicles either turning into, or egressing out from Wath Lane. Moreover, due to the
   bend and the presence of the low-level hedge, the visibility for drivers egressing
   Wath Lane would also be obscured, particularly to any vehicles approaching the
   junction from the South.
9. Given the context of the junction, it is important that appropriate visibility splays are
   provided to ensure the safe access and egress from the appeal site. Whilst Manual
   for Streets 2 indicates that local circumstances could result in a more flexible
   approach being taken with SSDs, there is no evidence before me as part of this
   appeal to suggest that a more flexible approach should be taken to the application
   of the guidance on visibility splays contained in the DMRB. Without such evidence I
   would therefore conclude that the application of guidance in the DMRB should be
   the starting point and no demonstrable local circumstances have been presented
   by the appellant to suggest a more flexible approach should be applied.
10. As a consequence, the presence of additional vehicles both accessing and
    egressing Wath Lane would result in unanticipated traffic movements which, due to
    the speed of the road in this location and the lack of appropriate visibility splay,
    would create an unacceptable risk to highway safety for road users.
11. I would acknowledge the appellants argument around the number of additional trips
    generated, however there is no dispute between parties that the number of
    occasions when vehicles access or egress the site will increase. Whilst the
    junction may be acceptable for low levels of use, a point is reached where the risk
    to highway safety is no longer acceptable. In my judgement, this proposal would
    increase the level of use above this safe point. Moreover, whilst the appellant has
    indicated that the land ownership would allow the necessary highway mitigation
    measures to be secured, there is no information before me to highlight how this
    would be practically achieved in order to secure the necessary visibility splay.
12. I also note the appellants position that they believe these to be technical matters
    which can be dealt with at the TDC stage. In relation to this, I have had regard to
    the PPG and note that the physical access layout is a matter for the TDC stage.
    However, given the layout of the road, the existing speed limits within this location


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010426


     and the limited alternative access options before me there is a fundamental or in
     principle access constraint at the junction. As such, I find that this is a matter for
     consideration under this application with regard to location and suitability of the site
     in principle.
13. I therefore conclude that the access of the junction with Wath Lane, Busk Lane,
    Church Fenton Lane and the B1223 would result in an unacceptable risk to
    highway safety. As a result, the site is an unsuitable location for the development
    proposed and would conflict with Policies ENV1 and T1 of the Selby District Local
    Plan and Policy SP19 of the Selby District Core Strategy (SDCS) which seeks
    proposals, amongst other matters, to take account of the relationship with the
    highway network, ensure they can safely serve the development and promote high
    quality design.
14. Additionally, I have had due regard to the Framework, which indicates that
    development should be prevented or refused on highway grounds if there would be
    an unacceptable impact on highway safety.
     Amount of Development
15. The appeal site is positioned adjacent to the residential dwelling of Wharfedale
    Cottage. There is no dispute between the parties that the appeal site is of a
    sufficient size to accommodate the level of development proposed and that any
    technical details could be reasonably addressed through the TDC stage. I have no
    reason to disagree with this conclusion.
     Proposed Land Use
16. The appeal site is grouped with two other residential properties on Wath Lane and
    therefore would be consistent with the predominant use of buildings within this
    locality. I have noted the proximity of the site to the railway line which may give rise
    to amenity issues from future occupants of the property. However, I would conclude
    that these matters could be satisfactorily addressed through a future TDC stage.
Planning Balance
17. The Framework does not change the statutory status of the development plan as a
    starting point for decision making. The proposal is not in accordance with the
    aforementioned policies of the Local Plan, with the risk posed to highway safety by
    the lack of appropriate visibility splay. The relevant policies are generally in
    accordance with the Framework’s aims to prevent development that would have an
    unacceptable impact on highway safety. For these reasons, the proposal conflicts
    with the development plan as a whole and should be refused unless other material
    considerations indicate otherwise. I give this harm significant weight.
18. The Council has confirmed that it cannot demonstrate a 5-year housing land
    supply. Paragraph 11d) of the Framework states that where the policies which are
    most important for determining the proposal are out of date (including situations
    where the Local Planning Authority cannot demonstrate a necessary housing land
    supply) permission should be granted unless (i) the application of policies in the
    Framework provide a strong reason for refusing the development proposed or (ii)
    the adverse impacts of doing so would significantly and demonstrably outweigh the
    benefits. As there are not assets of particular importance, paragraph 11d) ii applies.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010426


19. In favour of the proposal, I recognise the acute need for housing and the
    Government’s intention to deliver 1.5 million new homes, as emphasised in the
    Written Ministerial Statement ‘Building the Homes We Need’ (2024). The proposal
    would deliver one dwelling, which would support the Government’s objective of
    significantly boosting the supply of housing. As a small site, it could be delivered
    relatively quickly, make a positive contribution and I attribute significant weight to
    this benefit.
20. The Framework promotes residential development where it will enhance or
    maintain the vitality of rural communities. The benefit of the proposed dwellings in
    supporting both the services within the village and nearby settlements is limited by
    virtue of its scale. There are also likely to be limited economic benefits during the
    construction phase.
21. However, I have concluded that there would be significant harm due to the highway
    safety risks associated with the lack of appropriate visibility splay. This harm
    weighs substantially against the proposal.
22. The adverse impact would, therefore, significantly and demonstrably outweigh the
    benefits when assessed against the policies of the Framework taken as a whole.
    Consequently, the proposal does not benefit from the presumption in favour of
    sustainable development.
Conclusion
23. I conclude that the proposal conflicts with the development plan, when read as a
    whole, and there are no other considerations, including the Framework, that
    outweigh that harm. The appeal is therefore dismissed.



P Hatch
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010426




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
