Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 27 July 2026
by Alec Hickey MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 07 September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6010396
Pavement outside 42 New Street, Huddersfield HD1 2BU
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Safia Rana-Jaswal of BT Telecommunications Plc against the decision of
     Kirklees Metropolitan Council.
•    The application Ref is 2026/62/90544/W.
•    The development proposed is proposed installation of 1no. new BT Street Hub, incorporating 2no.
     digital 75" LCD advert screens, and associated BT Phone Kiosk removal.
Appeal Ref: 6010399
Pavement outside 42 New Street, Huddersfield HD1 2BU
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Safia Rana-Jaswal against the decision of Kirklees Metropolitan Council.
•    The application Ref is 2026/64/90545/W.
•    The advertisement proposed is proposed installation of 1no. new BT Street Hub, incorporating 2no.
     digital 75" LCD advert screens, and associated BT Phone Kiosk removal.

Decisions
1.     Appeals A and B are dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     Since the appeals were submitted, a revised National Planning Policy Framework
       (the Framework) has been published. Both main parties have had the opportunity
       to comment on it during the appeal process.
3.     There are two appeals on this site, one against the refusal of planning permission
       and the other against the refusal of advertisement consent. They are intrinsically
       linked and raise similar issues. To avoid repetition, while considering each on its
       merits, I have dealt with both in a single decision letter.
4.     The addresses contained within the banner headings above for both Appeal A and
       B have been taken from the appeal forms as they more accurately reflect the
       location of the proposals.
5.     In determining Appeal A, I have had regard to the statutory duties in Sections
       72(1) and 66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
       1990, which require special attention to be paid to the desirability of preserving or
       enhancing the character or appearance of a conservation area, and special regard
       to be given to the desirability of preserving the setting of listed buildings.
6.     In respect of Appeal B, the Advertisement Regulations require that decisions are
       made only in the interest of amenity and public safety. Therefore, whilst I have

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010396


       taken account of the policies the Council refers to insofar as they may be relevant,
       these have not been decisive in my determination of this appeal. The Council has
       not raised an objection in relation to public safety and from the available evidence,
       I find no reason to reach an alternative view.
Main Issues
7.     The main issue in respect of Appeal A is the effects of the proposed development
       on the character and appearance of the area having regard to the Huddersfield
       Town Centre Conservation Area (CA) and the presence of the nearby Grade II
       listed buildings – (1) 34 New Street, (2) 36 New Street, (3) 40 New Street and (4)
       42-48 New Street.
8.     The main issue in respect of Appeal B is the effect of the proposed advertisement
       on the visual amenity of the area.
Reasons
9.     The site is located on a pedestrianised retail/commercial section of New Street
       within the CA. The significance of this part of the CA is largely derived from the
       preservation of its historic core and street pattern, along with the architectural
       quality and variety of its historic buildings which comprise the high-quality
       townscape.
10. The Council has also identified the proposals as affecting the settings of a number
    of Grade II listed buildings located on the western side of New Street. No 34 dates
    from the eighteenth century and comprises 3 storeys, with a ground-floor shop
    frontage and an elliptically headed archway. Its significance can be attributed to its
    architectural style and historical contribution to the town centre streetscape.
11. No 36 dates from 1850 and comprises 3 storeys, with a modern ground-floor shop
    frontage. The building is Glaswegian in style with classical detailing retained above
    the shop frontage. Its significance can be attributed to its architectural style and
    historical contribution to the town centre streetscape.
12. No 40 is an early 20th-century single-storey building that generally matches the
    height of the adjacent buildings. The frontage incorporates an imposing arched
    window and with fine stone detailing to the façade. Its significance can be
    attributed to its distinctive scale and design alongside its contribution to the town
    centre streetscape.
13. No. 42-48 date from the early nineteenth century and comprise 3 storeys. Their
    significance can be attributed to their unified architectural proportions on the first
    and second floors and rendered façade with quoins. The buildings also frame the
    entrance to the Victorian Imperial Arcade and form part of the historical town
    centre streetscape.
14. The buildings on either side of this section of New Street are predominantly three
    storeys in scale, and provide a continuous frontage, with retail and commercial
    uses at ground floor level. Despite the width of the pedestrian footway, the height
    of buildings along this section of New Street serves to highlight their prominence
    and scale of buildings on either side of the street.
15. Development along this section of the street includes digital advertisements within
    some shop window frontages. Partially digital advertisement stands are also

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010396


       located at either end of this section of the street. It also includes other street
       furniture and landscaping along a linear line. The proposed Street Hub would
       directly replace an existing telephone kiosk located close to the walkthrough
       entrance to the Imperial Arcade.
16. The existing kiosk appears somewhat dated and does not complement the views
    along this section of the street or into and out of the Imperial Arcade.
    Nevertheless, it is not entirely out of keeping with the other street furniture in this
    linear arrangement. In this context and despite the non-digital advertisement on
    one elevation, it does not stand out as an overtly incongruous feature in the street
    scene.
17. The proposal would comprise a tall, freestanding structure, in place of the kiosk,
    and as such there would be no net increase in street clutter. However, it would be
    of a distinctly different design, taller than the existing kiosk, and illuminated on both
    sides with high-definition displays and changing advertisements. It would therefore
    be considerably more prominent, overt and intrusive than the kiosk currently in
    place. Its height, illuminated screen and changing displays would interrupt views
    along New Street and compete with the historic elevations that contribute to the
    character and appearance of the CA.
18. The effect would be most apparent in relation to No’s. 42-48, because the Street
    Hub would be close to the entrance to the Imperial Arcade and would compete
    with the building’s unified façade and its role in framing that entrance. In views
    along New Street, it would also distract from the architectural detailing and historic
    elevations of No’s. 34, 36, and 40. However, the effect on these buildings would be
    more limited given their relative positions.
19. Whilst I acknowledge planning conditions could be used to control the level of
    brightness, frequency of image change, and hours of illumination, such measures
    would not overcome the harms I have identified. Moreover, conditions would not
    prevent the screens, when operating, from competing with the surrounding historic
    elevations.
20. In view of the limited scale of the proposal, I find the harm to the CA and the listed
    buildings to be at the lower end of the scale of less than substantial, but
    nonetheless of considerable importance and weight. The Framework indicates that
    such harm is to be weighed against the public benefits of a proposal.
21. The purported benefits of the proposal include that it would contribute to meeting
    demand for digital connectivity and services, such as free ultra-fast Wi-Fi, 5G
    mobile connectivity, charging facilities, access to emergency services, charity
    helplines and wayfinding. The Street Hub would offer the community, the Council
    and small businesses access to local digital advertising space. It could also be
    fitted with sensors that could count pedestrian, cyclist and vehicle movements as
    well as monitor air, sound and light and would be powered by renewable carbon-
    free energy.
22. However, even acknowledging the support in the Framework for high quality
    communications and next generation mobile technology, these public benefits
    would be very modest and attract moderate weight in the planning balance.
    Consequently, the identified benefits do not achieve substantial public benefits
    sufficient to outweigh the less than substantial harm to the designated heritage
    assets, to which I attribute considerable importance and weight.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010396


23. Accordingly, in terms of Appeal A, the development would unduly harm the
    character and appearance of the area, the setting of the CA and Grade II listed
    buildings at 34, 36, 40 and 42-48 New Street. It would therefore conflict with
    policies LP17, LP24, and LP35 of the Kirklees Local Plan. Amongst other things,
    these policies seek to ensure development preserves and enhances the town
    centre’s architectural heritage and the significance of its assets.
24. In respect of Appeal B, as an integral part of the proposed Street Hub, the
    proposed advertisement would have an unacceptable impact on visual amenity. I
    have had regard to the policies set out above where they are material to this issue.
    As I have found harm to visual amenity, it follows that there would be conflict with
    these policies.
Conclusion
25. For the reasons given above, having considered the development plan as a whole,
    the approach in the Framework, and all other relevant material considerations, I
    conclude that both Appeal A and Appeal B should be dismissed.




Alec Hickey
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
