Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 August 2026
by C Cooper-Young MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 16TH September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010756
Scrambling Field, Gaffer's Farm, Higher Halstock, Yeovil BA22 9QX
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Adrian Diment against the decision of Dorset Council.
•    The application reference is P/FUL/2025/07211.
•    The development is described as, continue to use as a glamping site with adapted boat, bus,
     shepherds hut and railway trucks.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published in August 2026. In the interest of natural justice and to ensure neither of
       the main parties were prejudiced by this matter, I consulted both parties on the
       changes to the Framework and any comments which I have received have been
       considered in my determination of the appeal. Any reference to the Framework in
       this decision is to the most recent version.
3.     The description of development in the heading above has been taken from the
       Council’s decision notice as the evidence indicates that a revised description of
       development has been agreed.
4.     At my site visit it was clear that the development has been carried out, I also
       observed additional buildings that fall within the application site but are not
       annotated on the plans. For the avoidance of doubt, I have determined the appeal
       on the basis of the submitted plans rather than what has been physically carried
       out on site.
5.     Interested parties and statutory consultees have referred to other development on
       land in the control of the appellant. These matters are beyond the scope of this
       assessment, and as such these have not formed part of my consideration.
6.     The site lies within the Dorset National Landscape (NL). Therefore, in considering
       this appeal I have applied the duty in section 85 of the Countryside and Rights of
       Way Act 2000 as amended by section 245 of the Levelling-up and Regeneration
       Act 2023 to seek to further the purpose of conserving and enhancing the natural
       beauty of the NL.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010756


Main Issue
7.       The main issue is the effect of the development on the character and appearance
         of the National Landscape.
Reasons
8.       The appeal site occupies a visually prominent elevated position, accessed via a
         gently rising track that passes through the existing timber business yard off
         Ryewater Lane. At the peak of the hill, a substantial gravelled hardstanding forms
         the hub of the development, providing access to the individual glamping units and
         their associated gated parking areas. A separate WC and shower facilities block is
         located within easy walking distance of each unit. Beyond the site, the land falls
         away into a wooded valley before rising towards distant ridgelines, allowing wider
         views across the countryside and increasing the visibility and impact of the
         development within the landscape.
9.       The glamping units are comprised of a boat, a bus, a shepherds hut and railway
         trucks, which have been altered or extended beyond their original form. Together
         with the extensive use of fencing, boundary treatments, landscaping and defined
         curtilages, these changes have introduced a distinctly residential appearance that
         sits uncomfortably within the surrounding rural landscape. In addition, each plot
         contains a range of incidental domestic features, including outbuildings, planters,
         bird tables and other incidental or ancillary structures, further reinforcing the
         impression of residential occupation rather than a temporary holiday use.
10. I am mindful of the broad support given by the LP for the diversification of farms
    and for new tourism development. However, the development introduces
    incongruous features and buildings, along with residential paraphernalia and
    private motor vehicles into the countryside setting. Collectively, these elements
    materially change the character and appearance of the appeal site and fail to
    conserve and enhance the natural beauty of the NL.
11. Due to the appeal site’s rural location, light pollution is more limited and as such
    the site benefits from darker skies. Given the extent of glazing serving the units
    and by providing overnight accommodation the development generates new levels
    of illumination that erode the dark sky in the area at night, in contrast to this key
    characteristic of the area.
12. As such, the development results in an urbanising introduction of the built
    environment into a wider countryside setting that fails to further the purpose of
    conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of the NL.
13. The Officer Report contains photographs of the appeal site captured by the Dorset
    National Landscape Team. Whilst it is unclear from where these images were
    captured, they nevertheless evidence the ability to observe the development from
    a location within the wider NL. Indeed, the appellants final comments makes
    specific reference to two locations1 from which the appeal site can be observed.
    As such, the harm that I have identified above extends beyond the appeal site and
    into the wider NL.
14. Furthermore, whilst the proposed planting adjacent to the boat accommodation
    may ameliorate light spill to flight corridors for bats, it does not address the wider
1
    Higher Meadow Burial Ground and Eweleaze Farm.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             2
Appeal Decision 6010756


       visual impact of the development within the NL. Indeed, additional planting
       proposed beyond the appeal site, in and around the lake, sit lower than the appeal
       site and again would not address the visual impact of the development in the wider
       landscape setting for some considerable period of time.
15. Therefore, the proposal would be contrary to the relevant aims and objectives of
    Policies ENV1, ENV10, ENV12, ECON7 and SUS2 of the LP, which among other
    things, seek to ensure that development proposals conserve or enhance
    landscape and scenic beauty, character and distinctiveness. It also conflicts with
    the Framework which places substantial weight on the importance of conserving
    and enhancing the natural beauty of these areas.
Other Matters
16. The appeal site lies within the catchment area of the Somerset Levels and Moors
    Ramsar Site and Special Protection Area and is close-by to the Bracket’s Coppice
    and Ryewater Farm Site of Special Scientific Interest and Bracket’s Coppice
    Special Area of Conservation (collectively the Protected Sites). These sites are
    afforded protection under the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations
    2017 (as amended) (the Habitats Regulations).
17. In the event that the appeal were to be allowed, I would be required to undertake
    an Appropriate Assessment in relation to the effect of the proposed development
    on the integrity of the Protected Sites, and the mitigation proposed. However, as I
    am dismissing the scheme on other substantive matters, whether or not the
    development would likely have a significant effect on Protected Sites, has not been
    determinative in my consideration of the appeal.
18. A screening direction was issued under the Town and Country Planning
    (Environmental Impact Assessment) Regulations 2017 (the EIA Regulations). In
    exercise of the powers conferred by Regulation 14 (1) of the EIA Regulations, the
    Secretary of State directed that the development is not EIA development.
19. The appellant contends that the current use would be less intrusive than the use of
    the land for motorcycle activities, I have little before me to show that those
    activities form a lawful fall-back position. Whilst the evidence indicates that the
    motorcycle use was not subject to any formal enforcement action and that the use
    could resume, there would be no real prospect of these activities occurring on the
    appeal site, given the nature and level of development undertaken on that land.
    Moreover, at my site visit I observed that a significant part of the land previously
    used for motorcycle activities has been subject to subsequent development.
20. The appellant has directed me to a recent planning decision in the locality (Knapp
    Farm, Corscombe). I understand that the details of this case are held on the
    Council’s website. In this case, the evidence indicates that the Knapp Farm site is
    located some distance away and draws parallels on landscape similarities and
    other matters. However, it is not within the role of the Inspector to search out
    information.
21. Moreover, whilst other planning decisions are capable of being material
    considerations, all decisions turn on their own particular circumstances based on
    the facts and evidence before those decision-makers at the time. Therefore, I
    cannot make any meaningful comparisons to the appeal scheme before me, which
    I must consider on its own merits.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010756


22. I note that both the Divisional Member and Parish Council support the proposal.
    However, support, or a lack of objection to a scheme is not, in itself, a reason to
    allow development. I have in any case, determined this appeal on its own
    particular merits.
Conclusion
23. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
24. For the reasons given above the appeal is dismissed.



C Cooper-Young
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
