Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 26 August 2026

by J Bell-Williamson MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State

Decision date:22 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010236
 Knightswood Cottage, Prince Albert Drive, Ascot, Berkshire SL5 8AQ
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr Searle against the decision of Bracknell Forest Council.
 •   The application Ref is 25/00773/FUL.
 •   The development proposed is erection of single storey infill extension with roof lantern and skylight.
     Installation of 3 no. roof lights to existing single storey roof and installation of front facing dormer
     window to existing dwelling and installation of side facing dormer window to existing garage.

 Decision

 1. The appeal is dismissed.
 Preliminary Matter
 2. A new version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
    published on 17 August 2026. This has introduced significant changes to its
    structure and presentation, including the incorporation of development management
    policies. However, having carefully considered the new Framework, I am satisfied
    that, insofar as the issues determinative to this case are concerned, the relevant
    policy approach has not fundamentally changed, and my consideration of it would
    not cause procedural unfairness or prejudice to parties. Therefore, the parties have
    not been invited to make further comments.
 Main Issues
 3. The main issues are:
    • whether the proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt
      having regard to the Framework and relevant development plan policies;
    • the effect of the proposal on the openness of the Green Belt; and
    • whether any harm by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm, would be
      clearly outweighed by other considerations, so as to amount to the very special
      circumstances required to justify the proposal.
 Reasons
 Whether the proposal would be inappropriate development




 https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010236



4. The appeal property is a semi-detached dwelling located along a private road with
   an informal layout of dwellings in the surrounding area. It lies within the Green Belt
   identified on the Council’s Policies Map. Policy LP 34 of the Bracknell Forest Local
   Plan 2020-2037 (2024) says that proposals for development in the Green Belt will
   be determined in accordance with relevant national policy.
5. The Framework makes clear that development in the Green Belt is inappropriate
   unless it falls within one of the categories listed in Policy GB7. With regard to the
   extension or alteration of an existing building, for development not to be
   inappropriate the Framework requires that the extension will not result in a
   disproportionate increase in size compared to the original building1.
6. The supporting text to Policy LP 34 says that as a general guide an extension that
    would result individually, or cumulatively with other extensions, in an increase in
    volume of the original building of more than 40% is very likely to be regarded as
    disproportionate2.
7. The appeal property is a semi-detached dwelling, the original volume of which was
   around 361m3. This has been extended several times since. The existing volume
   of the extended building is 793m3 and the proposed 95m3 extension would increase
   this to 888m3. Together, the existing and proposed extensions would amount to an
   increase in size of the original building by around 145%.
8. Neither Policy LP 34 of the Local Plan nor Policy GB7 of the Framework set a
   numerical ceiling on additions. However, when viewed cumulatively alongside the
   existing extensions, due to the increase in volume, the appeal scheme would result
   in a disproportionate increase in size compared to the original building.
   Consequently, the proposal would not fall within the exception in the Framework
   and would therefore be inappropriate development in the Green Belt.
Effect on openness
9. The Framework states that the objective of Green Belt policy is to prevent urban
    sprawl by keeping land permanently open. Openness is the counterpart of urban
    sprawl and often connotes the absence of development. It can have both spatial
    and visual dimensions.
10. The proposed scheme would add built development to the ground floor, as well as
    two small dormers in the roof. Therefore, the house with the proposed extensions
    would be more substantial in its form and size than the existing building, albeit that
    the impact on spatial openness would be limited given the scale of the proposal.
11. The proposed development would be largely enclosed by the existing extended
    building and would not sprawl onto undeveloped land, which would limit any harm to
    visual openness.
Other considerations
12. The proposal would create more efficient, usable internal living spaces but it has not
    been demonstrated that this could not be achieved by a less harmful scheme. As
    such, I attribute only moderate weight to this benefit.

1
    Policy GB7, 1b.
2
    Paragraph 9.102.


                                             2
Appeal Decision 6010236



13. The appellants consider that under national and local Green Belt policies, a
    replacement dwelling with a greater volume than the proposed extended dwelling
    would be allowed and that this represents a fallback position. The Court of Appeal
    has found that there should be a real prospect of a fallback development being
    implemented3. There is no evidence that the appellants are pursuing such a
    scheme and, given that Knightswood Cottage is a semi-detached house, a
    replacement dwelling could be complex and costly to build. Therefore, there is no
    greater than a theoretical possibility that this might take place and thus I accord the
    fallback position limited weight.
14. The Council did not find harm or development plan conflict in relation to several
    other matters, including character and appearance, living conditions, highway
    safety, parking provision and biodiversity. However, even if I were to agree with the
    Council on these points, the absence of harm would be a neutral matter which
    would not carry weight in favour of the proposed scheme.
Whether there would be Very Special Circumstances
15. The Framework states that inappropriate development is, by definition, harmful to
    the Green Belt and should not be approved except in very special circumstances4.
    Substantial weight should be given to the harm to the Green Belt. Very special
    circumstances will not exist unless the harm to the Green Belt and any other harm
    are clearly outweighed by other considerations.
16. I give moderate weight to the provision of additional, more sustainable living space
    and limited weight to the fallback position. However, these other considerations
    would not clearly outweigh the harm to the Green Belt by reason of
    inappropriateness and the limited adverse impacts on openness. Consequently, the
    very special circumstances necessary to justify the proposed development do not
    exist. As such, it would be contrary to Policy LP 34 of the Local Plan and Policy GB6
    of the Framework.
Conclusion
17. The proposal is contrary to the development plan and the material considerations,
    including the Framework and the very special circumstances test therein, do not
    indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    Therefore, the appeal should be dismissed.



J Bell-Williamson
INSPECTOR




3
    Mansell v Tonbridge and Malling BC & others [2017] EWCA Civ 1314.
4
    Policy GB6, 2.


                                                               3
