 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 1 September 2026
 by Martin Andrews MA(Planning) BSc(Econ) DipTP & DipTP(Dist) MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 30 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010110
 Flat B, 83 Rectory Road, Hackney, London N16 7PP
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Neil Brunjes against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
      Hackney.
 •    The application Ref. is 2026/0014.
 •    The development proposed is demolition of the partial existing roof & window and a proposed roof
      terrace with obscure glazing and accessible through a new door. Additionally, proposed stairs and a
      floor slab connecting to the roof terrace.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issue
2. The main issue is the effect of the proposed roof terrace on the character and
   appearance of the host dwelling and the terrace of which it forms part.
Reasons
3. The appeal dwelling is a first and second floor flat in a building with a two-storey
   outrigger. The property forms part of a long terrace of very similar buildings.
   Because of its elevated position the flat has no readily accessible external amenity
   area and the appeal scheme is to construct an outdoor roof terrace of 9.3sqm
   above the outrigger. The construction would include the removal of a section of the
   outrigger’s pitched roof and the insertion of a new floor with the erection of a 1.7m
   high obscure glazed privacy screen and a new entry door from the second floor of
   the building.
4. However, the Officer’s Report on the application explains that under the Council’s
   Residential Extensions and Alterations SPD 2025, (‘the SPD) roof terraces are not
   normally acceptable unless they form part of the established character of the area.
   In the case of the terraces in Rectory Road, these form part of Hackney’s traditional
   housing stock dating from the Victorian era.
5. The grounds of appeal argue that the terrace would be a ‘modest and recessive
   intervention’ that would be set within the existing pitched roof of the outrigger
   thereby ‘retaining the overarching roof profile and ensuring that the original form (of
   the building) remains legible’. However, whilst this is correct, the modern
   lightweight appearance of the terrace screen would be wholly at odds with the
   traditional built form of No. 83 and the other buildings in the wider terrace that have
   not had alterations and additions.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision Ref. 6010110


6. In this regard, Section 5 of the SPD states under its ‘Design Principles’ that in
   addition to roof terraces conflicting with the character of the area, the alteration of
   traditional roof-forms, including outriggers, is precluded. The appeal scheme would
   clearly conflict with this guidance, all the more so because the SPD advises that
   ‘The use of glazed balustrades is unlikely to be acceptable, as these often appear
   as incongruous additions’. As in my view this applies to the appeal scheme, the
   proposal would be clearly contrary to the SPD and thereby also Policies LP1 &
   LP17 of the Hackney Local Plan 2033, adopted in 2020 and Policies D3 & D4 of the
   London Plan 2021.
7. The grounds of appeal take issue with the Council’s statement that ‘The proposed
   roof terrace would be one of the first along this portion of Rectory Road…’ and
   refers to ‘multiple examples of roof terraces along Rectory Road with no fewer than
   7 identified by the appellant, establishing a clear local precedent. ’ It is not clear
   whether these seven equate to the description ‘multiple’ or whether Figure 4 which
   is an aerial view of No. 47 shows the nearest roof terrace to the appeal property. If
   it does, there are 17 properties between No. 83 and No. 47, and whilst I accept that
   other roof terraces have been constructed in the locality there is no clear evidence
   in this appeal that No. 83 is close to buildings that have had a pitched roof of an
   outrigger converted to a roof terrace.
8. The relative distances are important in this appeal, because on the one hand
   I consider that roof terraces have a noticeably adverse effect on the character and
   appearance of the individual properties and thereby the traditional townscape of
   this part of the Borough, with the SPD guidance relevant and meriting full support.
   However, on the other hand, if No. 83 were to be within a a group of similarly
   altered buildings it might, in fairness, be difficult to give full weight to the SPD’s
   preclusion of them in weighing the planning balance in a decision on any
   application.
9. In contrast, a more sporadic introduction of roof terraces would represent an
   unfortunate incremental attrition of townscape quality. Indeed, one example of this
   attrition is illustrated by Figure 5 of the grounds of appeal which show that Nos.
   114, 118 and 124 Rectory Road not only have overly large dormers on the main
   rear roof slope but also roof terraces in the outriggers. In my view, both Figures 4
   and 5 are illustrations of the cumulatively degrading effect of unsympathetic
   alterations to the properties and in turn the townscape in this part of the Borough of
   Hackney.
10. I acknowledge that such alterations do have the benefit of improving and enlarging
    the living space of dwellings and thereby enhancing the living conditions for the
    occupiers. The proposed roof terrace at No. 83 is a case in point. Be that as it may,
    I conclude that because the proposed roof terrace would harm the character and
    appearance of the host dwelling and the terrace of which it forms part, in conflict
    with the SPD and policies referred to in paragraph 6 above, the appeal must fail.

Martin Andrews
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
