Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 July 2026
by E Fawcett BA (Jt Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 8th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010021
Land adjacent 10 Hurtley Street, Burnley BB10 1BY
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Mohammed Bashir against the decision of Burnley Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is PIP/2026/0028.
•    The development proposed is described on the application form as “Permission in Principle for the
     erection of one building to accommodate 6no. flats”.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and permission in principle is granted for the erection of one
       building comprising a minimum of 6 and a maximum of 6 flats at Land adjacent to
       10 Hurtley Street, Burnley BB10 1BY in accordance with the terms of the
       application, Ref PIP/2026/0028.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The proposal is for permission in principle. The Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
       advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for housing
       led development. The permission in principle consent route has 2 stages: the first
       (‘permission in principle’) stage establishes whether a site is suitable in principle
       and the second (‘technical details consent’) stage is when the detailed
       development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first of these
       2 stages.
3.     The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
       land use and the amount of development. All other matters are considered as part
       of a subsequent technical details consent application if permission in principle is
       granted. It is also not possible for conditions to be attached to a grant of
       permission in principle. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
4.     The PPG states that the amount of residential development must be expressed as
       a range, indicating the minimum and maximum number of dwellings. In this case,
       the minimum and maximum set out on the application form is 6 flats.
5.     The Government published a revised National Planning Policy Framework
       (the Framework) on 17 August 2026. As there are no substantive changes relevant
       to the appeal before me, I am satisfied that no interested parties would be
       prejudiced by my determining the appeal without seeking representations on the
       revised Framework.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010021


Main Issue
6.     The main issue is whether the site is suitable for residential development, in terms
       of its location, the proposed land use and the amount of development, with
       particular regard to the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of
       the area including in respect of open space.
Reasons
7.     The appeal site comprises an area of mown grass located at the end of a row of
       2-storey terraced dwellings. The surrounding area is characterised by long and
       regularly arranged terraced buildings and larger commercial and healthcare
       buildings and their associated parking areas.
8.     Although the appeal proposal relates solely to the principle, the submission
       indicates that the development could be carried out as a continuation of the
       existing terrace, comprising 3 flats at ground-floor level and 3 flats at first-floor
       level. Whilst this would be unlikely to accommodate landscaping or other green
       infrastructure, such a form of development would broadly reflect the pattern and
       scale of the adjoining residential development.
9.     Policy HS3 of Burnley’s Local Plan (2018) (the Local Plan) requires new housing
       to make an efficient use of land, and be developed at a density appropriate to its
       location and setting, with a minimum density of 25 dwellings per hectare (dph).
       The provision of 6 flats on the appeal site would equate to approximately 309 dph.
       Whilst this would be substantially higher than the density of the surrounding
       residential development, this largely reflects that the proposal relates to flats rather
       than dwellinghouses. The level of built form would be unlikely to be significantly
       greater than that which might arise from 3 dwellings occupying the site.
10. Local Plan Policy NE2 relates to designated Protected Open Space and, as the
    appeal site does not benefit from such a designation, the policy does not apply
    directly. Although the supporting text to the policy indicates that the effects on
    non-designated open spaces should be considered, this requirement does not
    form part of the policy itself. Nevertheless, Policy SP6 seeks to protect, enhance
    and extend the borough’s multifunctional green infrastructure network. The policy
    requires that, where appropriate to their nature and scale, proposals should seek
    to retain and enhance green infrastructure assets, be accompanied by an audit of
    green infrastructure functions within and adjacent to the site, and demonstrate any
    mitigation or replacement measures where the loss of, or adverse impact on,
    green infrastructure functionality is unavoidable. Notwithstanding this, Policy SP6
    does not preclude the loss of green infrastructure assets.
11. No detailed green infrastructure audit has been provided. However, based on the
    evidence before me, the site is in private ownership and comprises a relatively
    small area of mown grass bounded by surrounding development and roads. There
    is no compelling evidence that it performs a significant recreational, ecological or
    strategic green infrastructure function, nor that it is functionally connected to other
    areas of open space. Its principal value appears to be aesthetic, providing a
    degree of openness and relief within a densely developed urban environment
    although limited by its small scale.
12. Furthermore, there is also landscaping and a larger area of open space to the
    south which provide a greater aesthetic contribution within the surrounding area.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010021


       Consequently, whilst the proposal would result in a loss of green space, the site’s
       limited size, function and value mean that its development would not undermine
       the functionality of the wider green infrastructure network. In this case, having
       regard to the scale and characteristics of the appeal site, I find that the harm
       arising from the loss of the green infrastructure would be small and would
       therefore comply with the overall aims of Policy SP6.
13. For these reasons, I conclude that the site is suitable for residential development,
    in terms of its location, the proposed land use and the amount of development,
    with particular regard to the effect of the proposal on the character and
    appearance of the area including in respect of open space. It would therefore
    comply with Local Plan Policies SP1, SP5, SP6, HS3 and NE2. Collectively these
    seek to ensure, amongst other things, that the borough’s multifunctional green
    infrastructure network is protected, and that proposals make efficient use of land,
    are built at a density appropriate to their location and setting and they respect the
    townscape setting and locally characteristic street layouts, scale and massing.
Other Considerations
14. Whilst the Council can demonstrate a housing land supply that exceeds 5 years,
    this is not a maximum target. Therefore, this does not lead me to a different
    conclusion on the main issue.
15. Interested parties have raised concerns regarding increased noise, dust and dirt
    during construction, refuse storage, sustainable drainage infrastructure and
    biodiversity. However, these matters fall outside the scope of consideration at the
    first stage of the permission in principle process and would therefore be
    considered as part of a subsequent technical details consent application.
16. Although the site is not allocated for housing development, planning permission
    may still be granted where a proposal complies with the policies of the
    development plan. The effect of the proposal on neighbouring living conditions,
    parking provision and highway safety would be considered at the technical details
    stage, although they are relevant considerations at the permission in principle
    stage insofar as they relate to the type and quantum of development proposed.
17. Whilst development on the appeal site would alter the outlook for those properties
    backing onto the site, I have no doubt that the number of units proposed could be
    delivered without causing harm to the living conditions of the occupiers of
    neighbouring properties. Noting the accessible urban location of the site, the
    availability of on-street parking on surrounding streets, and the low quantum of
    development proposed, I am satisfied that the parking requirements arising from
    the development could be absorbed into the local area without causing harm to
    highway safety.
Conclusion
18. For the above reasons, I conclude that the site is suitable for residential
    development, in terms of its location, the proposed land use and the amount of
    development proposed. Therefore, the appeal should be allowed.

E Fawcett
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
