Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by F Bradley BRP(NZ) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 15 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010379
10 Goodmayes Lane, Redbridge, Ilford, London IG3 9NZ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr S Thananchajan, Rare and Curious Limited, against the decision of the
     Council of the London Borough of Redbridge.
•    The application ref is 2482/25.
•    The development proposed is described as the change of use from small HMO (use class C4) into
     larger HMO (sui generis) (maximum 11 persons).

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     During this appeal, a new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework)
       was published on 17 August 2026. The main parties were given an opportunity to
       comment on the implications of the revised Framework for the appeal. The
       appellant provided a response, and I have taken those comments into account in
       reaching my decision. The Council did not respond. References to the Framework
       in my decision are to the August 2026 version.
3.     Alongside the new Framework, updated Housing Delivery Test results for 2024
       and 2025 were released. I have referred to the updated results in this decision.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are:
       •   whether the proposed development provides acceptable living conditions for
           future occupants, having particular regard to the adequacy and functionality of
           the communal space;
       •   the effect of the proposed development on highway safety with regard to
           manoeuvring space within the site and parking provision;
       •   whether the proposed development is in a suitable location for a larger House
           in Multiple Occupation (HMO) having regard to access to shops, services and
           public transport;
       •   the effect on the living conditions of neighbouring occupants; and
       •   the loss of a family sized dwelling.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010379


Reasons
Living conditions of future occupants
5.     The Council’s Housing Design Supplementary Planning Document (2019) (the
       SPD) sets out space standards for HMOs. It seeks a minimum size for a
       communal kitchen of 11.5 square metres (sqm) for 8-10 occupants. The proposed
       HMO would provide two kitchens, one at ground floor level measuring 11.6 sqm
       and a second at first floor level measuring 11.5 sqm. This provides a combined
       floor area of 23.1 sqm serving a total of 11 occupants which is more than adequate
       to serve 11 occupants.
6.     Whilst these spaces would provide cooking facilities, their size and layout would
       not reasonably accommodate dining furniture and would therefore offer limited
       opportunity for occupants to eat or socialise communally. As such, the kitchens
       would perform a predominantly functional role and would not provide meaningful
       communal living space.
7.     The SPD provides that if a communal living room is provided in addition to shared
       kitchen and dining facilities, it should be at least 13 sqm for 3 people, plus 1 sqm
       for every additional person. Based on this, the living room would need to be at
       least 21 sqm.
8.     A communal room is proposed at first-floor level which measures 8.2 sqm. It
       incorporates a shower room which substantially reduces the usable communal
       floor area available to occupants. Having regard to its limited size and constrained
       layout, I find that the room would have restricted functionality and would be
       incapable of comfortably accommodating more than a small number of residents at
       any one time. Consequently, it would not operate as an effective communal facility
       for the number of occupants proposed and fails to meet the minimum size in the
       SPD.
9.     The bedrooms all exceed the minimum size required in the SPD. Whilst this is a
       positive attribute and would provide occupants with a good degree of private living
       space, it does not negate the need for adequate communal accommodation within
       a larger HMO.
10. To conclude, the proposed development would significantly underprovide
    communal floorspace and would therefore fail to provide acceptable living
    conditions for future occupants, having particular regard to the adequacy and
    functionality of the communal space. It conflicts with Policies LP26 and LP29 of the
    Redbridge Local Plan (the LP) and Policy D6 of the London Plan which, amongst
    other things, require development to provide a high standard of residential
    accommodation, including in respect of the size, quality and arrangement of
    internal space.
Parking provision
11. Criterion 1(d) of Policy LP6 of the LP requires appropriate car and cycle parking
    provision in accordance with London Plan standards which, at Policy T6.1 provides
    for a maximum of one car parking space within an area with a Public Transport
    Accessibility Level rating of 3.
12. Two on-site car parking spaces are proposed, as shown on the submitted site
    plan, representing an over-provision of one space. The appellant indicates that car

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010379


       ownership amongst residents is low. No evidence demonstrating a need for
       parking above the London Plan maximum standard has been provided therefore
       the proposed over-provision has not been justified.
13. The parking and turning area, which would also accommodate refuse and
    recycling storage, is constrained in size. In the absence of any tracking
    information, dimensions or other substantive evidence demonstrating that vehicles
    could safely and conveniently manoeuvre within the site, I cannot be satisfied that
    the parking spaces would be readily accessible or usable, or that vehicles could
    safely enter and leave the site.
14. The appellant also relies on the availability of two on-street parking spaces on
    Cardigan Gardens adjacent to dropped kerbs. However, no substantive evidence
    has been provided to identify their precise location, demonstrate that they would
    remain available to future occupants, or show that they could be safely accessed
    and used without detriment to highway safety.
15. In conclusion, the appellant has failed to demonstrate that the development would
    not have a harmful effect on highway safety with regard to manoeuvring space
    within the site and parking provision. The proposal would conflict with criterion 1(d)
    of Policy LP6 and Policy LP23 of the LP and Policies T6 and T6.1 of the London
    Plan which relate to parking provisions for new developments. It would also conflict
    with Policies T2 and T4 of the London Plan, which together and amongst other
    things, seek to ensure that parking provisions are appropriate, support the
    integration of transport modes, increase walking, improve street safety and ensure
    that proposals do not increase road danger. The proposed development would
    conflict with Policy TR6(4) of the Framework as it would result in an unacceptable
    impact on highway safety.
Location
16. There is no dispute between the parties that the site is not within a designated
    Metropolitan, District or Local Centre as required by criterion 1(a) of Policy LP6 of
    the LP. The Council states that this criterion is intended to ensure conversions are
    sited in areas with good access to local shops and services and public transport.
17. The site is located within short walking distance of a range of shops and services.
    It also benefits from good accessibility to public transport, including nearby bus
    services and Goodmayes Station, which provide connections to a wider range of
    employment, retail and service destinations. Accordingly, the site is well located as
    future occupants would have reasonable access to the facilities necessary to meet
    their daily needs without reliance on the private car.
18. In conclusion, the site is in a suitable location for a larger HMO having regard to
    access to shops, services and public transport. The proposal conflicts with the
    locational requirement of criterion 1(a) of Policy LP6 of the LP, however given the
    site's proximity to a range of services and public transport options, I afford only
    limited weight to the conflict with this policy criterion. Moreover, the site’s location
    would accord with Policy TR3 of the Framework which seeks to ensure
    development is located in sustainable locations.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010379


Living conditions of neighbours
19. The proposed development would increase the number of occupants within the
    property to eleven. It is reasonable to expect that a development of this nature
    would generate a greater level of activity than the existing use or a single
    dwellinghouse, including an increase in the number of daily arrivals and
    departures, including traffic movements, as well as a greater requirement for
    refuse storage and collection arrangements.
20. Nevertheless, I have not been provided with any substantive evidence to
    demonstrate that the resulting levels of activity would be materially harmful to the
    living conditions of neighbouring occupants. Whilst additional comings and goings,
    along with some increase in noise associated with day-to-day occupation, would
    inevitably occur, such activity is generally characteristic of residential use and
    there is nothing before me to indicate that it would give rise to unacceptably
    harmful noise, disturbance or other adverse effects beyond those typically
    associated with a property accommodating multiple residents.
21. The submitted management plan does not set out a clear process or reasonable
    measures to address matters such as pest control, complaint recording and
    preventing fly-tipping, as set out in the SPD. As I am refusing the appeal for other
    reasons I have not sought to address this matter further.
22. Taking these matters together, I find there is no evidence to conclude that the
    proposal would result in unacceptable harm to the living conditions of neighbouring
    occupants.
23. Accordingly, I conclude that the proposal would not have an unacceptable harmful
    effect on the living conditions of neighbouring occupants. Therefore, it would not
    conflict with part 1(c) of Policy LP6 and Policy LP26 of the LP insofar as they seek
    to ensure no significant loss of character or amenity occurs to the area as a result
    of increased traffic, noise and/or general disturbance.
Loss of family sized dwelling
24. There is no dispute between the parties that the property is in use as a small HMO
    (Use Class C4). The proposed development would result in an intensification of
    the existing HMO use by increasing the number of bedrooms and occupants within
    the property. Part 2 of Policy LP6 of the LP specifically supports the conversion of
    larger houses into HMOs subject to three criteria, one of which is that the gross
    floor area of the property exceeds 180 sqm, which this property does. The other
    two criteria are discussed above. Accordingly, while the proposal involves a
    building which is the size of a family-sized dwelling, it is not in use as such.
25. The provision of a larger HMO would provide a mix and choice of housing within
    the Borough which is supported by Policy LP5 of the LP.
26. To conclude, the proposed development does not result in the loss of a family-
    sized dwelling. Therefore, it does not conflict with Policies LP5 and LP6 of the LP
    which collectively seek to ensure that the Borough's housing stock provides for a
    range of housing needs and sizes, with a focus on the provision of larger, family-
    sized homes.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010379


27. Policy LP26 of the LP is referred to in the Council’s reason for refusal. As the
    policy is specifically to promote high quality design, and does not reference
    dwelling sizes, it is not relevant to this main issue.
Other Matters
28. The Council’s updated Housing Delivery Test results for the 2024 and 2025
    measurements are 24% and 30% respectively. In that context, the proposal
    contributes to housing choice and represents an efficient use of existing housing
    stock. The site is reasonably accessible by public transport and is within a short
    walk of local shops and services. These are benefits which weigh in favour of the
    scheme.
29. Although the proposal does not show the precise form and location of the cycle
    parking, sufficient space exists within the site for this, and a suitably worded
    condition could secure details of its provision. Consequently, this matter does not
    weigh against the proposal.
30. The appellant has referred to the appeal property as having a HMO licence and
    compliance with HMO rules. However, even if the proposal meets licensing
    criteria, such a licence is issued under a separate legislative regime and is not
    indicative of acceptability in planning terms. There is a difference in licensing
    considerations and those of planning, and I have considered this appeal on its
    planning merits.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
31. The inadequate provision of communal space results in a poor standard of living
    for the future occupants which conflicts with development plan policies that seek to
    secure high-quality living environments. For the reasons given earlier, this adverse
    effect attracts significant weight.
32. I attach moderate weight to the highway safety harm resulting from the failure to
    demonstrate safe and functional parking provision.
33. The benefits of the scheme, contributing to housing choice and the efficient use of
    an existing property in an accessible location, attract moderate weight in favour of
    the proposal.
34. The site lies within a settlement where Policy S4 of the Framework establishes a
    presumption in favour of development. However, I find that the benefits of the
    proposal are substantially outweighed by the adverse effects.
35. In conclusion, the proposal conflicts with the development plan taken as a whole.
    Material considerations do not indicate that a decision should be taken other than
    in accordance with the development plan. Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.

F Bradley
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
