Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by R Sabu BA(Hons), MA, BArch, PgDip, RIBA, ARB
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 14th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010191
Timberdown, Adj to 1 Jackson Road, Bromley BR2 8NL
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Matt Arnold against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
       Bromley.
•      The application Ref is 25/03925/FPA.
•      The development proposed is the demolition of the existing structures and the erection of a scheme
       of semi-detached and terrace houses, together with associated car parking and access.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. A new version of the National Planning Practice Framework (Framework) was
   published in August 2026. I have consulted the main parties and taken any
   comments into account in reaching my decision.
3. During the course of the appeal, planning was granted1 by the Council for
   demolition of existing structures and erection of 2 two storey four-bedroom semi-
   detached dwellings and 2 part two/three storey four-bedroom semi-detached
   dwellings, with associated car parking and access at the appeal site (approved
   scheme). There is a real prospect that the permission could be implemented should
   the appeal be dismissed. Accordingly, I attach it significant weight in my
   determination of this appeal.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are:
         •     the effect of the proposed terraced dwellings on the living conditions of
               neighbouring occupiers of Nos 33 – 39 Ribston Close with regard to light and
               outlook;
         •     the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area; and
         •     the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers
               with regard to noise.




1
    Council reference: 26/02197/FPA

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010191


Reasons
Outlook and light
5.     The proposed terrace would be in close proximity to the fence adjoining Nos 33 –
       39 Ribston Close. While the proposed terrace would have a hipped roof, the rear
       gardens of these properties are modest in depth and the 2 storey flank wall of the
       proposed terrace would be a significant height. Together with its position close to
       the fence, the proposed terrace would appear unacceptably oppressive from the
       rear windows and rear garden of No 35 in particular.
6.     The approved scheme includes a semidetached pair of dwellings at the rear of site
       such that the flank wall of this building would be a moderate distance from the
       boundary with Nos 33 – 39. Accordingly, the proposal would not result in a better
       outlook for neighbouring occupiers compared with the approved scheme.
7. The Daylight and Sunlight Report indicates that all of the windows and rooms within
   the neighbouring properties would meet the BRE guidance for both daylight and
   sunlight amenity, meaning that the development will not cause any noticeable
   reductions. With regard to gardens, the report states that the garden at 35 Ribston
   Close would see a minor reduction in sunlight beyond the guidance provided by the
   BRE. Although a noticeable difference, given the area of the rear garden receiving
   at least 2 hours of direct sunlight on 21 March would be reduced from some 57% to
   45%, the reduction would not be unacceptable.
8.     I note the comments of the inspectors for the cases noted by the Appellant. The
       proposal at Hilda Vale Road2 related to a first floor extension and replacement of
       roof among other things and does therefore not directly compare with the appeal in
       terms of the effect on outlook. The cases at Goddington Lane 3 and Copers Cope
       Road4 related to oblique lines of sight and 45˚ angles. In the case at The Avenue 5,
       the separation distance between the existing dwelling and nearest proposed
       dwelling was greater than in this appeal. Therefore, these cases are not directly
       comparable to this appeal which must be determined on its own merits in any
       event.
9.     Consequently, the proposal would unacceptably harm the living conditions of No
       35 Ribston Close with regard to outlook. Therefore, the proposal would conflict
       with Policy D3 of The London Plan The Spatial Development Strategy for Greater
       London March 2021(London Plan) and Policies 3 and 37 of the Bromley Local
       Plan (January 2019) (LP) which seek, among other things, development that
       deliver appropriate outlook, a high standard of separation and respect the amenity
       of occupiers of neighbouring buildings.
Character and appearance
10. The site would be accessed from Jackson Road, a residential street with
    predominantly 2 storey dwellings in a traditional style. However, there are a range
    of types of buildings near the junction with Hastings Road, including a 3 storey
    block of flats and a commercial unit.


2
  Appeal ref: APP/G5180/D/24/3353852
3
  Appeal ref: APP/G5180/W/25/3359027
4
  Appeal ref: APP/G5180/W/15/3002451
5
  Appeal ref: APP/G5180/W/24/3357689


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010191


11. To the rear of the site lies Bromley Bus Garage. The car park of a fast food
    restaurant also lies adjacent to the site. Accordingly, the area surrounding the site
    is varied in terms of pattern of development and type of buildings, although the
    overall height of buildings in the area is generally 2 to 3 storeys. Therefore,
    character of the area surrounding the site is varied.
12. The site is largely undeveloped though there are a number of outbuildings on the
    site. Given the surrounding buildings, tall fences and trees, there is limited visibility
    to the site from public vantage points.
13. The proposal for 5 dwellings on the site would comprise a pair of semi-detached
    dwellings and a terrace of 3 dwellings. The proposal would also include parking
    areas. There would be more built development on the site than existing, and the
    dwellings would be in close proximity to the side boundaries of the site. However,
    there would be moderate space between the semi-detached dwellings and the
    terrace with areas of landscaping such that the dwellings would not appear overly
    large for the size of the plot.
14. The rear gardens for the dwellings, and the semi-detached houses in particular,
    would be a modest size. However, given the varied pattern of development of the
    surroundings, the scheme would not harm the character and appearance of the
    area.
15. Given their 2 storey height, the proposed houses would be seen from the
    restaurant car park and from Hastings Road. However, they would be seen in the
    context of the residential area set behind the commercial frontage of Hastings Road
    and would not appear out of keeping in this respect.
16. Consequently, the proposal would not harm the character and appearance of the
    area. Therefore, it would not conflict with London Plan Policy D3, LP Policies 3, 4
    and 37 and the Urban Design Guide SPD (2023) which seek, among other things,
    development that enhance local context, new residential development on backland
    development where there is no unacceptable impact upon the character and
    appearance of an area and a high standard of design and layout.
Noise
17. The proposed site access would pass in close proximity to Nos 1 and 1A Jackson
    Road and the proposed parking area would be in close proximity to the rear
    garden of No 33 Ribston Close.
18. A Traffic Noise Assessment Report (TNA Report) was submitted with the appeal.
    As an alteration of the scheme is not proposed, and the Council has had the
    opportunity to comment on the report, I have had regard to its findings.
19. The TNA Report concluded that in the worst-case, the noise impact on the nearest
    residential properties is likely to be negligible, with no discernible effect on the
    residents.
20. Although cars would pass close to Nos 1 and 1A Jackson Road and park close to
    No 33 Ribston Close, the likelihood of the cars for all proposed parking spaces
    running at the same time would be limited. Moreover, as indicated by the report,
    existing noise from the surrounding roads would limit the perception of increased
    noise levels due to the proposal.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010191


21. Consequently, the proposal would not result in an unacceptable effect on the living
    conditions of neighbouring occupiers with regard to noise. Therefore, the proposal
    would not conflict with London Plan Policy D3 and LP Policies 3 and 37 which
    seek, among other things, seek development that help prevent or mitigate the
    impacts of noise, no unacceptable impact on the residential amenity of existing
    occupiers through disturbance from additional traffic and the amenities of
    neighbouring occupiers are not harmed by noise and disturbance.
Planning balance
22. The National Planning Policy Framework August 2026 (Framework) states that
    development proposals within settlements should be approved unless the benefits
    of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies in this Framework.
23. The Framework goes on to say that substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community, as identified through needs assessments
    prepared for the area of the local planning authority and other relevant evidence.
24. The Council’s housing land supply position is 1.93 years. Accordingly, as the
    proposal would contribute 5 dwellings to the local housing supply, I attribute
    substantial weight to this benefit.
25. The proposal would result in an unacceptable effect on the outlook of neighbouring
    occupiers of No 35 Ribston Close. As the flank wall of the terrace would occupy
    more than the full width of the rear boundary of the modestly sized garden, I
    attribute significant weight to this harm and the associated conflict with London
    Plan Policy D3 and LP Policies 3 and 37. Moreover, given the oppressive effect of
    the proposal on the neighbouring occupiers, the scheme would not support the
    principle of liveability in the terms of the Framework, by not supporting a healthy
    community.
26. The proposal would be within a settlement. However, given the harm identified, the
    benefits of the proposal would be outweighed by the adverse effects.
Other Matters
27. I note there were no technical objections to the scheme from statutory consultees
    during the application stage. However, given the harm identified, this has not
    altered my overall decision.
28. I note concerns regarding the service provided by the Council. However, I have
    necessarily determined the scheme based on its planning merits.
Conclusion
29. For the reasons given above, the proposal would conflict with the development plan
    as a whole and in the absence of material considerations to indicate otherwise, the
    appeal is dismissed.



R Sabu             INSPECTOR



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
