Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 July 2026 by Kim Vo MPlan
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 19 August 2026.


Appeal Ref: 6010986
Hillcott, Duffield Lane, Newborough DE13 8SH
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Bullingham against the decision of East Staffordshire Borough
    Council.
•   The application Ref is P/2025/00476.
•   The development proposed is for the subdivision of planning unit and change of use of garage and
    outbuilding to form separate dwelling.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Applications for Costs
3. An application for an award of costs was made by Mr & Mrs Bullingham against the
   decision of East Staffordshire Borough Council. This application is the subject of a
   separate decision.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are a) whether the proposed development would be suitably
   located, with specific regard to convenient and safe accessibility to services and
   facilities; and b) the effect of the proposed development on highway safety with
   specific regard to visibility and turning space.
Reasons for the Recommendation
Location
5. The appeal site comprises an existing detached, one and a half storey outbuilding
   used for a garage, garden room, and office/study. It is located on Duffield Lane,
   close to the junction where it meets the B5234. Although it occupies its own plot
   with separate access, parking and garden areas, it remains ancillary to the main
   dwelling at Hillcott, which lies on the opposite side of Duffield Lane.
6. The appellant states the proposal would represent a logical subdivision, allowing
   Hillcott and the appeal building to function as separate dwellings with independent
   access and amenity space. However, the appeal site lies outside the settlement

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010986


     boundary, approximately half a mile away from Newborough. Access to the village
     is via the B5234, which has no footways and is subject to a 40 miles per hour (mph)
     speed limit. The route is narrow, unlit and enclosed by high hedges with limited
     verge space, requiring pedestrians and cyclists to travel within the carriageway.
7. Given the curvature of the road, visibility of any pedestrians or cyclists is also
   restricted in places, increasing the potential for conflict with vehicles. I therefore find
   that walking and cycling between the appeal site and the village would be neither
   safe nor convenient, particularly during hours of darkness or inclement weather.
   The proposal would consequently fail to provide a safe and practical pedestrian
   route to local services and facilities. Public transport is also limited, with bus
   services running only at peak times and no bus stops within easy walking distance.
8. Additionally, the Newborough Parish Neighbourhood Development Plan 2016
   (NDP) notes that due to its rural character, the small village offers a limited number
   of services and facilities, including a primary school, public house, a tearoom/bed
   and breakfast, and a church. However, given the nature of the route between the
   appeal site and the village centre, any future occupiers would be reliant on private
   vehicle use to access even these limited local facilities.
9. The proposal comprises a single two bedroom dwelling and may not produce a
   significantly increased level of pedestrian or cycle trips. It would also remove
   movements between Hillcott and the appeal site. However, these points would not
   diminish the fact that any future occupiers wishing to travel to the village on foot or
   by bicycle, would be required to do so along a route that I have found to be neither
   safe nor convenient. No personal injury collisions have been recorded nearby
   within the last five years, but the absence of recorded incidents does not, in itself,
   demonstrate an absence of harm.
10. I recognise technology has allowed for home working, accessible online services,
    and home deliveries which can reduce the need to travel. Nevertheless, future
    occupiers would still need to access employment, services and other facilities, and
    there would be no restrictions on them doing so. The fact that rural locations often
    rely on private vehicles does not justify additional development in unsustainable
    locations that would further reinforce such dependence.
11. The proposal would provide accommodation better suited to the appellant's health
    needs, allowing them to remain within their established community, and contribute
    to the supply of smaller homes, in line with Policy HE2 of the NDP. It would also re-
    use an existing building, consistent with Policy HE3 of the NDP, Strategic Policy 8
    of the Local Plan 2015 (LP), the Re-use of Rural Buildings Supplementary Planning
    Document (SPD) and the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework).
12. However, support under these policies is dependent on compliance with other
    development plan policies and proposals having sustainable linkages and
    acceptable highway impacts. As outlined above, it would fail to satisfy these
    requirements and would not benefit from such policy support. The proposal does
    not involve the subdivision of a building rather; it seeks the conversion of an
    existing outbuilding to independent residential use.
13. For the above reasons, the proposed development would not occupy a sustainable
    location, as a convenient and safe route to walk, cycle or travel by public transport
    would not be provided. The limited opportunities for doing so would deter future
    occupants from using alternative, sustainable modes of travel and would inevitably

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010986


     result in a high degree of reliance on the private car for day-to-day needs. It would
     therefore conflict with Strategic Policy 1, Strategic Policy 8 and Strategic Policy 35
     of the LP, Policies SP1 and HE3 of the NDP and the Framework.
14. Together and amongst other things, these policies seek to ensure that development
    is located in sustainable locations with good links to the highway network, where it
    is safe and convenient to travel by walking, cycling and public transport.
    Development outside settlement boundaries will not be permitted unless it is in
    accordance with a ‘made’ Neighbourhood Plan and proposals will be judged on
    their proximity to settlements. The use of sustainable modes of transport will be
    encouraged. New residential development involving the conversion of existing
    buildings into single dwellings will also be supported, subject to compliance with
    other development plan policies.
Highway Safety
15. The appeal site is located on Duffield Lane, which has a speed limit of 60mph,
    close to the junction where it meets the B5234 with a speed limit of 40mph. The
    existing access has a wide, curved entrance which connects directly to the road.
16. Due to a gradual bend on the B5234, visibility from the access in that direction
    towards Newborough is sufficient. However, visibility towards Duffield Lane leading
    to the A515 is more restricted. The Highway Authority has advised that the
    proposal has failed to demonstrate suitable visibility from the centre of the access,
    in accordance with Manual for Streets. The appellant accepts that visibility in this
    direction falls below the recommended standard.
17. Nevertheless, the access is long established and already serves the existing
    outbuilding. The restricted visibility is therefore an existing constraint, and the
    function of the access would remain unchanged by the proposed development.
    Moreover, the appeal site accommodates parking for at least three vehicles
    (including the garage), and this arrangement would be retained.
18. Whilst visibility to this side is not ideal, sightlines of any approaching westbound
    traffic on Duffield Lane would be sufficient due to the curved angle of the access. It
    is also expected that traffic coming from this side would be unlikely to travel at
    60mph, as they would slow down due to the approach towards a give way junction,
    before entering the B5234. This would allow more time for any vehicles exiting the
    access to be aware of oncoming traffic from this direction. Sightlines could also be
    improved through the management or trimming of vegetation along the frontage,
    which could be secured by condition. Whilst neighbour representations have
    expressed concerns regarding a risk of accidents, this risk already exists in
    connection with the current use and would not be made materially greater.
19. Consequently, the proposal is unlikely to result in an unacceptable impact on
    highway safety arising from inadequate visibility splays. Whilst the Council has
    recommended a condition requiring visibility splays of 2.4 metres x 104 metres in
    both directions, achieving these may not be feasible, such that the condition would
    be neither reasonable nor enforceable. In any event, for the reasons set out above,
    I am satisfied that the reduced visibility to one side would not amount to harm to
    highway safety.
20. Concern regarding the adequacy of turning facilities to enable vehicles to enter and
    exit in forward gear from Hillcott relate to parking and manoeuvring arrangements

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010986


     within the site edged blue on the submitted plans. This falls outside the application
     site. In any event, their parking and turning space is an existing situation and would
     remain unchanged by the proposed development.
21. For these reasons, the proposal would not conflict with Strategic Policy 1 and
    Strategic Policy 35 of the LP and the Framework. Together, and amongst other
    things, these require development proposals to not result in vehicles causing
    highway safety issues and for appropriate infrastructure measures to be provided to
    mitigate the adverse effects of development traffic and safety impacts.
Other Matters
22. Dismissed appeal reference 3200932 differed in that it involved a substantial
    extension and concerned character and appearance. Since this decision, the speed
    limit of the B5234 has reduced and the outbuilding has completed approved
    extensions and alterations. However, that approval does not establish the
    acceptability of the appeal scheme, which is for a materially different form of
    development. The dismissed appeal decision also related to a new dwelling and the
    relevant development plan policies concerning the location of new housing remain
    unchanged. Therefore, the Inspector's findings regarding the absence of a safe and
    practical pedestrian route and the conflict with the sustainable development
    principles of the LP and NDP remain relevant. Nevertheless, that appeal has not
    been determinative, and I have decided the current proposal on its own merits, for
    which I find it unacceptable for the reasons above.
23. I have not been provided with details of the cited approval Ref. P/2017/00612 and
    therefore, cannot be satisfied that it is sufficiently comparable, such that
    it would change my findings. In any case, that approval related to the erection of
    four detached dwellings. Similarly, the appeal decisions cited by the appellant
    (Refs. 3332984 and 3160945) are not directly comparable. The first concerned the
    erection of eight dwellings on a former industrial site. Whilst the second related to a
    similar proposal for the conversion of an existing garage, this was located within the
    main residential area of a village, where the Inspector considered the site to be
    accessible to both services and a choice of transport modes.
24. The registration of the appeal property for Council Tax does not determine whether
    planning permission should be granted. The appellant is free to apply for planning
    permission for its use as a dwelling and, indeed, did so many years after its
    extension was granted. The lack of opportunity to provide additional information to
    the Council, adequacy of the Highway Authority’s evidence and of the Council’s
    assessment of the planning application, are matters that should be taken up with
    them directly and are not for me to resolve here.
25. The proposal would have acceptable impacts upon character and appearance,
    landscape, living conditions of neighbouring occupiers, flood risk and drainage,
    ecology and biodiversity, heritage assets, parking provision and internal space
    standards. It would also provide a contribution to mitigate effects on the Cannock
    Chase Special Area of Conservation. Support has been received from the Parish
    Council. However, these are a lack of harm or requirements to comply with
    legislation to offset other effects. They do not make up for the shortcomings of the
    scheme in regard to the harm identified on the first main issue.
26. The proposal would result in an additional dwelling that would contribute to a
    shortage of smaller homes within the parish. However, this would carry only very

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010986


     limited weight given the modest contribution it would make. I have also had regard
     to the proposal’s effective use of previously developed land. However, I would
     attach limited weight to this as in doing so, the proposal would not be sustainably
     located or provide safe or convenient access to local services and facilities.
Conclusion and Recommendation
27. Whilst I have found in the appellant’s favour on the second main issue, this is also
    a lack of harm and thus a neutral matter which is not capable of weighing against
    the harm I have found in regard to the first. Material considerations do not indicate
    a decision other than in accordance with the development plan, with which the
    scheme conflicts with for the reasons I have set out. I therefore recommend the
    appeal should be dismissed.

Kim Vo
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
28. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
