Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 27 August 2026
by C Housden BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 14 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010518
4 Offington Court, Offington, Worthing, West Sussex BN14 9PF
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
     planning permission
•    The appeal is made by Hannah Dilley against Worthing Borough Council.
•    The application ref is AWDM/1475/25.
•    The development proposed is a single storey rear extension with new gable roof over to create a first
     floor bedroom.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed and planning permission for a single storey rear extension
       with new gable roof over to create a first floor bedroom is refused.
Procedural Matters
2.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was issued on 17
       August 2026. Having reviewed the changes, I am satisfied that it does not affect
       the substantive matters of the appeal and that proceeding without further
       consultation with the main parties would not be prejudicial to their respective
       cases.
Main Issue
3.     The appeal results from the failure of the Council to determine the planning
       application within the relevant time period, and as such, there is no formal decision
       notice. The Council has confirmed in its appeal documentation that, had it been
       able to do so, it would have refused planning permission.
4.     The main issue is the effect on the living conditions of the occupiers of 5 Offington
       Court (No 5), with particular regard to overlooking and the provision of daylight and
       sunlight.
Reasons
5.     Offington Court comprises a cul-de-sac of detached bungalow properties set in a
       regular pattern fronting onto the road, which includes the appeal property, 4
       Offington Court (No 4) and its adjacent neighbour No 5.
6.     No 5 has a ground floor side window facing towards the plot of No 4, which the
       evidence shows is the sole window serving the dining room of this property. I
       observed that the building of No 4 as it currently exists obscures to some extent
       the daylight and sunlight received by this window. The evidence shows that this is
       particularly the case in the early morning. Nevertheless, owing to the position of

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010518


       No 4 with its rear building line shallower in its respective plot compared to No 5,
       this side window of No 5 still receives daylight and sunlight for much of the day,
       particularly given the hipped roof with a steep pitch of No 4 which helps to
       minimise the bulk and massing above the ground floor level. The proposal would
       involve a hip to gable roof extension, considerably extending the ridge of No 4 to
       the rear of the property.
7.     I have not been presented with any technical evidence regarding the effect of the
       proposal on the provision of daylight and sunlight to the relevant side facing
       window of No 5. Given the position of No 4 with No 5 and the path of the sun,
       along with the additional bulk and massing brought by the proposal above the
       ground floor level, the development would create an enclosing effect restricting the
       daylight and sunlight received by this window, along with casting shadows over
       this window for much more of the day than the existing situation. The small half-hip
       to the edge of the ridge would do little to minimise the bulk and massing introduced
       by the proposal above the ground floor level. Therefore, the development would
       result in the dining room of No 5 feeling colder and uninviting, harming the living
       conditions of the occupiers of No 5.
8.     In relation to overlooking towards this neighbour, the appellant sets out that the
       location of the side rooflights is indicative and that they intend to install them at a
       high level of 1.7m above the finished floor level. I am satisfied that a condition
       could secure these rooflights at a high level which would ensure there would be no
       direct outlook from them towards No 5. In relation to the proposed rear facing
       window, given views from this window would be at an oblique angle towards the
       garden area of No 5 there would not be any direct overlooking, retaining the
       privacy of the occupiers. Therefore, no harm would occur through overlooking to
       the occupiers of No 5.
9.     Whilst the proposal would not result in harmful overlooking, it would result in
       considerable harm to the living conditions of No 5 through the enclosure of its side
       facing window resulting in a loss of daylight and sunlight and harmful
       overshadowing. The proposal would therefore conflict with Policy DM5 of the
       Worthing Local Plan (2023). This policy, amongst other matters, seeks to ensure
       development does not have an unacceptable impact on the occupiers of adjacent
       properties, including an unacceptable loss of daylight and sunlight.
Other Matters
10. I have been provided with a set of plans which shows a rear dormer extension and
    single storey rear extension that the appellant contends could be undertaken
    through permitted development rights. I have no evidence before me
    demonstrating the plans benefit from a Certificate of Lawful Development. In any
    case, the appeal scheme would introduce a greater amount of bulk and massing
    above the ground floor level extending rearwards than the permitted development
    scheme. Given my concerns regarding the appeal proposal relate to the additional
    bulk and massing above ground floor level brought by the extension to the roof
    ridge, the appeal scheme appears to be more harmful to the living conditions of
    the occupiers of No 5 than the fallback position. Given the location to the rear
    there would be very limited benefits to character and appearance of the area
    implementing the appeal proposal over the fallback scheme. Therefore, whilst I
    have no reason to doubt that there is an existence of a permitted development
    fallback position, it would not be as harmful as the appeal proposal to the living

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010518


         conditions of the occupiers of No 5 and offers very little other benefits, and
         therefore carries very limited weight.
11. It has been brought to my attention that a larger extension was previously
    approved by the Council1. However, I have only been provided with limited details
    of this application and cannot be certain that the circumstances are directly
    comparable. Furthermore, this permission does not appear to have ever been
    implemented and therefore would now be time expired. Therefore, the existence of
    this historic planning permission is a matter of very limited weight. Furthermore,
    each proposal should be considered on its individual merits which I have done so.
12. My attention has been drawn to other extensions permitted within Offington Court2.
    However, the harm I have identified relates to the specific relationship between No
    4 and No 5. Therefore, the existence of these other extensions does not mitigate
    or otherwise justify the harm that I have identified.
13. The appellant has raised concern regarding the Council’s handling of the
    application. However, this is a matter that lies outside the scope of my
    determination as it does not affect the planning merits of the proposal.
14. The development would improve the living conditions of the occupiers of the
    appeal property by providing additional floorspace and improved energy
    performance. However, these are personal benefits of the scheme and attracts
    limited weight in favour of the development.
15. Policy S4 of the Framework sets out that development proposals within
    settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework. The proposal would conflict
    with Policy P3 of the Framework which sets out proposals should not give rise to,
    or contribute to, an unacceptable level of access to daylight and sunlight for
    neighbouring residents and occupiers and advises that adverse impacts of this
    nature should be avoided where possible, or else mitigated to an acceptable
    degree. Given the harm identified to the living conditions of the occupiers of No 5,
    the benefits of the proposal would be substantially outweighed by the adverse
    effects.
Conclusion
16. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    Therefore, for the reasons given above, the appeal should be dismissed.



C Housden
INSPECTOR




1
    LPA ref AWDM/0360/11
2
    Including at No 7 Offington Court LPA ref 04/01057/FULL


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 3
