Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by David Troy BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 10 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010980
Flat B, 35 Arvon Road, London, N5 1PL
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Louis Stuart-Bourne against the decision of the Council of the London
    Borough of Islington.
•   The application Ref is P2026/0457/FUL.
•   The development is proposed flat roof dormer extension to roof of rear outrigger and enlarged rear
    first floor window.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2. Since the determination of the application an updated and revised National
   Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026.
   The main parties have been consulted and provided with an opportunity to provide
   comments on it in relation to this appeal. I have therefore considered the
   development against the relevant policies in the Framework.
Main Issue
3. The main issue is the effect of the proposed rear roof dormer extension on the
   character and appearance of the host property, the adjoining terrace of properties
   of which it forms a part and the area.
Reasons
4. The appeal property consists of a three storey end terrace property used as two
   flats. It is located in a mature well-established residential area within a row of
   terraced properties that are of comparable scale and form, with two storey rear
   outriggers and traditional gabled pitched roofs. A number of the dwellings, including
   the host property, have small pitched dormers on the rear main roof plane that
   generally appear as clearly subordinate to the dwellings.
5. The proposed development involves the construction of a flat roof mansard style
   rear dormer extension over the rear mono-pitched outrigger projection and an
   enlarged rear first floor window. The dormer extension would be set in from the rear
   eaves of the roof, built up to the shared party wall with the adjoining property and
   finished in zinc/copper cladding.
6. Although the proposed rear dormer would be set in, the proposed roof addition
   would result in a material alteration to the property’s outrigger roof, which currently

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010980


     makes a positive contribution to the roofscape of the host property. The proposed
     roof alteration would result in additional bulk at the rear of the host property that
     would be very much at odds with the more modest form and appearance of the
     host building and the adjoining terrace of properties of which it forms a part.
7. These shortcomings are exacerbated by the proposal’s position, which would be
   readily visible along Witherington Road at the rear. The proposed rear dormer roof
   extension, by virtue of its scale, siting and design, would fail to achieve an
   appropriate degree of subordination to the host property and would detract from the
   architectural integrity of the host property and adjoining terrace. As such, I
   consider that the proposed rear dormer extension would result in an incongruous
   and out-of-keeping addition that would cause unacceptable harm to the host
   property, adjoining terrace of properties and the area.
8. I have considered the appellant’s arguments that the design and layout of the
   proposed front dormer extension have been carefully considered and revised in
   response to the Council’s pre-application advice in order to minimise any impacts on
   the host property and the area. However, the Council are not bound by the officer’s
   pre-application advice in making their final decision and whilst the use of materials
   would assist in integrating the development with the area, these aspects do not
   overcome the adverse effects outlined above.
9. Consequently, I conclude that the proposed rear dormer extension would result in
   harm to the character and appearance of the host property, adjoining terrace of
   properties and the area. It would therefore be contrary to Policies D3 and D4 of the
   London Plan 2021, Policy PLAN1 of the Islington Local Plan Strategic and
   Development Management Policies 2023, and the guidance within Islington’s
   Urban Design Guide 2017. Collectively, these policies and guidance seek, amongst
   other things, to ensure that developments of a high quality that are designed and
   sited so as to protect and enhance local character and respond positively to the
   local context and distinctiveness.
Other Matters
10. I have noted the other developments and roof designs in the area drawn to my
    attention by the appellant. However, whilst I acknowledge the varied rear roofscape
    in the surrounding area, this does not set a precedent for such an inappropriate
    development in this location. The roof alterations at Nos. 33 and 43 Arvon Road
    have different development characteristics to the appeal scheme and I have not
    been provided with the full details of the various other roof extensions and
    alterations to know how directly comparable they are to the current proposal. In any
    event, each proposal falls to be assessed primarily on its own merits and I am
    unaware of the full circumstances associated with these other cases.
11. I have considered the appellant’s arguments regarding the type of roof extensions
    and alterations that can be built on a dwellinghouse under General Permitted
    Development Rights. Whilst this may be so, this does not apply to the host property
    which contains flats and does set a precedent for the reasons set out above.
12. I have noted the comments received from third parties, including the letters of
    support for the proposal. However, in light of my findings on the main issue, my
    decision does not turn on these matters.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010980


13. I have considered the various benefits put forward by the appellant that the proposal
    would bring, including providing additional accommodation to meet the needs of the
    appellant, energy efficiency, sustainable construction measures and improvement to
    the existing roof structure above the residential property. While I have given them
    some weight, these modest benefits would not be sufficient to outweigh the harm I
    have identified. For all these reasons, there are no other material considerations to
    outweigh the development plan conflicts identified.
Conclusion
14. For the reasons given above, and having regard to all other matters raised, I
    conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

David Troy
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
