Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by J Heppell BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25th September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6010811
Footpath outside 100 High Street, Bromley BR1 1EY
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne on behalf of BT Group plc against the decision of the Council
     of the London Borough of Bromley.
•    The application Ref is 26/00380/FPA.
•    The development proposed is installation of 1no. BT Street Hub Unit and associated advertisement
     panels to either side of the unit.

Appeal B Ref: 6010812
Footpath outside 100 High Street, Bromley BR1 1EY
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 against a refusal to grant express consent.
•    The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne on behalf of BT Group plc against the decision of the Council
     of the London Borough of Bromley.
•    The application Ref is 26/00455/ADV.
•    The development proposed is installation of 1no. BT Street Hub Unit and associated advertisement
     panels to either side of the unit.

Decisions
1.     Appeal A is dismissed.
2.     Appeal B is dismissed
Preliminary Matters
3.     The two appeals relate to the same site and to each other. I have considered each
       on its individual merits, but as they are intrinsically linked and raise similar issues, I
       have combined these cases in a single decision letter.
4.     In accordance with the Regulations for the control of advertisements, I have limited
       my consideration of Appeal B to matters of amenity, and have had regard to the
       development plan only insofar as it is relevant to my consideration of those
       matters.
5.     Following the submission of the appeal, the revised National Planning Policy
       Framework (Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. The main parties
       were afforded the opportunity to comment on the implications of the new
       Framework for the proposals.
Main Issues
6.     The main issue for Appeal A is the effect of the proposal on the character and
       appearance of the area with particular regard to designated heritage assets.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6010811 and 6010812


7.     The main issue for Appeal B is the effect of the advertisement on amenity.
Reasons
8.     The site is located within Bromley Town Centre Conservation Area (CA), whose
       significance derives from Bromley’s origins as a medieval town associated with the
       Bishop of Rochester. Located on the London to Hastings Road, the town grew in
       the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries when the Bishops Palace, College and
       almshouses were constructed, along with a number of coaching inns. Further
       expansion was triggered by the arrival of the railways. This section of the High
       Street, now pedestrianised, retains the character and appearance of a traditional
       main street and, despite not containing any listed buildings owing to the relative
       modernity of many of its buildings, Aberdeen Buildings (95-109 High Street) dates
       from the late Victorian period and is locally listed.
9.     The pedestrianisation of the High Street has been sensitively undertaken utilising a
       variety of contrasting surfacing materials. Beside shop units, larger paviors akin to
       a pavement have been used, occupied in places by seating for cafes. The wider
       central section of the road is surfaced with smaller paviors, giving it the
       appearance of a cobbled street, with large planters at intervals providing a
       landscaped backdrop. A separate paved strip between the “pavement” and the
       “road” contains the majority of street furniture, mainly in the form of lamp posts and
       litter bins.
10. The proposed hub would be located within the strip reserved for street furniture,
    where it would align with a pair of lamp posts and litter bins, and its dark finish and
    slender profile would complement the mainly dark coloured street furniture.
    However, judging from the appellant’s elevations, the hub would not be dissimilar
    in height to adjacent shop windows which, combined with its width and orientation
    to face along the street, would create a dominating feature which the nearby lamp
    posts would not screen. The proposal would contribute to a sense of clutter in an
    area where, despite the presence of lamp posts and litter bins, street furniture is
    not prevalent. It would impinge, albeit to a limited degree, on a key view identified
    in the Bromley Town Centre Conservation Area Appraisal and Management Plan
    Adopted 25 June 2025, which incorporates the attractively proportioned and
    detailed Aberdeen Buildings opposite.
11. The site is within a section of High Street which is designated as a primary retail
    frontage within the town centre, which contains a number of well lit, active shop
    frontages. The design and illumination of the hub would to some extent echo the
    appearance of the shop fronts but, notwithstanding that such hubs are increasingly
    common in town centres, it would have a different and contrasting character to the
    shop fronts, which are a well established part of the area’s character. The size and
    illuminated nature of the proposed advertisements would exacerbate the negative
    impact of the hub. The appellant has referred to the prevalence of digital
    advertisement structures in the town centre, but from my observations such
    structures are not characteristic of this part of the High Street.
12. I have taken account of the proposed removal of two existing telephone boxes
    outside 67 High Street and the Salvation Army building in Ethelbert Road
    respectively. However, neither location is within the CA or the pedestrianised part
    of the town centre. The box at 67 High Street is situated in a row of bus shelters
    and seating, and its removal would make only a modest contribution to reducing


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6010811 and 6010812


         clutter. The box in Ethelbert Road sits discreetly in front of a brick wall and has
         only a moderate impact on the street scene. The removal of the telephone boxes
         would provide a limited visual benefit, together with a potential reduction in
         antisocial behaviour.
13. The appellant referred me to a recently permitted street hub outside 3 High Street
    Bromley1, which the Council concluded was appropriate in the context of the retail
    uses and street furniture which characterised the immediate area. The site lies
    outside the CA and the pedestrianised area, and the decision is thus of limited
    relevance given the different context of the appeal site.
14. S72(1) of the Planning (Listed Building and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 places a
    statutory duty on decision makers to pay special attention to the desirability of
    preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of a CA. Having regard to
    the High Street’s historic role as Bromley’s main throughfare and the sensitive
    manner in which it has been pedestrianised, the proposal would diminish the
    street’s pleasing open character, resulting in a moderate degree of harm to the
    CA’s significance, to which I attach considerable importance and weight. In such
    circumstances, Policy HE6 of the Framework requires the effect on the designated
    heritage asset and its significance to be weighed against any public benefits
    resulting from the proposal.
15. The hub would provide a fast, free, encrypted Wi-Fi service as part of a planned
    sequence of hubs in Bromley, benefitting both residents and tourists. It would have
    a direct 999 call button and USB ports for rapid device charging. The appellant has
    explained usage levels across BT’s estate, including the number of calls made and
    free WI-Fi connections provided. Environmental sensors would monitor air, sound
    and light, as well as pedestrian, cycle and vehicle movements, providing data
    which could assist in managing patterns of growth and developing travel plans in
    support of national air quality objectives and the green agenda.
16. The proposed advertisements would support these functions and provide
    advertising opportunities for local businesses, as well as displaying emergency
    awareness messaging and providing the Council with 5% free screen time (circa
    438 hours a year per display or 876 hours per unit). The hub would be powered by
    100% renewable carbon free energy, thus promoting sustainability, and would be
    cleaned and inspected regularly. It would improve public safety in support of Policy
    P5 of the Framework by providing access to emergency services, increased street
    illumination. and reducing anti-social behaviour in existing telephone boxes.
17. The Council’s Officer Report confirmed that a number of applications for street
    hubs were before the Council, including one outside 145 High Street Bromley2 in
    the same pedestrianised section of the CA as the site, where there is currently a
    telephone box. Whilst some benefits of hubs are very localised – such as
    increased street illumination – it is unclear whether the proposed sequence of
    hubs would result in a duplication of services, meaning that some of the benefits
    offered by the proposal could potentially be delivered by other hubs, such as those
    at 3 and 145 High Street. Moreover, it has not been explained why the hub could
    not be located in a different, less harmful position, whilst still delivering the same
    benefits. Overall, the harm to the significance of the designated heritage asset
    outweighs the public benefits.
1
    LPA reference 21/02650/ADV
2
    LPA references 26/00379/FPA and 26/00453/ADV


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           3
Appeal Decisions 6010811 and 6010812


18. The appellant referred me to appeal decisions for hubs where the existing context
    was a determining factor3. At Kingston upon Thames, the presence of existing
    digital signs in the town centre meant that a proposed hub would not be visually
    incongruous. In Barnet, the presence of street furniture and advertisements
    allowed an Inspector to conclude that a proposed hub would not result in clutter. In
    Blackpool, existing street furniture including a telephone box justified a proposed
    hub. Whilst these decisions establish the importance of context in determining the
    acceptability of hubs, I do not know whether the context was similar to that of
    Bromley High Street, and I therefore place limited weight on them.
19. Further appeal decisions were supplied by the appellant for hubs found to have an
    acceptable relationship with heritage assets4. Illuminated digital advertisement
    displays in Dundee were judged to reflect the busy retail and commercial
    environment of the CA, which included information boards, street furniture,
    advertisements and shopfronts. In Blackpool, part of a CA’s significance was held
    to derive from its strong commercial character. In Croydon, a proposed hub was
    considered to be less conspicuous than an existing telephone box. A hub in
    Banbury was found to have a neutral effect on the significance of a CA given the
    presence of nearby street furniture including a telephone box which would be
    replaced. However, beyond drawing from these decisions the fact that street hubs
    can be appropriate within the setting of heritage assets, there is insufficient
    information to allow me to determine whether the circumstances were comparable
    with the current appeal. There is therefore little that I can glean from them.
20. I conclude that the proposed street hub and associated advertisement panels
    would result in a moderate degree of harm to the CA’s significance and thereby fail
    to preserve or enhance its character or appearance. As a result, and although not
    determinative in relation to Appeal B, the proposal would conflict with policies D8
    and HC1 of the London Plan March 2021 and policies 37, 41 and 102 of the
    London Borough of Bromley Local Plan January 2019. Together these policies
    require proposals affecting the setting of heritage assets to be sympathetic to the
    asset’s significance and appreciation within its surroundings, including by
    respecting important views and complementing the layout of existing spaces.
    Proposals should furthermore ensure that the public realm is well designed and
    related to the local and historic context.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
21. The site is within a settlement where Policy S4 of the Framework applies to Appeal
    A. Therefore, development should be approved unless the benefits of doing so
    would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against
    the national decision-making policies in this Framework. There are no specific
    national policies directing refusal in this case.
22. The Framework sets out the circumstances in which the benefits of approving
    development are likely to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects, which
    include but are not restricted to the situations listed in Policy S4(2). Although none
    of the situations listed in the policy apply to the proposal, I am nonetheless
    required to consider whether the benefits of the proposal would be substantially
    outweighed by the harm I have identified to the significance of a heritage asset.


3
    Appeal references APP/Z5630/H/3209488, APP/N5090/Z/22/3296138 and APP/J2373/H/22/3305072
4
    Appeal references ADA-180-2017, APP/J2373/H/22/3305072, APP/L5240/W/21/3285398 and APP/C3105/W/25/3366449


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            4
Appeal Decisions 6010811 and 6010812


23. Policy CO1 of the Framework, which relates to proposals for telecommunications
    infrastructure, requires substantial weight to be given to the benefits of maintaining
    or improving network coverage, capacity, reliability and resilience. It states that
    proposals should, amongst other things, be sited and designed to minimise the
    visual impact of the proposals, especially in situations where a new structure is
    required, so far as practical taking into account their operational requirements.
24. The proposal would, amongst other services, provide free Wi-Fi, thereby making a
    minor contribution to improved coverage. However, my findings indicate that it has
    not been sited to minimise its visual impact, and that it would as a consequence
    diminish the High Street’s open character, resulting in a moderate degree of harm
    to the CA’s significance.
25. The limited benefits resulting from the proposal attract substantial weight, but the
    harm I have identified is a matter of considerable importance and weight by
    reference to Policy HE6(3) of the Framework. In this instance, the benefits of
    approving Appeal A would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects.
26. Given the above, I conclude that both Appeal A and Appeal B should be
    dismissed.

J Heppell
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
