Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 September 2026
by S Ramsden BSc (Hons) MA MA IHBC
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 16th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010050
The Laurels, Gloucester Road, Grovesend, Thornbury, South Gloucestershire
BS35 3TU
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Mr G Jones, of Go 2 Storage, against the decision of South Gloucestershire
     Council.
•    The application Ref is P26/00395/ADV.
•    The advertisement proposed is for 2 x non illuminated gate signs for temporary period (until May
     2027).

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The Advertisement Regulations require that decisions are made only in the interest
       of amenity (which can include visual and/or aural amenity) and public safety. As
       set out in the reason for refusal, the Council has identified impacts on visual
       amenity as being the relevant matter. Whilst I have taken account of the policies to
       which the Council refers insofar as they may be relevant, these have not been
       decisive in my determination of this appeal.
3.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published on 17 August 2026. The changes to the Framework do not affect the
       merits of this case in a material way and I, therefore, have not consulted the
       parties with regard to these changes.
4.     The application form confirms that the advertisements are already in place and I
       was able to observe them at my site visit.
Main Issue
5.     The main issue is the effect of the advertisements on the visual amenity and the
       character and appearance of the host property and surrounding area.
Reasons
6.     The appeal site is a detached house with a sizeable frontage to Gloucester Road
       (the A38), the boundary treatment of which comprises a low stone wall with a high
       hedge above. The boundary contains a large pair of solid vehicular gates,
       approximately 1.87 metres high, with a combined width of around 5.17m.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010050


7.     There are a few houses to the south of the Laurels and occasional houses
       elsewhere along the road, predominantly with low walls and hedges fronting the
       A38. However, the surrounding area consists largely of fields and open land, with
       continuous hedges fronting the A38. Grass verges add to the distinctive verdant
       character of this section of the road and, notwithstanding the presence of the A38,
       the immediate area has a rural character. Whilst there may be some commercial
       signage elsewhere along the A38, it is at some considerable distance from the
       appeal site; other than road signs there is little, if any, signage in its immediate
       vicinity, and the surrounding streetscape has an uncluttered appearance.
8.     The two large advertisements cover almost the entirety of each gate. Given their
       size, the rural character of the area, the relative uniformity of nearby boundary
       treatments, and absence of other commercial signage in the vicinity, they are a
       discordant and visually intrusive element in the streetscape. Their modern and
       unrelieved nature contrasts unfavourably with the natural appearance of the
       surrounding hedgerows. They harm the visual amenity and the character and
       appearance of the host property and surrounding area.
9.     The advertisements are therefore contrary to the Town and Country Planning
       (Control of Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended). They also
       conflict with Policy CS1 of the South Gloucestershire Local Plan: Core Strategy
       (2013) and Policies PSP1 and PSP38 of the South Gloucestershire Local Plan:
       Policies, Sites and Places Plan (2017); which taken together seek to promote high
       quality development which responds positively to local distinctiveness. The
       advertisements are also contrary to the Council’s Householder Design Guide
       Supplementary Planning Document (2021) which seeks to ensure alterations are
       of a high quality.
Other Matters
10. The appellant highlights that the advertisements draw attention to a new business,
    which generates employment and serves the local business community. Whilst
    these are benefits which weigh in favour of the advertisements, they are not
    sufficient to outweigh the considerable visual intrusion of the advertisements and
    harm to amenity.
11. There are no objections to the advertisements with regards to public safety, nor
    has the Parish Council objected, and no representations were received from
    neighbours. However, these are neutral matters, weighing neither in favour nor
    against the advertisements.
12. The application seeks permission to display the advertisements on a temporary
    basis, but that does not diminish the harm during that period of time.
Conclusion
13. For the reasons given above, and having regard to other matters, the appeal
    should be dismissed.

S Ramsden
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
