Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 27 August 2026
by C Butcher BSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010498
Higher Bal Farm, Higher Bal, Cornwall, TR5 0ND
•     The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•     The appeal is made by Mr S Mills against the decision of Cornwall Council.
•     The application Ref is PA25/07856.
•     The development proposed is construction of a single dwellinghouse (minimum 1, maximum 1).

Decision
1.      The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.      The proposal is for permission in principle. Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
        advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
        housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has two
        stages: the first stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site
        is suitable in-principle and the second (‘technical details consent stage’) is when
        the detailed development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first
        of these two stages.
3.      The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
        land use and the amount of development permitted1. All other matters are
        considered as part of a subsequent Technical Details Consent application if
        permission in principle is granted. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
4.      An updated version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework)
        was published on 17th August 2026. In the interests of fairness, I provided the main
        parties with an opportunity to provide comments on the new Framework as part of
        the appeal process. I have taken account of those comments when making my
        decision.
Main Issue
5.      The is no indication from the evidence before me that the proposed land use or the
        amount of development would be inappropriate. I can see no reason to disagree
        with that position. As such, the main issue is whether the site is suitable for
        residential development, having regard to its location.




1
    PPG Paragraph: 012 Reference ID: 58-012-20180615

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010498


Reasons
6.    The appeal site is located within the Cornwall and West Devon Mining Landscape
      World Heritage Site (the WHS). Section 4.3 of the WHS Management Plan 2020 –
      2025, which forms part of the evidence before me, sets out the seven attributes
      which physically express the Outstanding Universal Value (OUV) of the
      designation. One such attribute is the presence of former mineworkers’
      smallholdings.
7.    The WHS Site Office provided a response to the original application in which they
      objected to the proposed development. Their comments provide a relatively
      detailed and interesting history of the immediate area around the appeal site and
      the wider surroundings. Based on tithe mapping and census data, as well as the
      characteristics of the appeal site, the site office has concluded that it was almost
      certainly created as part of a mineworkers’ smallholding. Furthermore, they note
      that the plot still reads as part of the wider smallholding landscape.
8.    Based on the evidence before me, and my observations during my site visit, I can
      see no reason to disagree with the conclusions of the WHS site office. Given that
      the appeal site almost certainly formed part of a smallholding, and that the relevant
      features of the site can still be appreciated today, I must conclude that the appeal
      site does contribute positively to the OUV of the WHS. The fact that other mining
      features, such as chimneys or shafts, are not present on the site makes no
      difference to this conclusion.
9.    The proposed development is for permission in principle and so matters such as
      scale, design and layout are currently unknown. However, the development of one
      dwelling on the site would clearly give it a domestic appearance with built form,
      hardstanding and various paraphernalia. As such, it is absolutely inevitable that
      the current ability to read the site as part of the wider smallholding landscape
      would be almost entirely lost.
10. Policy HE6(1) of the Framework sets out that substantial weight should be given to
    the conservation of a designated heritage asset, with that weight increasing
    according to the importance of the asset. In relation to Policy HE5(2) of the
    Framework, I find that the visual loss of an attribute of the WHS resulting from the
    proposal before me would amount to ‘harm’. However, given the limited scale of
    the development, I find that the extent of this harm would not be substantial.
11. In such circumstances, Policy HE6(4) of the Framework then requires that the
    harm be weighed against the public benefits of the proposal. In this instance, the
    provision of one new dwelling would help meet local need and there would also be
    economic benefits associated with the development, both during construction and
    post occupation. Moreover, there is some potential for increased biodiversity on
    site. However, given the modest scale of the proposal, these benefits in
    combination would be very limited. As a result, it is clear that the harm outweighs
    the public benefits in this instance.
12. The appeal site forms part of a small hamlet known as Higher Bal. There are no
    services and facilities in the hamlet, however it is situated very close to St Agnes
    which contains various facilities, while also providing access to bus services to
    other areas. In theory, future occupiers of the proposed dwelling would be able to
    walk or cycle into St Agnes. However, doing so would involve travelling along a
    relatively narrow lane which is unlit and has no pavement. Therefore, while I am

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010498


      sure some people do choose to make that journey, either for recreation or
      exercise, doing so is unlikely to be an attractive option on a regular basis,
      particularly in poor weather or during the hours of darkness. Therefore, while I
      acknowledge that there are likely to be fewer options for sustainable modes of
      transport in rural areas, it is still the case that future occupiers would be largely
      reliant on private vehicles to access the services and facilities needed for everyday
      living. However, due to the scale of the proposal, any additional journeys would be
      small in number, while their length would often be very short. As such, the amount
      of ‘on the ground’ harm associated with this issue would be very limited.
13. In determining whether the site is in a suitable location, it is also important to
    consider the Council’s spatial strategy. Policy 3 of the Cornwall Local Plan
    Strategic Policies 2010 – 2030 (the LP) notes that, outside of the main towns,
    housing development will be delivered in a variety of ways, including the rounding
    off of settlements. Paragraph 1.68 of the LP sets out that rounding off applies to
    sites that are substantially enclosed but are outside of the urban form of a
    settlement. The edge of the site should also be defined by a physical feature and
    proposals should not visually extend development into the countryside. I note that
    the Chief Planning Officers Advice Note on Infilling/Rounding Off also provides
    further guidance which reflects the LP policy and the supporting text.
14. In this instance, I am satisfied that Higher Bal constitutes a settlement for the
    purposes of the LP. Indeed, it does have a form and shape around a crossroads
    and is not just a low-density straggle of dwellings. Moreover, the appeal site is very
    close to the crossroads in the centre of the small settlement and therefore has a
    close visual connection to the existing dwellings. It is also substantially enclosed in
    the sense that there are dwellings to the west and north, albeit with very minor
    gaps. To the east is the large garden space associated with a dwelling known as
    Nimby Bal. This particular dwelling visually reads as the final building in the
    settlement as one travels towards St Agnes, rather than an isolated structure in the
    countryside. Given the characteristics of the site, I am satisfied that the proposal
    would not visually extend development into the countryside, and therefore that it
    could be considered to be ‘rounding off’ in broad conformity with LP Policy 3.
15. The site is also within the Cornwall National Landscape (the NL). Policy N4 of the
    Framework notes that substantial weight should be placed on the importance of
    conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of such areas. Furthermore, the
    Levelling Up and Regeneration Act 2023 requires decision makers to actively seek
    to further the statutory purposes of NL’s. I have already described how the
    proposed development, in whatever form it may take, would be visually contained
    within the existing extent of the settlement, and therefore that it would not extend
    development into the countryside. With this in mind, I can see no reason why a
    well designed dwelling could not preserve the scenic beauty of the NL, as well as
    the heritage coast of which the site also forms part. I therefore do not find
    additional harm in this regard.
16. As a result of these considerations, I conclude that the proposed development
    would not be in a suitable location as a result of the harm to the WHS and, to a
    much lesser extent, the reliance of future occupiers on private vehicles. The
    proposal would therefore conflict with LP Policies 21, 24 and 27, as well as Policy
    11 of the St Agnes Neighbourhood Development Plan (SANDP) and Policy T1 of
    the Climate Emergency Development Plan Document. Taken together, the
    relevant aspects of these policies seek to ensure that development preserves the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010498


      significance of heritage assets while also encouraging the use of sustainable
      modes of transport to access services and facilities.
17. Conversely, I have not found harm in relation to the Council’s spatial strategy or
    the effect of the proposal on the NL or heritage coast. As such, there would be no
    conflict with LP Policies 2, 3, 7 and 23 or SANDP Policy 10. The relevant aspects
    of these policies seek to direct new development to appropriate locations,
    including by allowing the rounding off of settlements. They also seek to preserve
    character and appearance and the environment, including the NL and heritage
    coast.
Other Matters
18. I note that the appellant has sought to direct my attention to various other appeal
    decisions, including two of my own. However, none of these decisions appear to
    be directly comparable in the sense that the site’s did not comprise mineworkers’
    smallholdings and harm was not found to a WHS in those instances. As such, they
    have little bearing on my decision here.
19. The site is within the zone of influence for the Penhale Dunes Special Area of
    Conservation. However, as I am dismissing this appeal, an appropriate
    assessment in not necessary.
Conclusion
20. The proposal would not be in a suitable location as a result of harm to the WHS
    and in relation to a reliance on private vehicles. As such, it would conflict with the
    development plan when read as a whole, notwithstanding the fact that I have not
    found harm in relation to other aspects of the site’s location.
21. The provision of one new dwelling would help meet local need. There would also
    be economic benefits associated with the development, both during construction
    and post occupation. Moreover, there is some potential for increased biodiversity
    on site. However, given the modest scale of the proposal, these benefits in
    combination would be very limited.
22. I have found that the appeal site forms part of a settlement within the context of the
    LP. However, the glossary of the Framework makes it clear that the definition of a
    settlement does not include hamlets. The appellant has acknowledged within their
    statement of case that Higher Bal is a hamlet, and I agree with that assessment.
    As such, Policy S5 of the Framework is of relevance, rather than Policy S4.
23. This states that, outside of settlements, only certain forms of development should
    be supported. This includes limited infilling within groups of houses (part e). I have
    already provided a description of the site in relation to existing built form. As a
    result of the same considerations, I am satisfied that the proposal could constitute
    limited infilling in accordance with this policy. Given the history of the site, as
    outlined by the appellant, it is also quite possible that it should benefit from support
    under part (d) of the policy in relation to previously developed land (PDL).
    Conversely, despite the shortfall in the Council’s five-year land supply, part (j) of
    the policy is not of relevance given that it requires developments to be physically
    well related to a defined settlement.
24. I am cognisant of Policy H07 of the Framework which notes that substantial weight
    should be given to the benefit of providing homes which will contribute towards

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010498


      meeting the evidenced accommodation needs of the community. Given the
      shortfall in housing supply, this is likely to be of relevance. Moreover, in light of the
      possibility of classifying the site as PDL, Policy L2 requires that substantial weight
      also be given to the principle of making better use of underutilised land.
25. However, I am also keenly aware that Policy DP3(1) of the Framework sets out
    that development proposals should respond to their context, including the history
    of the site. It also states that proposals should cater for the integration of heritage
    assets. In light of the harm to the WHS, the proposed development would clearly
    not accord with this part of the policy. Part 3 of the same policy indicates that
    development proposals should be refused if, without clear justification, they conflict
    with paragraph 1. This is therefore clearly a very important matter within the overall
    planning balance.
26. Part 1 of Policy S5 opines that development that would accord with the policy
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against national decision-
    making policies. In this instance, I conclude that the identified harm would
    substantially outweigh the benefits, even when applying substantial weight to the
    aforementioned policies within the Framework.
27. Accordingly, there are no material considerations, either individually or in
    combination, that outweigh the identified harm and associated development plan
    conflict. The appeal is therefore dismissed.



C Butcher
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
