 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 17 August 2026
 by Chris Couper BA (Hons) Dip TP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 4 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010226
 A1 London Retail Park, Biggleswade, Central Bedfordshire SG18 8PS
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Gridserve Sustainable Energy Limited against the decision of Central
      Bedfordshire Council.
 •    The application Ref is CB/26/00286/FULL.
 •    The development proposed is the installation of electrical infrastructure and associated works to
      support an electric vehicle charging hub.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the installation of
   electrical infrastructure and associated works to support an electric vehicle
   charging hub at A1 London Retail Park, Biggleswade, Central Bedfordshire
   SG18 8PS in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref CB/26/00286/FULL,
   subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: 25040_01 Rev D, 25040_02 Rev C, 25040_03
              Rev C, 53032_T Rev 0 and 53032_T_UG Rev 0.
     3)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out fully in accordance
              with the Arboricultural Impact Assessment by Maydencroft (Amended May
              2026), including its Arboricultural Method Statement and Tree Protection
              Plan.
     4)       Replacement tree planting, as shown on the approved plans and as detailed
              in the Arboricultural Impact Assessment by Maydencroft (Amended May
              2026), including its Appendix G, shall be carried out in the first available
              planting season following completion of the development. Any tree planted
              pursuant to this condition that dies, is removed, becomes seriously damaged
              or diseased within a period of five years from the date of planting shall be
              replaced in the next available planting season with another of a similar size
              and species.
Procedural Matters
2. The revised National Planning Policy Framework was published in August 2026
   (‘the Framework’). Having regard to the main issue in this appeal, there are no
   significant material differences between it and the now superceded version which


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision: 6010226


     was in place at the time of the Council’s decision. It is the current version that I
     refer to in my reasoning.
3. As part of the appeal, the appellant submitted an Arboricultural Impact Assessment
   by Maydencroft Limited (Amended May 2026) (‘the UAIA’). The UAIA updated an
   earlier Arboricultural Impact Assessment (March 2026) (‘the AIA’) which was
   considered by the Council and interested parties at application stage.
4. The Planning Inspectorate Procedural Guide: Planning Appeals – England 2026
   states that the appeal process should not be used to evolve a scheme, and that it is
   important that what is considered by the Inspector is essentially the same scheme
   that was considered by the Council and by interested parties at application stage.
5. In this case, the main differences between the AIA and the UAIA is that the latter
   includes an amenity assessment at paragraph 4.8 and Appendix H, along with an
   explanation for the choice of replacement planting, and further details on cable
   routing and installation methodology, including drawing no. ENV10688-E Rev 8.
   The UAIA therefore responds to the Council’s concerns regarding the impact of the
   proposal on the amenity of the area and I am satisfied that it does not significantly
   evolve the scheme. For me to accept the UAIA at this stage would not introduce
   procedural unfairness and I have therefore considered it in my decision.
Main Issue
6. The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the
   area, with particular regard to its impact on protected trees.
Reasons
     Character and appearance
7. The site comprises part of the parking and landscaping areas of a retail park, in a
   prominent position adjacent to London Road. There is a belt of landscaping and
   trees in this location, which soften the impact of the commercial buildings and car
   parking from the nearby pavement and the London Road streetscene. The trees
   are protected by Tree Preservation Order Number 40/2024. Given their
   prominence and screening affect, collectively the trees in this belt make a positive
   contribution to the character and appearance of the immediate area.
8. The scheme would involve the reconfiguration of a curved row of parking spaces to
   provide fewer spaces with electric vehicle charging posts, along with three cabinets
   and an electrical substation.
9. The appellant says that this charging hub is required in response to a growing
   demand by electric vehicle users and to help limit the impacts of climate change. In
   these regards the scheme finds support from various planning policies, including
   Central Bedfordshire Local Plan 2015 - 2035 (2021) (‘CBLP’) Policies CC1 and T5,
   and Framework policy TR4; along with the approach in the Central Bedfordshire
   Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Strategy (2023) to provide suitable public charging
   facilities in locations such as car parks.
10. In a covering letter (Ref 6433CA.L001) the appellant sets out why the precise
    location for the hub was chosen having regard to various restrictions and
    operational requirements, including covenants, safety concerns and the proximity to
    existing utilities. I have no persuasive reasons to disagree with those findings.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      2
 Appeal Decision: 6010226


11. The proposed substation would be a modestly proportioned, functional feature,
    typical of retail parks in an urban environment such as this. Consequently, neither
    it, nor the small posts and cabinets, would have a harmful impact on the
    streetscene.
12. The scheme would require the removal of a protected tree, which is identified as T7
    in the UAIA. Having regard to BS5837:2012, it is described in the UAIA as a young
    small-leafed lime, about 6 metres high, which is in a good condition and of
    moderate quality. From my observations I agree with those conclusions. It makes
    a moderate positive contribution to the streetscene as the last tree in this small
    group, and its loss would therefore have a limited, but nonetheless harmful, impact
    on the character and appearance of the area.
13. That said, T7 is located close to T6, which is another small leaved lime of a similar
    height, form and condition, and which has a broadly similar visual amenity affect.
    Moreover, as part of the scheme, two replacement trees would be planted. These
    would be located nearby within the same group, in the gaps between T3 and T4,
    and T4 and T5. As detailed at Appendix G of the UAIA, they would be a ‘heavy
    standard’ sweet gum and a small leafed lime, around 2.5 to 3 metres high.
14. These species are found elsewhere within this group, and they would be suitable
    replacements. Whilst each would be smaller than T7, considered together they
    would have a broadly similar visual amenity affect, which would increase as they
    grow.
15. The application was accompanied by a utilities plan (Ref: 53032_T_UG Rev 0)
    which shows that the proposed infrastructure would be located close to existing
    cabling. The UAIA confirms that the scheme would result in a modest reduction of
    T6’s unsurfaced root protection area, and that the impact of works, including new
    cabling, can be managed through hand digging, the use of an impermeable liner,
    and suitable arboricultural supervision and monitoring. Subject to such controls,
    and other measures such as protective fencing, which are detailed in the UAIA,
    including its Arboricultural Method Statement and Tree Protection Plan, I am
    satisfied that the proposed infrastructure could be provided without causing
    significant harm to the other protected trees.
16. Amongst other things and in general terms, CBLP Policy HQ1 sets out that
    proposals should respond positively to their context, and enhance or reinforce local
    distinctiveness and sense of place, having regard to matters including appropriate
    landscaping. CBLP Policy EE4 states that proposals will be permitted where the
    removal of trees to accommodate development is justified and where they are
    replaced within the site with suitable species of equivalent scale and character.
    Policy BGS1 of the Biggleswade Neighbourhood Plan (2022) says that
    development should retain existing trees and hedges, and incorporate them into the
    design, layout and landscaping.
17. In broad terms and amongst other things, Framework Policies N2 and N3 require
    proposals to conserve natural features such as established trees where possible,
    use appropriate landscaping to integrate development into its surroundings, and to
    incorporate appropriate trees in suitable locations.
18. Given my findings above, I consider that the removal of T7 has been appropriately
    justified, and that its replacements would be suitable and would have a broadly
    similar visual amenity affect. Subject to the methodology and tree protection

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
 Appeal Decision: 6010226


     measures detailed in the UAIA, the scheme would not cause significant harm to the
     character and appearance of the area. It would therefore accord with the overall
     thrust of the development plan and the Framework, when considered as a whole.
     Other matters
19. Interested parties point out that the car park is heavily used, and whilst it represents
    just a snapshot in time, this was borne out on my visit. The submitted plans show
    that the scheme would result in a net loss of 4 parking spaces. However, in the
    context of the retail park as a whole, where I am told there are 716 spaces, that
    reduction would not be significant. Moreover, that minimal reduction should be
    balanced against the improved parking provision for drivers of electric vehicles.
    The scheme would not therefore have a harmful impact on the convenience of
    highway users.
Conditions and Conclusion
20. I have considered suggested conditions in the appellant’s statement of common
    ground against the Framework’s tests. As well as the standard time limit, in the
    interests of certainty, I have imposed a condition requiring that the development be
    carried out in accordance with the approved plans. Finally, my conditions 3 and 4
    are necessary for the reasons set out above and to protect the character and
    appearance of the area.
21. For these reasons, and having regard to all other matters raised, the appeal is
    allowed.

Chris Couper
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     4
