 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 13 August 2026
 by K E Down MA(Oxon) MSc MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 28 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010273
 118A Hempstead Road, Kings Langley, Hertfordshire, WD4 8AL
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mrs Shermeen Akhtar against the decision of Dacorum Borough Council.
 •   The application Ref is 26/00671/RET.
 •   The development proposed is for a raised rear patio area including timber boundary fencing,
     balustrade and steps providing access to the garden with storage space beneath the patio.

Decision
 1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2. Since the application was determined and the appeal made, a revised National
   Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) has been published in August 2026. Although
   changes have been made to Green Belt policy, those policies that are relevant to
   this decision have not materially changed. I am therefore satisfied that no party will
   be prejudiced by my having regard to the latest version of the NPPF in reaching my
   decision.
Main Issues
 3. The main issues are:
         •    Whether the proposed development amounts to inappropriate development
              in the Green Belt, having regard to the NPPF, August 2026, and any
              relevant development plan policies;
         •    The effect on the openness of the Green Belt;
         •    The effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of
              the host dwelling and the surrounding area;
         •    The effect on the living conditions of occupiers of 118 and 120 Hempstead
              Road with respect to privacy;
         •    If the proposed development amounts to inappropriate development in the
              Green Belt, whether the harm by reason of inappropriateness and any other
              harm is clearly outweighed by other considerations, so as to amount to the
              very special circumstances necessary to justify the development.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision Ref: 6010273


Reasons
Whether inappropriate development in the Green Belt
 4. The appeal dwelling is a new, modest, detached chalet bungalow on a large, open
    plot at the edge of rough open grazing land. Its boundary with the rural area is
    marked by a wooden post and rail fence. A high, close boarded fence separates it
    from 118 Hempstead Road. The dwelling is the last property in a row of three on
    Hempstead Road, with undeveloped land to the east and south. Whilst there are
    dwellings on the opposite side of the street, the appeal dwelling and its
    neighbours are isolated from other development on the east side of the road and
    surrounded by open land. The appeal dwelling and its neighbours are set on land
    which slopes noticeably from the highway towards the rear.
 5. The NPPF identifies that the objective of Green Belt policy is to prevent urban
    sprawl by keeping land permanently open. The government attaches great
    importance to Green Belts, the essential features of which are their openness and
    permanence. The NPPF goes on to state, in Policy GB6, that development in the
    Green Belt is inappropriate unless it falls within one of the categories set out in
    Policy GB7. Inappropriate development is, by definition, harmful to the Green Belt
    and should not be approved except in very special circumstances. Policy GB7
    sets out that the reuse, extension, alteration or replacement of an existing building
    is not inappropriate provided that, in the case of extensions, it will not result in a
    disproportionate increase in the size, compared to the original building. In the
    case of the appeal building, this is the dwelling as it was originally built. Policy
    CS5 of the Council’s Core Strategy 2006-2031 (CS), adopted 2013, accords with
    the NPPF in applying national Green Belt policy.
 6. The dwelling was permitted in 2022 and is understood to have replaced earlier
    buildings and structures. It appears to have been permitted with no rear or side
    access because, in 2025, a non-material amendment was allowed to provide
    timber steps from a side door down to garden level. The door and concrete, rather
    than wooden, steps have been provided. However, a raised side path, leading to
    a raised rear patio with access from the rear of the dwelling, has also been
    constructed, together with a wooden balustrade. This, including the storage area
    beneath with its own stepped access from the garden is the subject of the appeal.
 7. The patio, which is rendered and painted cream to match the dwelling, projects
    from the rear elevation of the bungalow across its entire width, including the side
    path. Owing to the fall of the land, it rises well above natural ground levels and is
    surrounded by a slatted wooden balustrade which continues around the side of
    the building. Steps leading to a storage area beneath the patio are surrounded by
    similar slatted fencing. Overall, the development is a large addition to the
    bungalow. Although the depth of the patio is not disproportionate to that of the
    dwelling, its height and width, emphasised by the balustrade, result in it
    overwhelming the rear elevation of the modest host dwelling. I therefore find that
    the development as a whole results in a disproportionate increase in size,
    compared with the original building.
 8. The appellant suggests that, assessed against the size of the original dwelling
    and in view of the modest increase in non-habitable floorspace and its single
    storey, low-profile, the proposed structure is not disproportionate. However,
    proportionality does not rely only on specific measurements or parameters. In this


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
 Appeal Decision Ref: 6010273


      case, owing to the noticeable fall in land levels and its scale, it appears as a large
      and incongruous addition.
 9. I therefore conclude that the proposed development is inappropriate development
    in the Green Belt.
Openness of the Green Belt
 10. As set out in the NPPF, openness is one of the essential characteristics of Green
     Belts. Openness has a spatial and visual aspect, and its assessment is a matter
     of planning judgement having regard to both. The proposed raised patio is clearly
     visible to the rear of the dwelling, including from the undeveloped area to the east
     and south, encroaching into a previously undeveloped space. It is prominent
     owing to its projection at height, pale finish which stands out from the darker tones
     of the surrounding garden, and the elevated wooden surround. Owing to the fall of
     the land, it occupies a significant volume behind and below the dwelling and,
     given its appearance and scale, it detracts from the spatial and visual openness of
     the area which lies within the Green Belt.
 11. The appellant suggests that because the patio sits against the rear wall of the
     dwelling and much of the garden remains open, its effect is limited. However, I
     consider that the effect on both the spatial and visual openness of the Green Belt
     is readily apparent.
 12. Accordingly, I conclude that the proposed development results in moderate harm
     to the openness of the Green Belt.
Character and appearance
 13. The projecting rear patio which is wider than the bungalow and set above
     increasingly lower land appears visually bulky and as a dominant addition to the
     modest host dwelling. Its effect is exacerbated by its elevation, pale finish and by
     the slatted wooden balustrade which has limited visual permeability and therefore
     emphasises the scale of the overall structure and masks the rear elevation of the
     bungalow. Overall, the development amounts to a poorly designed and intrusive
     addition, that fails to appear sympathetic or subservient to the host dwelling.
 14. The appellant suggests that the use of matching render and a timber balustrade
     utilise ordinary, recessive materials. However, in this rural edge location they
     result in a discordant transition between the built development and the open
     countryside. The appellant notes that the height of the balustrade is necessary for
     safety. Nevertheless, this structure is at odds with its open, elevated setting,
     resulting in a visually prominent and incongruous appearance. I accept that the
     development is not prominent in the street scene, but this does not compensate
     for its prominence in the landscape. Finally, the appellant suggests that the
     Council has already allowed a similar fencing material on the site boundary.
     However, I have no compelling evidence before me to support this and, at the
     time of my site visit, the boundary was marked by a visually permeable post and
     rail fence, sympathetic to its semi-rural location.
 15. For these reasons, I conclude that the proposed development has a materially
     detrimental effect on the character and appearance of the host dwelling and the
     surrounding area. In consequence, it conflicts with CS Policies CS11 and CS12.
     Taken together and amongst other things, these expect new development to


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
 Appeal Decision Ref: 6010273


      respect and enhance the general character of the area and adjoining properties in
      terms of scale, height, bulk and materials.
Living conditions
 16. The elevated patio and side path will enable direct views towards No 118 over its
     balustrade and the boundary fence which sits at original ground level. This means
     that anyone standing on the proposed patio or using the side path has an open
     view over the rear patio at No 118, resulting in a harmful loss of privacy to
     occupiers of that dwelling. This degree of direct overlooking is significantly greater
     than that which might ordinarily be expected between neighbouring dwellings. In
     the absence of the raised patio, views of No 118 would be screened by the
     intervening high, close boarded boundary fence. Owing to the distance of
     separation and intervening structures, there is no material overlooking of No 120.
 17. The appellant suggests that the approved steps from the side door at the appeal
     dwelling already allow views to No 118, but the steps are located opposite the
     side wall of No 118 and so any view of the patio at No 118 from this point is not
     only fleeting, during entry/exit, but at an angle and more limited. Finally, the
     appellant suggests that a condition requiring the balustrade to be increased in
     height on the northern boundary will overcome any privacy issue but since, as
     identified above, this structure has a detrimental effect on the character and
     appearance of the area that will not provide an acceptable solution.
 18. It is concluded that although there is no loss of privacy to No 120, the proposed
     development has a materially harmful effect on the living conditions of occupiers
     of 118 Hempstead Road with respect to privacy. In consequence, it conflicts with
     CS Policy CS12 which expects, amongst other things, that new development
     should avoid loss of privacy to adjoining properties.
Other considerations
 19. The appellant has explained that there is a need to provide an accessible outside
     space for the occupier of the dwelling who is a registered disabled person and has
     mobility issues. Disability is a protected characteristic under the Public Sector
     Equality Duty (PSED) and in reaching my decision I have had regard to the three
     aims under the PSED. The raised patio has been designed to provide a level and
     accessible area immediately adjoining the dwelling. Without this the occupier
     would have difficulty accessing outside space at the dwelling. It is suggested that
     the patio represents a reasonable adjustment to enable the disabled occupier to
     use and enjoy outside amenity space at the property. A refusal of permission for
     the development would therefore reduce equality of access to private outside
     space.
 20. However, it is not explained why the patio is located to the rear of the dwelling
     where the difference in levels between the dwelling and the ground is greatest, or
     why it needs to be the size it is. Since the appellant has not provided evidence to
     show that the patio is in the only feasible position and is no larger than necessary
     to serve its purpose, and because the need for the development is temporary,
     lasting only during the occupation of the dwelling by the current resident, I can
     only attach moderate weight to the occupier’s need for accessible outside space
     as a consideration in favour of granting permission.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        4
 Appeal Decision Ref: 6010273


 21. Conversely, I have found that the patio and associated structures are
     inappropriate development in the Green Belt and that in addition they result in
     moderate harm to the openness of the Green Belt. The NPPF makes clear that
     any harm to the Green Belt carries substantial weight. The development also
     results in noticeable harm to the character and appearance of the area and to the
     living conditions of neighbouring occupiers. This conflicts with CS Policies CS11
     and CS12 and attracts significant weight against the development. Overall, these
     factors weigh heavily against granting permission for the development.
 22. Accordingly, it is concluded that the occupier’s need for accessible outside space
     carries only moderate weight and, in the final balance, this does not clearly
     outweigh the harm to the Green Belt through inappropriateness and loss of
     openness and the other identified harms. Consequently, the very special
     circumstances necessary to justify the development do not exist. The proposed
     development therefore conflicts with CS Policy CS5 and with national policy set
     out in Policies GB6 and GB7 of the NPPF, 2026.
 23. I have had due regard to the Public Sector Equality Duty set out under the
     Equality Act 2010. The harm caused by the appeal development outweighs its
     benefits in terms of eliminating discrimination against persons with the protected
     characteristics of disability, advancing equality of opportunity for those persons
     and fostering good relations between them and others.
Conclusions
 24. For the reasons set out above, I conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.


K E Down
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      5
