Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by C McDonagh BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 11 September 2026.


Appeal Ref: 6010260
Land to east of Old Shackerley Lane, Old Shackerley Lane, Albrighton WV7 3AB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•    The appeal is made by B Parry against the decision of Shropshire Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/04594/PIP.
•    The development proposed is for 1 or 2 number detached dwellings.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) advises that permission in principle is an
       alternative way of obtaining planning permission for housing-led development. This
       has 2 stages: the first stage (permission in principle) establishes whether a site is
       suitable in principle and the second (technical details consent) assesses detailed
       development proposals. This appeal relates to the first of these two stages.
3.     The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
       land use and the amount of development. All other matters are considered as part
       of a subsequent technical details consent application if permission in principle is
       granted.
4.     The Council did not provide an officer’s report explaining its reasons for refusal,
       nor do I have an appeal statement. I have therefore based my reasoning on the
       decision notice and the appellant’s statement only.
5.     On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published by the Government. This is a material consideration in
       the decision-making process from the day of publication. The main parties were
       given the opportunity to comment on the changes and the implications for the
       appeal, with their respective observations taken into account where relevant.
Main Issue
6.     The main issue is whether the appeal site is suitable for housing having regard to
       its location, with particular focus on the Green Belt, spatial strategy of the
       development plan and the character and appearance of the area.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010260


Reasons
Whether Inappropriate in the Green Belt
7.     The appeal site is located within the Green Belt and as such I have had regard to
       policy GB7 of the Framework. This lists exceptions to the presumption against
       development in the Green Belt. Neither party has clarified which exception the
       proposal was assessed against in order to ascertain whether it would be
       inappropriate or otherwise. From all that I have seen and read, the most relevant
       exception is part 1e of policy GB7. This relates to the redevelopment of previously
       developed land (including a material change of use to residential or mixed-use
       including residential), which would not cause substantial harm to the openness of
       the Green Belt.
8.     Policy CS5 of the Shropshire Local Development Framework Adopted Core
       Strategy (CS) (adopted March 2011) states that new development will be strictly
       controlled in accordance with national planning policies protecting the countryside
       and Green Belt, although it also provides for other exceptions outside the scope of
       the Framework.
9.     The appeal site comprises an enclosed parcel of land associated with No.5
       Shackerley Cottages which is one of 4 cottages in a small cluster to the east. I
       understand that the 4 cottages were formerly part of an agricultural holding at
       Shackerley Farm and were erected in the 1960s for use by workers on the farm.
       The appeal site itself formerly hosted 4 other cottages which predated the
       aforementioned 4 adjacent cottages. The dwellings as they exist today were
       evidently granted permission to remove their respective agricultural ties through
       the removal of a condition to that effect.
10. On my site visit I observed that the appeal site now presents as a domestic garden
    and is laid to grass with the expected associated paraphernalia such as a shed,
    greenhouse and children’s toys. I see no reason to doubt that the site historically
    included dwellings given the lack of evidence to the contrary and the submitted OS
    map provided by the appellant.
11. That being said, the Framework is clear that previously developed land excludes
    land that was previously developed but where the remains of the permanent
    structure or fixed surface structure have blended into the landscape. There was
    one low level brick structure evident on the appeal site that appeared to possibly
    be remains of a former dwelling or outbuilding. However, it was clear from my
    observations that the former dwellings had blended into the landscape given the
    domestic use of the site in relation to the ancillary relationship to No.5. As such,
    they would not meet the exception under policy GB7(1)(e).
12. The appellant has referenced policies GB3(2)(a) and GB7(1)(a) of the Framework,
    albeit the former relates to the altering of Green Belt boundaries in plan-making
    rather than decision taking. The former involves the exceptions for development
    which is for agriculture, horticulture and forestry, or which is solely for nature
    conservation, restoration and/or enhancement. There is nothing before me to
    indicate that any of these are relevant to the proposal.
13. There are no other arguments put forth under other exceptions. Regardless of the
    presence of other dwellings nearby, the proposal would therefore be inappropriate


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010260


       in the Green Belt. This would be contrary to policy GB7 of the Framework and
       policy CS5 of the CS.
Openness of the Green Belt
14. Section 13 of the Framework advises that the Government attaches great
    importance to Green Belts, with the fundamental aim to prevent urban sprawl by
    keeping land permanently open. This includes an assessment of both spatial and
    visual openness and the effects of the proposal.
15. Due to the domestic nature of the appeal site, and hedgerows lining the south side
    of the boundary, visibility is largely limited to the adjacent dwellings. In terms of
    impacts upon openness visually, this would be very limited. However, where there
    is currently garden there would be 1 or 2 dwellings. While I don’t have detailed
    designs at this stage, there would invariably be a loss of spatial openness due to
    the construction of dwellings and associated hardstanding.
16. Taken together, there would be a limited loss of openness of the Green Belt
    overall. Invariably this would result in harm to the Green Belt given its purposes,
    contrary to policy GB6 of the Framework. This harm must be given substantial
    weight.
Whether Suitable Location
17. The CS generally seeks to direct development to where it is most suitable and
    needed through policy CS1. A hierarchy of settlements is used, although the
    appeal site is not located within any of these. For the purposes of planning the
    appeal site is in the countryside, where policy CS5 states that development will be
    strictly controlled in accordance with national planning policies protecting the
    countryside. There are a number of exceptions given which broadly align with
    those given in the Framework.
18. Policy MD7a of the Site Allocations and Management of Development Plan
    (SAMDEV) (adopted December 2015) goes on to state that further to Core
    Strategy policies CS5 and CS11, new market housing will be strictly controlled
    outside of Shrewsbury, the Market Towns, Key Centres and Community Hubs and
    Community Clusters. Suitably designed and located exception site dwellings and
    residential conversions will be positively considered where they meet evidenced
    local housing needs and other relevant policy requirements. The proposal would
    not meet any of these exceptions.
19. Policy S5 of the Framework advises that only certain forms of development should
    be approved outside settlements which are listed within part 1 (a-j) of policy S5.
    However, section 5 of S5 is clear that this policy does not apply to proposals in the
    Green Belt, unless the proposal would not be inappropriate in accordance with
    policy GB7. I have found the proposal would be in appropriate in the Green Belt,
    contrary to GB7.
20. I note the points made the appellant with regards to services and facilities nearby.
    However, given the circumstances of Shackerley Lane, which is narrow, unlit and
    has a national speed limit, I find it highly unlikely prospective future residents
    would choose to walk or cycle to the nearest shop or onto services in Albrighton
    from the appeal site. They would therefore be highly reliant on the private vehicle
    to access their day-to-day needs.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010260


21. The matter in question is not whether the site is isolated, and I disagree that there
    are a ‘considerable’ number of houses in the locality. The area is inherently rural,
    where the development of houses is generally tightly controlled. The spread of
    houses in the wider area is generally reflective of that type of location. Regardless,
    the site is not within a recognised settlement in policy terms, and it does not meet
    any of the given exceptions in either local or national policy.
22. As such, I do not consider the location to be suitable for the proposed dwellings
    and there are no material considerations which indicate otherwise. This would
    conflict with policies CS1 and CS5 of the CS and MD7a of the SAMDEV which
    seek to direct development to the larger settlements of the area while the proposal
    does not meet any exceptions to the strict control of development outside of
    identified settlements.
Character and Appearance
23. The appeal site presents as a residential garden. It is located in a rural area
    surrounded by agricultural fields, narrow roads and woodland pockets. The M54
    motorway to the south is a stark urbanising influence, albeit development is
    generally sparse in the area and is formed of limited detached dwellings and
    farmsteads.
24. Although I take on board the Council’s concerns that the proposal would harm the
    rural character of the area, there are no definitive plans before me to substantiate
    this. To my mind, the proposal deals with matters of principle, and the Council has
    not substantiated this concern with an officer report or an appeal statement. The
    appellant has advised that the design approach would be to meet the exception
    given in of the Framework insofar as it would represent a design of exceptional
    quality.
25. I see no reason why this could not be achieved and with these matters determined
    under a technical details consent application, the proposal could accord with
    policies MD2 and MD7a of the SAMDEV which seek to ensure development would
    contribute to and respect locally distinctive or valued character and existing
    amenity value. The proposal could also accord with policy DP3 of the Framework
    which seeks to ensure development proposals should respond to their context (the
    history, character and features of their site and its setting), so that they integrate
    with and enhance their surroundings.
Other Considerations
26. There is no dispute between the main parties that the Council cannot demonstrate
    a five-year supply of deliverable housing sites. This figure is put at 3.81 years by
    the Council, and I see no reason to dispute it. As such, the contribution of 1-2
    dwellings would make an important but limited contribution this undersupply. There
    would be further limited positive weight accrued through the construction process.
27. I have found that the site would not be previously developed and as such the
    reuse of such land would not weigh in favour of the scheme. The appellant advises
    that the dwellings would be self-build, although there is no planning obligation
    before me to secure this tenure. I cannot give this weight as a result.
28. Any boost to local services and facilities from new residents would be
    counteracted by the need to take these journeys in private vehicles given the lack


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010260


       of evidence showing that sustainable travel options have been prioritised. The lack
       of harm to heritage assets or sites of nature conservation would be neutral in the
       planning balance rather than weighing in favour.
29. There are further claimed benefits through ecology and green credentials,
    although there is nothing before me to indicate what these would entail. As such I
    cannot give them weight in the balance.
Planning and Green Belt Balance
30. The benefits as presented to me are worthy of some positive weight, but this would
    be limited overall. Against this, I must give the harm to the Green Belt by way of
    inappropriateness and loss of openness substantial weight in each instance as per
    policy GB6 of the Framework. There would be further harm by way of the appeal
    site not being in a suitable location with reference to the Council’s spatial strategy.
    These factors weigh against the proposal considerably.
31. Taken together, the adverse impacts of granting permission in principle would
    significantly and demonstrably outweigh the benefits of the proposal.
Conclusion
32. The proposal would be contrary to the development plan taken as a whole and the
    Framework. There are no material considerations which would dictate that a
    decision should be made other than in accordance with the development plan. For
    the reasons given, and having regard to all other matters raised, I conclude that
    the appeal should be dismissed.

C McDonagh
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
