Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 September 2026
by Graham Wraight BA(Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010392
144 Browns Lane, Stanton on the Wolds, Nottinghamshire NG12 5BN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Michael Ackroyd against the decision of Rushcliffe Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01184/FUL.
•    The development proposed is the erection of a replacement dwelling, carport and garage following
     demolition of the existing dwelling and garage.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the erection of a
       replacement dwelling, carport and garage following demolition of the existing
       dwelling and garage at 144 Browns Lane, Stanton on the Wolds, Nottinghamshire
       NG12 5BN in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 25/01184/FUL,
       subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A new version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published on 17 August 2026. I am satisfied that the parts of the Framework most
       relevant to this appeal have not substantively changed from the previous iteration
       and therefore I have not sought comments from the main parties.
3.     The main parties agree that, with reference to what is now Policy GB7.1.e of the
       Framework (previously paragraph 154g)), the proposed development is not
       inappropriate development in the Green Belt. I find no reason to disagree with that
       conclusion.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
       appearance of the area.
Reasons
5.     The proposed dwelling does not meet with the requirements of the Rushcliffe
       Design Code Supplementary Planning Document 2025 (SPD). Policy C6.6 of
       Section 6.2 of the SPD states that replacement dwellings in the open countryside
       must not exceed by more than 50% the volume of the original building with further
       guidance that the height of the replacement should not significantly exceed that of
       the existing dwelling. The crux of the Council’s concern in this regard is that the
       proposal would not meet those restrictions and that it would as a result have an
       urbanising impact on the character and appearance of the surrounding area and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010392


       that it would be at-odds with the prevailing character of the immediate street
       scene.
6.     The SPD sets out the expectations for new development, but there will be
       occasions where the application of its policies may not be necessary or beneficial
       to a given development proposal. In this instance, the appeal site is a significantly
       sized plot which at present accommodates only one reasonably modest bungalow.
       It is a site which is of both considerable depth and width, being in effect a double
       plot when compared to nearby plot sizes. Whilst clearly not an urban location,
       substantial built development is arranged in a predominately linear form along
       Browns Lane. This means that in visual terms there is not a feel of the open
       countryside in the vicinity of the appeal site either and that the location is less
       sensitive to the presence of a larger dwelling.
7.     Furthermore, the character and appearance of the surrounding area is incredibly
       varied, being formed by individually designed dwellings of varying heights,
       massing and location in relation to the public highway. This includes a dwelling at
       138A Browns Lane which is much closer to the public highway, and which is two
       storeys in height. Other dwellings in the locality are of considerable width,
       including the dwelling found opposite the appeal site at 155 Browns Lane. Whilst
       bungalows and dormer bungalows are present, they are often of considerable
       height at their highest point. Overall, dwellings of considerable scale, massing
       and/or height are features within the Browns Lane street scene. In these
       circumstances and in the context of the area that I have described, I do not
       consider it appropriate or necessary in this instance to impose such rigid
       restrictions on the proposed development as those contained within the SPD.
8.     In terms of the specific impact of the proposed dwelling, it would be set back
       considerably into the appeal site, which would be characteristic of other dwellings
       in this area. The large size of the plot means that a dwelling of the scale, massing
       and height proposed could be accommodated without being overbearing on the
       street scene. These factors would greatly reduce the impact of both its massing
       and height on that street scene. The proposed dwelling has further been designed
       to minimise its impact in that regard, incorporating on its front elevation a relatively
       low eaves and ridge height between two gables at one and a half storey eaves
       height. The height of those gables would not be out of keeping with that found on
       the adjacent dwelling at 142A Browns Lane. As a whole, it would integrate into the
       street scene in a manner that would not cause harm to the character and
       appearance of the area.
9.     In conclusion, the size and height of the proposed dwelling would fail to meet the
       stipulations of Policy C6.6 of the SPD. However, in this instance, this would not
       result in harm to the character and appearance of the area and consequently there
       would be no conflict with Policy 10 of the Rushcliffe Local Plan Part 1 2014 and
       Policy 1(4) of the Rushcliffe Local Plan Part 2 2019, where taken together they
       seek to safeguard character and appearance. There would also be no conflict with
       the aims of the Framework where it seeks to achieve well-designed places.
Other Matters
Bats
10. A bat roost has been identified on the appeal site. Bats are a European Protected
    Species (EPS). Regulation 9(3) of the Conservation of Habitats and Species

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010392


         Regulations 2017 (as amended) (the Regulations) requires a competent authority
         to have regard to the requirements of the associated Directive so far as it may be
         affected by the exercise of its functions. This includes any proposal that might lead
         to the deterioration or destruction of the breeding sites and resting places of EPS
         under Article 12(1)1. This includes bats and the places that they roost, irrespective
         of whether or not they are present at the time the development is carried out.
11. The Courts2 have established that planning permission should ordinarily be
    granted save only in cases where a proposed development would be likely to
    offend Article 12(1) and unlikely to be licensed pursuant to the derogation powers.
    The duty to have regard to the requirements of the Directive, as set out in
    Regulation 9(1), remains but the judgement establishes that there is no need to
    carry out a detailed assessment as to whether there would be a breach of Article
    12(1) or whether derogation from that article would be permitted and a licence
    granted.
12. Nevertheless, I am still required to ensure that any potential harm to an EPS would
    be adequately mitigated and to consider whether or not the proposed development
    is unlikely to be licensed. In that regard, a Bat Activity Survey Report (BASR) has
    been submitted. This concludes that, given the low status of the roost, the site is
    eligible for registration under Natural England’s Bat Mitigation Class Licence
    scheme. The BASR further sets out mitigation measures, which could be secured
    by way of a planning condition. The Council does not raise any objection on the
    grounds of the impact on this EPS, and I have no reason to disagree with their
    conclusions on the three legal licensing tests that would need to be met. I am
    satisfied on the evidence provided that the potential harm to the EPS would be
    adequately mitigated, and that there is nothing to suggest that the proposed
    development would be unlikely to be licensed.
The Framework
13. Policy S3 of the Framework sets out that decisions on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development, and that either
    Policy S4 or Policy S5 should be applied depending on whether the site is within or
    outside a settlement respectively. The main parties agree that the appeal proposal
    represents the redevelopment of previously developed land. It therefore benefits
    from part 1.d of Policy S5. Whether S4 or S5 is applied, the Framework instructs
    that development should be approved, unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework.
14. I have found the proposal to be in accordance with the relevant policies of the
    development plan. When assessed against the policies of the Framework, there
    are no adverse effects to outweigh the benefits of the appeal proposal. The
    proposal therefore would accord with whichever Framework policy were to be
    applied.
Conditions
15. The Council has provided a list of suggested conditions but no reasons why those
    conditions should be imposed. This initially appeared to be as a result of a

1
    Council Directive 92/43/EEC of 21 May 1992 on the Conservation of Natural Habitats and of Wild Fauna and Flora (the Directive)
2
    Morge v Hampshire County Council [2011] UKSC 2


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  3
Appeal Decision 6010392


         misapprehension that it is not necessary to explain or give reasons for imposing
         conditions on a planning permission granted via appeal. However, having clarified
         that point with reference to Policy DM6 of the Framework and having further drawn
         attention to the relevant procedural guide for planning appeals, the Council still
         declined to assist me in this matter. I have therefore imposed the suggested
         planning conditions where I have been able to piece together justifiable reasons
         from the material I do have or where the reason for the condition is otherwise
         obvious, but I have not imposed those where I have no policy basis to do so and/or
         I am unclear as to why such a condition might be justified with reference to the
         relevant tests set out in the Framework.
16. Conditions setting out the period to commence development (1) and the approved
    plans (2) are required to provide certainty. As the submitted plans do not show the
    external facing materials to be used, it is necessary to impose a condition requiring
    that these are as per the application form (3), to ensure that the proposal has an
    acceptable visual finish. It is necessary that tree protection is put in place before
    any works commence, to protect trees that are to be retained as per the plan that
    has been provided (4).
17. For the reasons set out above conditions are required securing the implementation
    of bat mitigation measures (5) and ecological enhancements (10). Conditions
    requiring the surfacing of the driveway in hard bound material (6), that the existing
    site access is made redundant (7) and that no gates or other obstacles shall be
    erected within 6 metres of the site boundary fronting Browns Lane (8) are required
    in the interests of highway safety.
18. Details of the driveway materials and method of construction where close to trees
    (9) are required to ensure both an acceptable visual appearance and to safeguard
    retained trees. Details of drainage (11) are required to ensure that appropriate
    provision is put in place and the approval of a landscape scheme (12) is required
    in the interests of visual amenity and to ensure that the proposed development
    integrates into its surroundings. A condition requiring the provision of the balcony
    privacy screens (13) shown on the submitted plans is needed to protect the living
    conditions of the occupiers of adjacent dwellings.
19. I have sought the comments of the parties on the suggested condition that would
    tie the proposed dwelling to being self-build. I have reservations in general that this
    can be secured by way of a planning condition, in particular in terms of the
    implications of enforcing that the individual who constructed the dwelling then
    occupies it. It would be preferable for this to be addressed by way of a planning
    obligation, but no such obligation is before me.
20. However, the appellant suggests that a planning obligation could be secured by
    way of a negatively worded planning condition. The Planning Practice Guidance3
    is clear that whilst this is possible, it should only occur in exceptional
    circumstances, where there is clear evidence that the delivery of the development
    would otherwise be at serious risk.
21. This is to my mind an exceptional circumstance, because the securing of self-build
    means that the proposed development is exempted from statutory Biodiversity Net
    Gain (BNG). If the exemption is not secured, the appellant has otherwise not met
    the minimum information requirements for a development that must provide the
3
    Paragraph: 010 Reference ID: 21a-010-20190723


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            4
Appeal Decision 6010392


       statutory BNG, and this alone would strongly support the dismissal of the appeal.
       The self-build exemption has been removed for planning applications submitted
       post 6 August 2026 and the site exceeds the 0.2 hectare site area exemption
       which is now in place. This means that if the appeal was dismissed and the
       appellant reapplied, they would be likely to need to provide the statutory BNG, and
       there would be no planning based requirement, or indeed incentive to them, to
       secure the dwelling as self-build to obtain a BNG exemption.
22. Whilst not a benefit which is determinative on the outcome of this appeal, the
    delivery of self-build is a benefit of the appeal proposal nonetheless. It is one
    which aligns with the aims of the Framework to meet the needs of people wishing
    to commission or build their own homes. The imposition of a negatively-worded
    condition requiring the submission of a planning obligation (14) secures this
    benefit, in the exceptional circumstances that I have set out.
23. Electric vehicle charging provision is a requirement of building regulations, and the
    Council provides no reason as to why this should also be subject to a planning
    condition. No reason or policy requirement to restrict water consumption has been
    provided, nor has any reason or explanation been provided for the suggested
    removal of permitted development rights. This is in the face of the instruction of
    Policy DM6 of the Framework that there should be a clear justification for their
    removal. I have therefore not imposed any of those conditions.
Conclusion
24. For the reasons given above, the appeal should be allowed.

Graham Wraight
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010392


SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans:
              • 7670 MEIN-XX-XX-DR-A-70-001- Site Location and Block Plan
              • 7670 MEIN-XX-XX-DR-A-20-005- Existing and Proposed Site Sections
              • 7670 MEIN-XX-XX-DR-A-20-007- Proposed Car Port
              • 7670 MEIN-XX-XX-DR-A-20-008- Proposed Garage
              • 7670 MEIN-XX-XX-DR-A-20-009 Rev P1 - Proposed Fencing and Entrance
              Gates
              • 7670 MEIN-XX-XX-DR-A-70-003 Rev P1- Proposed Site Layout
              • 7670 MEIN-XX-XX-DR-A-70-004 Rev P1- Proposed Block Plan
              • 7670 MEIN-XX-XX-DR-A-20-003 Rev P1- Proposed Floor Plans
              • 7670 MEIN-XX-XX-DR-A-20-004 Rev P1- Proposed Elevations Received
              on 26th August 2025; and
              • 7670 MEIN-XX-XX-DR-A-70-005- Tree Protection Plan
     3)       The facing and roofing materials specified in the application form shall be
              used for the development hereby permitted.
     4)       No operations shall commence on site until the existing trees which are to be
              retained have been protected in accordance with drawing 7670 MEIN-XX-
              XX-DR A-70-005- Tree Protection Plan. The tree protection measures shall
              be retained for the duration of the construction period. No materials,
              machinery or vehicles are to be stored or temporary buildings erected within
              the perimeter of the fence, nor is any excavation work to be undertaken
              within the confines of the fence without the written approval of the local
              planning authority. No changes of ground level shall be made within the
              protected area without the written approval of the local planning authority.
     5)       The development hereby approved shall be implemented in accordance with
              the bat mitigation measures detailed within Part 4 - Conclusions and
              Recommendations of the Bat Activity Survey Report by ML-Ecology dated
              20th September 2025.
     6)       The dwelling shall not be occupied until the driveway has been surfaced in a
              bound material (not loose gravel) for a minimum distance of 6.0 metres from
              the highway boundary, and has been drained to prevent the unregulated
              discharge of surface water onto the public highway. The hard bound
              surfacing and drainage measures shall be retained for the life of the
              development.
     7)       The dwelling shall not be occupied until the existing site access that has
              been made redundant as a consequence of this consent and as shown on
              Dwg. No. 7670 MEIN-XX-XX-DR-A-70-003 Rev P1 has been permanently
              closed and the access crossing reinstated as verge.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6010392


     8)       No gates or other obstacle shall be erected on the access driveway within 6.0
              metres of the site boundary fronting Browns Lane and any gates shall be
              hung so not to open outwards.
     9)       Prior to any hard surfacing of the site taking place details of the proposed
              surfacing materials (including the driveway) shall be submitted to and
              approved in writing by the local planning authority. This shall include details
              of the driveway construction where this would result in the incursion within
              the root protection area(s) of any trees in close proximity to the drive. The
              development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details
              prior to the first occupation of the dwelling and maintained as such for the
              lifetime of the development.
     10)      Prior to the development progressing above Damp Proof Course level, a
              scheme of ecological enhancements including the provision of at least two
              swift bricks along with consideration for appropriate provision for bat boxes,
              bee bricks and hedgehog friendly boundary treatments shall be submitted to
              and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The approved
              ecological enhancements shall be implemented prior to the development
              being brought into use and shall thereafter be retained for the lifetime of the
              development.
     11)      Prior to the dwelling progressing above Damp Proof Course level, details of
              surface water drainage shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the
              local planning authority. The surface water drainage scheme shall have
              regard to the drainage hierarchy of infiltration- watercourse- sewer as the
              priority order for discharge location. Once agreed, the drainage provision for
              surface water shall be fully installed prior to the first occupation of the
              dwelling hereby approved.
     12)      Prior to the dwelling progressing above Damp Proof Course level a detailed
              landscaping scheme shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the
              local planning authority. The approved landscaping scheme shall be carried
              out in the first planting season following the commencement of the use
              hereby permitted and any trees or plants which within a period of 5 years
              from the completion of the development die, are removed or become
              seriously damaged or diseased shall be replaced in the next planting season
              with others of similar size and species, unless the local planning authority
              gives written consent to any variation.
     13)      Prior to the occupation of the replacement dwelling, 1.8 metre high obscure
              glazed privacy screens shall be fitted to the outer side of both respective rear
              balconies as shown on drawing 7670 MEIN-XX-XX-DR-A-20-004 Rev P1.
              Thereafter the privacy screens shall be retained to the agreed specification
              for the lifetime of the development.
     14)      No development shall commence unless and until evidence that the dwelling
              hereby permitted will be constructed and occupied as a self-build dwelling as
              defined in section 1(A1) of the Self-build and Custom Housebuilding Act 2015
              has been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
              Authority. This shall be in the form of a completed planning obligation which
              secures the approved dwelling as a self-build dwelling.

---------------------------------------------End of Conditions-----------------------------------------------


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        7
