Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by K Mee BA(Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6010253
Land adj Langley Cricket Club, Cock Hall Lane, Langley, Macclesfield SK11 0DE
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•    The appeal is made by Mr S Slack against the decision of Cheshire East Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/0446/PIP.
•    The development proposed is described as: one dwelling and associated development.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Background and Preliminary Matters
2.     The proposal is for permission in principle. Planning Practice Guidance advises
       that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for housing-led
       development. The permission in principle route has 2 stages: the first stage (or
       permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site is suitable in-principle and
       the second (“technical details consent”) stage is when the detailed development
       proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first of these 2 stages.
3.     The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
       land use and the amount of development. All other matters are considered as part
       of a subsequent Technical Details Consent application if permission in principle is
       granted.
4.     An applicant can apply for permission in principle for a range of dwellings by
       expressing a minimum and maximum net number of dwellings as part of the
       application. In this instance, permission in principle has been sought for 1 dwelling.
5.     The Government published a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) on 17 August 2026. The main parties were provided with an
       opportunity to comment. I have had regard to the 2026 version of the Framework
       in my decision. References hereafter are to the August 2026 version.
6.     During the appeal proceedings, the Council confirmed that the reference within the
       first reason for refusal to land identified in footnote 7 of the previous iteration of the
       Framework was made in error and should therefore be disregarded. I have
       therefore proceeded to determine the appeal on this basis.
Main Issue
7.     The Council does not object to the proposed amount of development. Therefore,
       given the above, the main issue is whether the appeal site is suitable for
       residential development having regard to its location and proposed land use, in
       relation to:

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010253


           •    whether the proposal would constitute inappropriate development in the
                Green Belt, having regard to the Framework and any relevant development
                plan policies, and the effect on openness;
           •    whether the proposed development would be suitably located having regard
                to the accessibility of services and facilities; and
           •    if the proposal is inappropriate development, whether any harm by reason
                of inappropriateness, and any other harm, would be clearly outweighed by
                other considerations, so as to amount to very special circumstances (VSC)
                required to justify the proposal.
Reasons
Whether inappropriate development in the Green Belt
8.     The appeal site is located within the Green Belt. The Framework states that the
       fundamental aim of Green Belt policy is to prevent urban sprawl by keeping land
       permanently open; the essential characteristics of Green Belts are their openness
       and their permanence. Development in the Green Belt is inappropriate unless one
       of the exceptions stated in the Framework applies.
9.     Policy PG 3 of the Cheshire East Local Plan Strategy 2010-2030 (July 2017)
       (CELPS) seeks to protect the Green Belt. In that respect, its aims are broadly
       consistent with the Framework. However, Policy PG 3 does not refer to grey belt
       land, given it predated the introduction of the most recent version of the
       Framework. Consequently, and being mindful that weight should be afforded to
       development plan policies on the basis of their degree of consistency with the
       Framework, I have afforded greater weight to the Framework in relation to this
       main issue.
10. Framework Policy GB7(g) advises that the development of homes in the Green
    Belt should not be regarded as inappropriate where 4 criteria are met. The main
    parties do not dispute that the site would meet the definition of grey belt land and
    that the proposal would not undermine the purposes of the remaining Green Belt. I
    have no reason to reach a different conclusion and therefore criterion (i) is met.
11. There is also no dispute between the parties that the Council cannot demonstrate
    a 5-year supply of deliverable housing land. Consequently, there is an unmet need
    for housing in the area, and the proposal would therefore comply with criterion (ii).
12. Criterion (iii) requires consideration of whether the development is in a sustainable
    location, with particular reference to Framework Policy TR3. However, the
    reference to Policy TR3 does not displace other relevant considerations, including
    those arising from the development plan.
13. The Framework does not prescribe specific accessibility thresholds. However,
    CELPS Policy SD 1 seeks to ensure that new development is accessible by public
    transport, walking and cycling, whilst CELPS Policy SD 2 further requires
    residential development to have access to public transport and a range of services
    and facilities. In this regard, Table 9.1 provides recommended accessibility
    thresholds against which the site's accessibility can be assessed.
14. I note the appellant's contention that Policies SD 1 and SD 2 are out of date
    because they do not reflect the emphasis within Policy TR3(1)(a) on the amount of

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010253


       movement generated by development. However, the overarching aim of Policy
       TR3 is to locate development in sustainable locations by adding within TR3(1) that
       development is located where it can support sustainable pattern of movement and
       enable good accessibility for different users. Those objectives are broadly
       consistent with the Framework and I therefore attach only very limited weight to
       any alleged inconsistency.
15. The recommended accessibility thresholds within CELPS Table 9.1 include 500m
    to a bus stop, post box and convenience store; 1km to a primary school, leisure
    facility, community facility and public house; and 2km to a railway station.
    Development is considered to be accessible where it lies within the recommended
    distance of a bus stop, a convenience store, multi-functional open space and at
    least four other services or facilities. Whilst not therefore determinative in relation
    to the Framework, these recommended standards do provide guidance on what
    might be an appropriate distance in terms of accessibility.
16. The appeal site comprises a small parcel of land of approximately 0.1ha forming
    part of an open field beyond the edge of the village of Langley. The site is
    relatively isolated in character, with no adjacent residential development and only
    Langley Cricket Club located nearby to the east. Access would be taken from an
    existing driveway off Cock Hall Lane, which presently serves an agricultural
    building and associated yard to the north-east.
17. The road alongside the appeal site is not served by public transport, with the
    nearest bus stop located approximately 550m away within Langley village. Beyond
    the edge of the village, the route lacks footways and street lighting, is subject to
    the national speed limit and is on an incline. For part of this route, opportunities for
    pedestrian refuge are limited due to the lack of verges and dense roadside
    vegetation. Taken together, these conditions would materially constrain the safe
    and convenient use of non-car modes to access nearby facilities, particularly in
    respect of pedestrian movements. This is despite the route onwards from the
    village towards Macclesfield benefiting from lit footways for its full length.
18. Furthermore, the distance to supermarkets, medical facilities and the railway
    station, which is around 4.5km distant, in Macclesfield are at the upper end of what
    could reasonably be expected for regular cycle journeys. As a result, opportunities
    for sustainable travel are limited, particularly for less mobile groups, those
    travelling with children, and during periods of adverse weather or darkness.
    Consequently, notwithstanding the small scale of the proposal, future occupiers
    would be likely to rely heavily on private car use to meet their day-to-day needs,
    representing the least sustainable mode of travel.
19. The appellant also advises that the Connectivity Tool has been utilised, as
    recommended in Framework Policy TR3(2). However, little detail has been
    provided regarding its findings beyond a score of 25 and a colour-coded map
    which, owing to its scale and presentation, is difficult to interpret with any
    meaningful degree of precision.
20. I have had regard to the appeal decisions cited by the appellant including the
    decision at Pickmere1. However, the evidence before me is limited, and I am not
    satisfied that they are directly comparable to the circumstances of this appeal. In

1
 APP/R0660/W/25/3376104 (Pickmere), APP/M3645/W/24/3347328, APP/R3650/W/24/3352222, APP/F2605/W/25/3376235,
APP/R0660/W/24/3354674


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
Appeal Decision 6010253


       those cases, sites generally benefited from stronger accessibility credentials,
       including being closer to existing residential development, bus stops, public rights
       of way or routes subject to lower speed limits. Some also benefited from a greater
       degree of passive surveillance and incidental illumination from adjacent
       development.
21. By contrast, although the distance to Langley village and its limited facilities is not
    excessive, the appeal site is physically separate from the village and from any
    meaningful groups of residential development. From the appeal site, it is accessed
    via a narrow road subject to the national speed limit, with no footways or street
    lighting.
22. Whilst the cited decisions demonstrate that small-scale development may, in some
    circumstances, be acceptable in locations with limited accessibility, each appeal
    must be determined on its own merits, notwithstanding the importance of
    consistency in decision-making. In this case, I attach limited weight to those
    decisions, which do not outweigh the accessibility and sustainability concerns I
    have identified above.
23. I therefore find, having regard to the evidence before me and my observations
    during the site visit, that the appeal site would not occupy a sustainable location.
    Consequently, the proposal would be contrary to criterion (iii).
24. Criterion (iv) requires the application of the ‘Golden Rules’, however, these only
    apply to major development and are therefore not pertinent to this appeal
    proposal.
25. Therefore, whilst criteria (i) and (ii) would be met, and criterion (iv) is not necessary
    to be complied with in this case, I find that the location of the site would not comply
    with the requirements of criterion (iii). As such, the proposal would comprise
    inappropriate development in the Green Belt.
26. Accordingly, I have no reason to conclude that the proposed development would
    meet any of the exceptions set out in the Framework and therefore the proposal
    would amount to inappropriate development in the Green Belt. This would be
    contrary to the overarching aim of CELPS Policy PG 3 and the provisions of the
    Framework referred to above, unless very special circumstances have been
    demonstrated. I will return to this matter later in my decision.
27. The Council’s first reason for refusal also references CELPS Policy MP 1. This is
    an overarching policy relating to the Council’s approach when considering
    development and reflects the presumption in favour of sustainable development
    set out within the Framework. I return to the presumption in favour of sustainable
    development below.
Openness
28. Openness is an essential characteristic of the Green Belt; it can be perceived both
    spatially and visually. At this stage my assessment relates to the principle of the
    site for residential development, and does not include details such as height,
    massing, scale and design, which are to be considered at the technical details
    stage. From my site visit I observed that the appeal site comprises an
    undeveloped open green field.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010253


29. Spatially the proposal would introduce built form together with a driveway, means
    of enclosure and other paraphernalia related to a residential development into a
    location where there is currently none and would be readily visible from a range of
    public and private viewpoints. Consequently, the proposal would diminish the
    openness of the Green Belt in both visual and spatial terms. Given it would result
    in the development of an open and undeveloped site, I find that it would result in
    significant harm to openness.
Suitability of Location
30. The appeal site lies beyond the edge of Langley and exceeds the recommended
    distance to a bus stop, albeit only marginally. Whilst some facilities including
    Langley Cricket Club, a public right of way, a public house and Langley Church
    Hall, fall within the recommended accessibility thresholds, the nearest
    convenience store is substantially further away than envisaged by Policy SD 2.
    Moreover, irrespective of distance, the route to these facilities would not provide a
    safe or attractive environment for walking, wheeling or cycling. Consequently,
    future occupiers would be likely to rely predominantly on the private car to access
    the majority of day-to-day services and facilities.
31. Overall, I therefore conclude that the appeal site is not suitably located having
    regard to the accessibility of services and facilities. The proposal would therefore
    conflict with CELPS Policies SD 1, SD 2 and CO 1 which seek to direct residential
    development to sustainable and accessible locations, with access to a range of
    public transport, key services and amenities.
Other Considerations
32. Notwithstanding the dispute over the current housing land supply figure, with the
    appellant stating this is 3.8 years and the Council confirming this to be 3.3 years,
    in any event it is clear that a 5-year supply of deliverable housing sites cannot be
    demonstrated. I therefore find that there is a significant shortfall in the supply of
    housing land and whilst the proposal is only for a single dwelling, it would
    nevertheless make a positive contribution. I attribute significant weight to this
    benefit as a consequence.
33. The proposal would deliver limited economic benefits during construction, social
    benefits through the introduction of an additional household contributing to the
    community and the delivery of biodiversity net gain would also represent a tangible
    environmental benefit. Furthermore, a single dwelling on a 0.1ha site would
    represent an efficient use of land in accordance with Framework Policy L3(2)(b). I
    afford moderate weight to these benefits.
34. I also note that no concerns have been raised by the Local Highway Authority with
    regard to the principle of the proposal. However, the avoidance of harm in this
    respect does not amount to a benefit, rather this is an expectation of local and
    national planning policies and so it is a neutral matter in the balance.
Green Belt Balance
35. As set out above, I have found that the proposal would be inappropriate
    development in the Green Belt, which would cause harm to its openness.
    Framework Policy GB6(2) states that I should afford substantial weight to any
    harm to the Green Belt, including harm to its openness. I have also found that the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010253


       proposal would not be a suitable location, with future occupiers heavily reliant on
       the private car to access the majority of day-to-day services and facilities. I find
       that the benefits, whilst they would be significant, would not clearly outweigh the
       totality of this harm. Consequently, the VSC necessary to justify the proposal do
       not exist in this case.
36. Accordingly, the development would not be a suitable location or land use when
    applying the development strategy set out in the Local Plan and the Framework in
    relation to the Green Belt.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
37. Framework Policy S5(5) sets out that the presumption in favour of sustainable
    development does not apply to proposals in the Green Belt. I have found that the
    proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt and that it would
    cause harm to its openness. In the absence of VSC, I find that the presumption in
    favour of sustainable development does not therefore apply in this case and the
    proposal would be contrary to Framework Policy GB6.
38. Accordingly, for the reasons set out above, I find that the proposal is not suitable
    having regard to its location and proposed land use. The proposal would conflict
    with the development plan when read as a whole. The material considerations in
    this case, including the Framework, do not indicate that the decision should be
    taken otherwise than in accordance with the development plan. The appeal is
    therefore dismissed.

K Mee
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
