Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by J Heppell BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010883
28 Central Parade, Croydon CR0 0JB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission under section 73 of the Town and Country Planning
     Act 1990 (as amended) for the development of land without complying with conditions subject to
     which a previous planning permission was granted.
•    The appeal is made by JM Restaurants Ltd against the decision of the Council of the London
     Borough of Croydon.
•    The application Ref 26/00964/CONR dated 31 March 2026 was refused by notice dated 29 May
     2026.
•    The application sought planning permission for use of basement, ground and upper level mezzanine
     for purposes within Class A3 (restaurant), erection of two storey rear extension with external fire
     escape staircase/hand railings without complying with a condition attached to planning permission
     Ref 94/2051/P dated 24 August 1995.
•    The condition in dispute is No 1 which states that: The premises shall not be used except between
     0900 hours and 2330 hours.
•    The reason given for the condition is: To protect the amenities of adjoining occupiers.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2.     An application for costs was made by JM Restaurants Ltd against the decision of
       the Council of the London Borough of Croydon. This is the subject of a separate
       decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     Following the submission of the appeal, the revised National Planning Policy
       Framework (Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. The main parties
       were afforded the opportunity to comment on the implications of the new
       Framework for the proposal.
Main Issue
4.     The planning permission for a restaurant granted under Ref 94/2051/P was subject
       to a number of conditions, including No 1 which limited the use of the premises to
       the hours of 09:00 to 23.00. The reason for the condition was to protect the
       amenities of adjoining occupiers.
5.     Under Ref 26/00964/CONR, the appellant sought to vary Condition 1 to extend the
       opening hours of the premises to allow it to remain open until midnight on Sunday
       to Thursday and 02:00 on Friday and Saturday. The Council refused the
       application, fearing that it would be detrimental to the amenities of the occupiers of

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010883


         nearby properties by reason of noise and disturbance at a time when neighbours
         can reasonably expect not to be disturbed. The Council cited conflict with Policy
         D3 of the London Plan March 2021 (LP) and policies SP4.1, SP4.2 and DM10.6 of
         the Croydon Local Plan 2018 (CLP), and with the Framework.
6.       The main issue is the effect on the living conditions of existing residents of
         extended opening hours, having particular regard to noise and disturbance.
Reasons
7.       The site is located within the main retail frontage of New Addington’s district
         centre. The primary shopping area comprises an extended parade of shops with
         duplex flats above facing a central car park, opposite which there is a cluster of
         community facilities. The majority of units are in retail use, though there are some
         restaurants and hot food takeaways, including the site itself which operates as a
         KFC takeaway.
8.       On my site visit on a weekday, I observed New Addington to be a busy district
         centre with considerable pedestrian and vehicular activity. The daytime
         environment for residents living above the units is therefore noisier than for
         occupiers of houses located further away from the parade. However, the limited
         presence of restaurants and takeaways indicated to me that there is likely to be
         reduced activity in the evening, once local shops have closed and their customers
         have gone home.
9.       The premises is currently required to close by 11.30pm. The Domino’s takeaway
         at No 40 is required by the terms of its planning permission to close at 11.30pm on
         weekdays, at midnight on Saturdays and at 10pm on Sundays and Bank Holidays1
         (albeit the appellant reports that the advertised opening hours extend closer to
         midnight on some days). I have not been advised of the opening hours of the
         takeaway at the adjacent No 27, known as Kuku’s, and have taken account of the
         appellant’s contention that as No 27 does not benefit from planning permission for
         a takeaway, it has not been assessed against the policies of the development
         plan. Potential enforcement issues however fall outside the scope of this appeal
         and do not have a bearing on its outcome.
10. The appellant undertook an acoustic assessment based on noise readings taken
    on a weekday between 11pm and 2am, which provided typical measured
    background noise levels and ambient sound levels. The assessment confirmed
    that the extract system at the premises required attenuation in the form of a
    silencer, which the appellant indicated a willingness to install. The assessment
    found that the noise of delivery vehicles arriving in the nearest parking bay would
    be lower than the typical ambient noise environment and therefore have no effect
    on residents. I have no reason to doubt the findings of the acoustic assessment.
11. However, it is evident from the Council’s submissions that their concerns related to
    the comings and goings of customers and to the use of delivery bikes, neither of
    which is explicitly addressed in the acoustic assessment. Given that residents live
    directly above the units, there is a risk of customer conversations and the noise
    generated by delivery bikes (as opposed to cars), causing disturbance late at night
    and early in the morning. In the absence of predicted noise outputs from these
    sources in relation to background levels, there is insufficient evidence to show that

1
    LPA reference 16/06335/FUL


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010883


         the living conditions of nearby occupiers would be adequately protected from these
         noise sources.
12. Interested parties, some of whom reside above the shops, have alluded to existing
    problems of litter, antisocial behaviour, noise from staff taking breaks behind the
    shops, and the behaviour of delivery bike riders. I observed on my site visit that the
    shared residential staircase next to Kuku’s suffers from a litter problem, though
    there is no indication that this is associated with KFC. The appellant pointed out
    that it would not be in the interests of delivery riders whose income depends on
    KFC’s business to loiter unnecessarily, and drew my attention to KFC’s litter
    policy, which could I consider be made the subject of a condition were I minded to
    allow the appeal.
13. Whilst there is no record of recent crimes or noise complaints associated with the
    site, or indeed No 27, and no suggestion that antisocial behaviour is linked to
    either premises, the police advised that instances of antisocial behaviour are not
    always reported. I therefore attach weight to the concerns raised by interested
    parties, which underscore the risk of extended opening hours exacerbating the
    problems currently experienced by residents.
14. I have placed limited weight on the Council’s previous refusal to extend the
    opening hours of the premises2, a decision which dates back a number of years,
    since when both the local context and the development plan have changed. I have
    had regard to the comments of the Council’s Pollution Control Officer who, whilst
    not querying the conclusions of the acoustic assessment, recommended that the
    opening hours of the premises be restricted to the hours of nearby takeaways. On
    the basis that the current permitted opening hours of the takeaways which have
    been brought to my attention do not allow operation after midnight, noise levels
    after that time are likely to be lower, underscoring the need to carefully scrutinise
    the proposal for extended night time opening.
15. The Council’s reason for refusal referred to paragraphs 97 and 135 of the
    Framework, which have been replaced by policies HC5 and P3 respectively of the
    updated Framework. Policy HC5 provides guidance on hot food takeaways near
    schools and proposals which would give rise to a concentration of such uses and,
    as it has not been put to me that either of these outcomes would result from the
    proposal, there is no conflict with this policy.
16. Policy P3 requires proposals not to give rise to, or contribute to, unacceptable
    levels of noise for neighbouring residents. It advises that adverse impacts of this
    nature should be avoided where possible, or else mitigated to an acceptable
    degree. In light of my findings, the proposal would conflict with the requirements of
    Policy P3.
17. The relevant development plan policies aim to enhance social cohesion via a
    design-led approach which protects the amenity of the occupiers of adjoining
    buildings and prevents or mitigates the impact of noise. The proposal has not
    sufficiently demonstrated that it would achieve these aims. I therefore conclude
    that varying the condition to allow extended opening hours would have an
    unacceptable impact on the living conditions of nearby residents, contrary to Policy
    D3 of the LP and policies SP4.1, SP4.2 and DM10.6 of the CLP.


2
    LPA reference 97/01762/P


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010883


Conclusion
18. As I have concluded that varying the condition would harm the living conditions of
    existing residents, the appeal is dismissed.

J Heppell
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
