Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by H Jones BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010112
Balne Moor Coarse Fishery, Balne Moor Road, Balne, North Yorkshire DN14 0EU
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Colin Welsh against the decision of North Yorkshire Council.
•   The application Ref is ZG2025/0890/COU.
•   The development proposed is change of use of land (including the existing caravan currently used as
    a welfare unit) to residential use (C3) to provide a management dwelling associated with the
    operation of Balne Moor Course Fisheries.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. On 17 August 2026, a revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework
   (the Framework) was published. In making my decision, I have had regard to the
   Framework and any comments in respect to it submitted by the appeal parties.
Background and Main Issue
3. The appeal site is situated within the Green Belt. However, the appeal parties are in
   agreement that the proposal would not constitute inappropriate development in the
   Green Belt and, having regard to Green Belt policy within the Framework and the
   development plan, I agree.
4. Therefore, the main issue is whether the development complies with relevant
   policies within the development plan, and within the Framework, which control
   housing in rural areas.
Reasons
      Background
5. Balne Moor Coarse Fishery has been an established coarse fishing enterprise for
   many years. However, it operates only 3 days per week and does not have
   extended opening hours, including during the night-time. Therefore, the present
   fishing enterprise is a limited one.
      Whether the proposed dwelling would constitute an isolated home in the
      countryside
6. The fishery is situated within a countryside location, with fields to much of its
   surrounds. The fishery itself, with its lakes and landscaping, is spacious and
   verdant. The caravan the subject of the appeal is situated on the eastern side of the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010112


        fishery. Neither appeal party submits that the caravan constitutes a building, and I
        have no reason to disagree.
7. To the west of the fishery, there are 3 houses and some mobile homes. However,
   between these properties and the caravan there is the fishery’s main fishing lake,
   landscaping and a railway line. Consequently, the caravan is physically separated
   from these other properties, and it does not form a part of a group with them. Whilst
   the fishery contains some buildings and structures, they are limited in number, and
   they are also concentrated on its eastern half such that they too are separated from
   the existing houses and mobile homes. Consequently, the caravan is not within a
   group of houses or a settlement. The proposed dwelling would therefore constitute
   an isolated home in the countryside.
        Whether there is an essential need for a dwelling to accommodate a rural worker
8. The well-established nature of the fishery, alone, indicates to me that the enterprise
   has been able to function properly without an on-site dwelling. Indeed, the
   appellant's claim that a dwelling is essential is based on aspirations to expand the
   fishery rather than on the requirements of its current operation.
9. The form of fishery expansion referenced represents a substantial step-change in
   comparison to its established pattern of operation. Notably, references are made to
   24-hour opening and operation 7 days a week. The subsisting, limited enterprise
   could likely be expanded in a range of manageable ways - this could include
   opening on more days of the week or introducing some more extensive opening
   hours. It is not the case that the absence of an on-site dwelling is the sole barrier to
   expansion.
10. The detail contained within the business case and financial submissions before me
    is high-level. The evidence underpinning the projected angler demand and
    anticipated income is limited, whilst the information relating to operating costs
    comprises only a broad overview. Overall, the business case and financial
    submissions are not a comprehensive forecast, and they do not adequately
    evidence that the referenced expansion would be very likely to come into fruition.
11. Taken together, the fishery's established operating pattern, the extent of the
    departure from that pattern now asserted, and the rudimentary nature of the
    business case submissions provide unconvincing evidence of a firm intention to
    develop the enterprise in the manner proposed.
12. Certain environmental harms and other risks can apply to fishing enterprises. This
    may include the potential for water quality decline, deoxygenation, stock escape or
    loss/theft and fish welfare incidents. Meanwhile customers will require oversight
    and assistance at times. The appellant references appeal decisions whereby the
    essential need for an on-site dwelling has been demonstrated, partly because of
    these types of factors. Particular focus on cases in Cheshire1 and Devon2 is drawn.
13. However, since the enterprise in the case in Devon employed 25 people, the scale
    of that enterprise differs considerably to that at Balne Moor Coarse Fishery. In the
    Cheshire case, I particularly note that night-time fishing already took place, and the
    appeal decision indicates that there was particular evidence before the Inspector in
    respect of the likelihood of deoxygenation, incidents of snagging and an increased
1
    Appeal decision APP/R0660/W/21/3288270
2
    Appeal decision APP/W1145/W/24/3355763


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
Appeal Decision 6010112


     poaching threat. These and other factors distinguish those cases from this appeal
     such that they are not directly comparable.
14. In contrast, in this appeal, I find the submissions made regarding the stewardship,
    safety and security demands which would apply to the expanded fishery at Balne
    Moor to be uncompelling. The evidence before me concerning these matters is
    generic, unsupported by substantive submissions regarding instances when any
    environmental, safety or security risks have arisen or been narrowly avoided. In
    addition, whilst the appellant submits that remote management measures such as
    the use of CCTV or automated monitoring systems would be inadequate, I have
    little evidence that the contribution they could make to the fishery’s operation has
    been explored to their fullest potential.
15. Furthermore, on the one hand, the appellant submits that the enterprise is owner-
    operated, managed solely by himself, and references are made to the constraints
    on securing another employee and why reliance on others is not possible.
    However, in contrast, the submitted application form references 2 existing
    employees whilst references are made in evidence to the enterprise’s ‘staff’. There
    are also other submissions to the effect that the fishery’s proposed growth would
    enable further employment. Consequently, the situation in respect to both existing
    and proposed employment at the fishery is unclear. The evidence before me that
    the appellant has no one available to assist in the operation of the fishery, thereby
    necessitating his continuous on-site presence, is therefore unconvincing.
16. For the above reasons, there is not an essential need for a dwelling to
    accommodate a rural worker. This includes one which would be subject to a
    temporary permission.
     Policy assessment
17. The development would result in an isolated home in the countryside which is also
    designated as Green Belt. Policy HO11 of the Framework sets out the
    circumstances when isolated homes in the countryside should be supported. I have
    concluded that there is not an essential need for a dwelling to accommodate a rural
    worker, consequently, the proposal conflicts with HO11(a). The caravan the
    dwelling would be within is not a building. HO11(c) refers to the reuse of buildings
    not other structures or land. Consequently, the proposal also conflicts with
    HO11(c). The proposal would not involve any of the development types which
    HO11 (b), (d) and (e) concern either. As a result, the proposal conflicts with HO11.
18. Since the site is within the Green Belt, much of Framework policy S5 is not
    engaged in this case. However, policy S5 remains relevant. Applying Framework
    policy GB7, the development is not inappropriate development in the Green Belt: it
    complies with GB7(e). Consequently, S5(5) is engaged, and it sets out that
    proposals should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    Framework’s national decision-making policies and applying S5(2). S5(2) provides
    that one, but not the only, circumstance in which the benefits of approving
    development proposals are likely to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects
    is when one of the national decision-making policies which state that development
    proposals should be refused in specific circumstances is conflicted with.
19. As a national decision-making policy, and since the site is within a countryside
    location, Framework policy HO11 remains applicable to the proposal and S5(2) and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010112


     S5(5) engages it in this case even though S5(3) does not. I return to the
     implications of this in my planning balance.
20. Policy H12 of the Selby District Local Plan (the LP) permits, in certain
    circumstances, the conversion of rural buildings to residential use in the
    countryside. Since the caravan is not a building, the proposal does not comply with
    it.
21. Policy SP2 of the Selby District Core Strategy Local Plan (the CS) establishes a
    spatial development strategy. Criteria A (c) and A (d) of the policy are of particular
    relevance in this case, since the former relates to the countryside, and latter the
    Green Belt.
22. In part, CS policy SP2 A(c) cross-refers to CS policy SP13 which is concerned with
    the scale and distribution of economic growth. SP13 part C relates to the rural
    economy, whilst part D applies to all proposals being considered under the policy.
    The development proposed is for a dwelling, not the expansion of the fishery as
    such, and the necessary demonstration of essential need for it has not been made.
    Therefore, the development is not appropriate in type to its location in conflict with
    SP13 D.
23. The appellant emphasises that the proposal would facilitate the fishery expansion
    with derived benefits to the rural economy, social benefits through its improved
    recreational offer whilst environmental benefits would arise from the greater
    stewardship. However, in this case, the development for which permission is
    sought is a dwelling rather than a business or employment building. Moreover, I
    have reservations regarding the firm intention to develop the enterprise, and the
    enterprise could expand irrespective of the proposal. I have also found the
    submissions regarding the stewardship, safety and security demands of the
    expanded fishery to be unconvincing. Consequently, the weight I attach to the cited
    benefits is tempered, its relevance to, and compliance with, the forms of
    sustainable economic rural growth which CS policy SP13 C advocates is limited,
    and the conflict with SP13 D means that the proposal conflicts with policy SP13 in
    overall terms.
24. As the proposal conflicts with CS policy SP13, it would not meet a rural affordable
    housing need, is not essential to accommodate a rural worker need and other
    special circumstances do not apply, it also conflicts with CS policy SP2 A (c) and
    SP2 as a whole. As they apply to the proposal, policies SP2 and SP13 are
    consistent with the Framework. This is because CS policy SP2 A(d) requires
    development in the Green Belt to conform with national Green Belt policies, ie the
    Framework, whilst SP2 A(c) and SP13 C and D together reflect, and similarly apply,
    the same principles as Framework national decision-making policies, notably E4,
    HO11 and DP3.
      Conclusion
25. For the reasons given above, the development does not comply with relevant
    policies within the development plan, and within the Framework, which control
    housing in rural areas.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010112


Other Matters
26. The development would not harm the Green Belt, the appearance of the area, the
    living conditions of any residents, or biodiversity. Neither would it increase flood risk
    or result in conditions prejudicial to highway safety. Since the caravan is already in
    place, the development would not result in any further erosion of the countryside it
    is set within. However, the absence of harm in these respects is a neutral factor
    which does not weigh in favour of the proposal.
27. Although the appellant cites that the proposal would enable fewer vehicular trips
    associated with running the fishery, it would facilitate the appellant’s relocation from
    Hensall to an isolated area. The development would not be sited within a
    sustainable location in overall terms, and any trips the appellant would make aside
    from to the fishery would likely be heavily reliant on private cars. No benefit is
    therefore derived from this.
28. The appellant submits that there is a brick-built building on site which could, as an
    alternative to using the caravan, be used to accommodate the dwelling sought.
    However, I have no substantive evidence before me which indicates that this would
    not require planning permission in its own right. Furthermore, the appellant sets out
    that the costs of converting it would be significant, and I have no substantive
    evidence before me regarding its condition or its capability to be converted into a
    dwelling. In such circumstances, the prospect of the cited building being used as a
    dwelling does not weigh in the proposal’s favour.
Planning Balance
29. In my main issue, I have found that the development does not comply with relevant
    policies within the development plan, and within the Framework, which control
    housing in rural areas. Overall, I find that the development conflicts with the
    development plan taken as a whole.
30. Policy S3 of the Framework establishes a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development and, in this case, Framework policy S5 paragraphs 2 and 5 are
    engaged. In summary, this instructs that developments should be approved unless
    the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects,
    when assessed against the Framework’s national decision-making policies.
31. A new home would be created. Although it would specifically be for a rural worker,
    it would likely facilitate the appellant’s existing home becoming available on the
    market. Therefore, a contribution to housing supply would be made. It would be a
    very modest contribution, nevertheless a valuable one as the evidence before me
    indicates that only 2.6 years’ worth of housing land supply can be demonstrated. In
    compliance with Framework policy H07, this draws substantial weight.
32. Although Framework policy E2 sets out that substantial weight should be attributed
    to the economic benefits derived from proposals, that is in specific regard to
    commercial development. Framework policy E4 is also geared towards rural
    business development. The proposal is for a dwelling not business development.
    Given this, and other case specifics I detail in my main issue, I must markedly
    reduce the weight I attach to the proposal’s likelihood of facilitating the various
    economic, social and environmental benefits to which the appellant refers.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010112


33. The proposal would make use of previously developed land. However, as the
    caravan is neither vacant nor underutilised, and is not proposed as a temporary
    meanwhile use, it does not represent the type of development to which Framework
    policy L2 applies, nor does it attract the substantial weight that the policy indicates
    should be afforded.
34. Set against the development’s benefits, the conflict with the policy approach to the
    spatial distribution of housing is harmful. The instruction provided by Framework
    policy H011 that isolated homes in the countryside should only be provided in
    certain exceptional circumstances is a very strong one. That the proposal would run
    counter to this weighs very heavily against permitting the development - so much
    so that it substantially outweighs the development’s benefits when assessed
    against the Framework’s national decision-making policies. Framework policies S3
    and S5, and the application of the presumption in favour of sustainable
    development, therefore indicates that the development should be refused.
Conclusion
35. The development conflicts with the development plan as a whole. The material
    considerations in this case, including the Framework, do not indicate that the
    appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it. I therefore conclude that
    the appeal should be dismissed.



H Jones
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
