 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 15 July 2026
 By Ian McHugh DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 20 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010250
 Egmont, 23 Wragby Road, Sudbrooke, Lincoln, LN2 2QU
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Sath Vaddaram against the decision of West Lindsey District Council.
 •    The application Ref is WL/2026/00063.
 •    The development proposed is the retention of two piers to front boundary wall, provision of reduced
      railings and minor amendment to previously approved gates.

Procedural Matters
1. The description in the banner heading is taken from both the planning application
   form and the Council’s decision notice. However, I consider that it should be
   amended to include the wall upon which the railings will be attached. The appellant
   did not include that in the description, because he considered part of the wall to be
   permitted development. In my opinion, development cannot be disaggregated in
   that way, as the wall is an integral part of the overall structure.
2. Consequently, I have considered the proposal as the erection of a front boundary
   wall and railings and amendment to previously approved gates. Following
   consultation, both parties have agreed to this description.
3. On 17 August 2026, the Government published the National Planning Policy
   Framework 2026 (NPPF). It does not contain any provisions that raise material
   issues in respect of this appeal and I have not found it necessary to seek
   comments from the main parties. Where relevant, I have made reference to the
   2026 version in my reasoning below.
Decision

4. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the erection of a front
   boundary wall and railings and amendment to previously approved gates at
   Egmont, 23 Wragby Road, Sudbrooke, Lincoln, LN2 2QU in accordance with the
   terms of the application Ref WL/2026/00063, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: 1:1250 scale Site Location Plan – L-ADD-025-
              01B; 1:500 scale Block Plan – L-ADD-025-02C; and 1:50 scale Entrance
              Gates and Wall – WRA023-04.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6010250


Application for costs
5. Applications for costs have been made Mr Sath Vaddaram made by against West
   Lindsey District Council and by West Lindsey District Council against Mr Sath
   Vaddaram. These are the subject of separate decisions.
Main Issue
6. The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the
   area, including the effect on trees on the site frontage that are covered by a tree
   preservation order.
Reasons
7. The appeal site is located within a row of ribbon development that stretches along
   Wragby Road. Planning permission was granted by the Council in 2019 to
   demolish the original dwelling on the site and erect a new detached dwelling and
   garage. At the time of my site visit, the new dwelling was under construction.
8. Approval was also given by the Council in 2020 for gate piers and a sliding gate.
   These were the subject of a condition attached to the planning permission for the
   new dwelling.
9. Frontages along Wragby Road vary in terms of their means of enclosure, but
   generally, trees, hedges and other vegetation provide a verdant character and
   appearance to the area. However, there are also properties that are enclosed by
   walls or by walls and railings. These include numbers 47, 59 and 65.
10. I also note that the appeal property is located within Character Area 5, as defined
    in the Sudbrooke Neighbourhood Plan. This states that properties on the northern
    side of Wragby Road are screened from view by a combination of formal
    hedgerows and more sprawling and substantial areas of tree planting. It also
    states that it is only the driveway entrances to these properties where the band of
    planting is momentarily broken.
11. More recently, an application which was described as being for “four sections of
    railings on the front boundary wall and retrospective planning application for the
    retention of four piers above 1m from the ground level,” was refused by the Council
    and subsequently dismissed at appeal (reference APP/N2535/D/25/3363760).
12. The description considered by the previous inspector was not, in my opinion,
    particularly clear at first reading, but essentially the proposal was to construct a
    wall, gates and railings along the site frontage, with the wall containing four tall
    piers.
13. Both the Council and the Inspector concluded that the proposal would cause harm
    to the character and appearance of the area. The current appeal proposal seeks to
    address the previous application and appeal decisions by deleting two of the wall
    piers and reducing the height of the railings. A laurel hedge is proposed behind the
    wall and railings.
14. The Council maintains its previous stance, stating that the proposal would be
    incongruous and out of character with the existing streetscene. It also states that
    no Arboricultural Method Statement (AMS) has been provided and there could be



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
 Appeal Decision 6010250


     harm to trees adjacent to the wall and railings caused by its construction. The trees
     are the subject of a preservation order.
15. The Council cites a conflict with Policy S53 of the Central Lincolnshire Local Plan
    and with Policy 9 of the Sudbrooke Neighbourhood Plan. These policies seek
    (amongst other things) to ensure that the design of new development is of high
    quality and contributes positively to local character. In addition, the Council also
    refers to conflict with the National Design Guide and the NPPF 2024, which contain
    similar provisions. The 2024 version of the NPPF has been replaced by the 2026
    publication. The relevant provisions contained in the new version are similar to
    those in the 2024 and I have considered these in my assessment of the proposal.
16. In reaching my decision, I have given close consideration to the recent planning
    history. In particular, I have studied the reasoning and conclusion of the previous
    inspector and considered the need for consistency in decision making.
17. Whilst the length and basic form of the boundary wall, railings and gates have not
    changed, the removal of the two piers and the lowering of the railings are significant
    differences between the two proposals, which, in my opinion substantially reduces
    the bulkiness and visual impact of the development. Consequently, I consider that
    there is a material difference between the current appeal development and the
    earlier proposal.
18. With regard to the impact on the adjacent trees, I note that this was not an issue
    with the previous application and appeal. Whilst good practice would normally
    dictate the carrying out and submission of an assessment, in this case the wall has
    already been constructed and the appellant states that the gates can be
    constructed off the earlier foundations. Therefore, there would appear to be little
    gained by the request for an AMS.
19. A further consideration, which I consider to weigh in favour of the proposal is that
    the trees and other vegetation, including any new planting would be visible behind,
    through and above the railings. As a result, the verdant appearance of the site
    frontage would not be lost.
20. Accordingly, for the reasons given above, I conclude that the proposal does not
    conflict with the provisions of the Development Plan, as referred to above.
Conditions
21. As the development has already commenced, the only condition necessary is one
    that lists the approved plans.
Conclusion
22. For the reasons given above, it is concluded that the appeal be allowed.



Ian McHugh
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
