Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 2 September 2026
by A Knight BA PG Dip MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010727
1 Boxley Oast, Street Farm, Boxley, Kent ME14 3DR
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
     planning permission
•    The appeal is made by Bradley Smith against Maidstone Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/500136/FULL.
•    The development proposed is alterations to existing detached garage building, including height
     increase and roof alterations to provide home office and storage space within the roof void, with 2no.
     dormers to the front elevation and 3no. conservation roof windows to the rear elevation.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The Council did not determine the application. It has since stated that, had it been
       able to issue a decision, it would have refused permission on the grounds of the
       visual impact of the proposal upon the Boxley Conservation Area (the CA), Boxley
       Oast, a non-designated heritage asset (NDHA), and the character and appearance
       of the area, including what it describes as a protected landscape. The site is in the
       Kent Downs National Landscape (the NL).
3.     The description of development in the banner heading above was agreed by the
       main parties in the course of the application. I have taken the site address from the
       appeal form and the appellant’s statement of case. Different variations appear in
       the submissions. The location of the appeal site is clear from the plans.
4.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was issued on 17
       August 2026. The main parties have been given the opportunity to comment on
       any implications for the appeal, and I have taken any responses received into
       account in reaching my decision.
5.     Section 72 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
       requires that I pay special attention to the desirability of preserving or enhancing
       the character or appearance of the CA. The Framework states that when
       considering the potential effect of a development proposal on the significance of a
       designated heritage asset, substantial weight should be given to the asset’s
       conservation.
6.     Section 85 of the Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000 (as amended) requires
       me to seek to further the purpose of conserving and enhancing the natural beauty
       of the NL.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010727


Main Issue
7.     Having regard to the above, the main issues are whether the proposed
       development would preserve or enhance the significance of the CA; the effect of
       the proposed development on the significance of the NDHA, and; its effect upon
       the character and appearance of the area, including the NL.
Reasons
8.     The appeal site is at the southern edge of Boxley, a small, traditional rural village.
       The built form therein is focused around a central junction from which development
       extends outward. The village contains a reasonably high proportion of Listed
       Buildings and non-designated heritage assets and is set in a mix of open
       countryside and arable fields. This combination gives the village a timeless,
       unchanged feel which, for the purposes of the appeal, is both the defining
       characteristic of the local area and the significance of the CA.
9.     The site includes the NDHA, a pleasant, traditional oast building converted to
       residential use. The Boxley Conservation Area Appraisal and Management Plan
       identifies the view along Forge Lane towards the appeal site as a significant view
       within the CA. My site visit led me to the same conclusion; Upon approach from
       the south and west the NDHA is one of the first and most prominent indications of
       the village. Indeed, it is the principal element of such views, marking as it does the
       end of the fields and the beginning of the historic core of Boxley.
10. Furthermore, the appearance of the oast building and its proximity to the fields
    strongly indicates the historical relationship between the two. In this way, the
    appeal site contributes strongly to the timeless, unchanged feel of the area,
    including the CA. For the purposes of the appeal, this is the significance of the
    NDHA.
11. The views across the fields offer a mix of long-distance panoramas across open
    countryside and attractive farmed landscape. Both are described within the Kent
    Downs Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) Management Plan 2021-2026
    as being amongst the special components, characteristics and qualities of the NL.
    Sustainable development principle SD8 of the management plan includes that
    development proposals should not negatively impact on views from the NL.
12. Within the curtilage of the NDHA are found a number of domestic outbuildings
    including the detached garage subject of the appeal (the garage). This is a simple,
    modest building, the main body of which has a ‘pyramid’ hipped-roof. The appeal
    scheme involves the creation of a new roof with a slightly higher, extended
    ridgeline with barn hips at each end. The scheme would create a first floor, served
    by two dormers on one roofslope, three rooflights on the other, and a window in
    the southern elevation.
13. This would result in a simple garage of modest size, not readily distinguishable
    from the other domestic outbuildings in terms of scale and presence, becoming
    comparatively substantial; Indeed, it would be the only two-storey outbuilding.
    Whereas the existing garage appears a modest ancillary domestic structure, the
    proposal would be noticeably more prominent; The roof form and arrangement of
    windows would draw attention to the presence of first floor accommodation,
    particularly when illuminated from within.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010727


14. Overall, the appeal scheme would add significant additional bulk to the garage and
    make a striking change to its character. Given the prominent position it would have
    in the foreground of views from the south and west, it would harmfully undermine
    the primacy of the NDHA in those views, and intrude upon the existing visual
    relationship between it and the fields beyond.
15. In so doing it would harm the significance of the NDHA, eroding its contribution to
    the significance of the CA, and to the character and appearance of the area. In the
    same ways it would negatively impact on views towards Boxley from the NL,
    contrary to principle SD8.
16. With reference to Policy HE5 of the Framework, the scheme would result in a
    greater than moderate level of harm to the significance of the CA. I am informed
    that the proposal would secure the retention, long-term use, and maintenance of
    the building, and would also avoid the need for a larger, alternative building
    elsewhere on site to meet the appellant’s needs.
17. I have no reason, however, to believe the existing building is in poor repair or
    could not be well-maintained if not for the appeal scheme. I also have very little
    evidence that the appellant’s needs are such that some other, more harmful
    structure would have to be approved if the appeal is dismissed. I attribute little
    weight to these arguments, and consider them to comprise minimal public benefits
    that do not outweigh the harm to the significance of the CA.
18. The proposed development would neither preserve nor enhance the significance
    of the CA, would have a harmful effect on the significance of the NDHA and upon
    the character and appearance of the area including the NL. In these respects, it
    would not satisfy the requirements of the aforementioned Acts and would conflict
    with the aims of Policies LPRSP9, LPRSP15, LPRQD4 and LPRHOU11 of the
    Maidstone Borough Local Plan Review 2021-2038 (2024).
Conclusion
19. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
20. The appeal is dismissed.

A Knight
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
