Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 14 July 2026
by C Skelly BA (Hons) MSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026
Appeal A Ref: 6010059
Footpath on Euston Road Outside the Standard Hotel, 10 Argyle Street, London,
WC1H 8EG
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Group Plc against the decision of the Council of the
       London Borough of Camden.
•      The application Ref is 2025/5879/P.
•      The development proposed is Installation of New BT Street Hub and associated display of
       advertisement panels to both sides of the unit.
Appeal B Ref: 6010061
Footpath on Euston Road Outside the Standard Hotel, 10 Argyle Street, London
WC1H 8EG
• The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
        Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
        consent.
•       The appeal is made by Verity Cheyne of BT Group Plc against the decision of the Council of the
        London Borough of Camden.
•       The application Ref is 2026/0204/A.
•       The advertisement proposed is installation of 1 No. BT Street Hub Unit and associated
        advertisement panels on either side of the unit.

Decision
1.       Appeal A is dismissed.
2.       Appeal B is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
3.       The above address is taken from the Council’s decision notice as this more
         accurately describes the location of the proposal as shown on the submitted plans.
4.       There are two appeals on this site. Appeal A relates to the refusal of planning
         permission for the provision of a new BT street hub. Appeal B is in respect of the
         refusal of advertisement consent for advertising panels on either side of the unit.
         The hub and the advertisement are integral to each other, and both are the subject
         of these appeals. I have dealt with each case on its individual merits, but to avoid
         duplication both proposals are considered together in this decision, unless
         otherwise indicated.
5.       The appeal site is on the opposite side of the road to St Pancras Station and the
         former Midland Grand Hotel1, which is a Grade I Listed Building. It adjoins


1
    List entry 1342037

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6010059 and 6010061


         Camden Town Hall2 and is on the opposite side of the road to a K6 telephone
         kiosk3 outside St Pancras Station, both of which are Grade II listed and lies within
         the Kings Cross/St Pancras Conservation Area (CA). Accordingly in respect of
         Appeals A and B I have had regard to the duties set out in Section 72(1) of the
         Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (LBCAA) which
         requires that, with regard to buildings or land in a conservation area, special
         regard is paid to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or
         appearance of the conservation area. In respect of Appeal A, I have had regard to
         s66(1) of the LBCAA which requires that, in considering whether to grant planning
         permission for development which affects a listed building, or its setting, special
         regard shall be had to the desirability of preserving the building or its setting or any
         features of special architectural or historic interest which it possesses.
6.       In respect of Appeal B, Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control
         of Advertisements (England) Regulations 2007 and the National Planning Policy
         Framework (the Framework), make it clear that advertisements are subject to
         control only in the interests of amenity and public safety. Factors relevant to
         amenity include the general characteristics of the locality, including the presence
         of any features of historic, architectural or similar interest.
7.       Concurrent appeals have also been submitted for similar schemes outside 297
         Pentonville Road and outside 366 Gray’s Inn Road. Whilst I am the same
         Inspector for these appeals, I have considered each scheme independently.
Main Issues
8.       For Appeal A, the main issues are:
            • the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area,
              including whether it would preserve or enhance the significance of the Kings
              Cross /St Pancras Conservation Area and nearby listed buildings through
              development within their settings;
            • whether the proposal would achieve an appropriate level of community safety
              at the locality; and
            • the effect of the proposal on pedestrian safety.
9.       For Appeal B, the main issue is the effect of the advertisements on the visual
         amenity of the area.
Reasons
Character and appearance (Appeals A and B)
10. The appeal site is an area of pavement facing onto Euston Road located in front of
    the Standard Hotel which has a recessed ground floor level and external lift shaft.
    Whilst the surrounding area is characterised by commercial and shop frontages,
    this section of pavement is dominated by the hotel and the Town Hall, which have
    less active frontages and limited external illumination. This section of pavement
    includes a retail kiosk, streetlamp, cycle stands and utility kiosk however the
    immediate section of pavement around the location of the proposed hub is open in
    character. Further along the pavement there are streetlamps and a bus stop which
2
    List entry 1379162
3
    List entry 1393675


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decisions 6010059 and 6010061


       has paper advertisements. Euston road is a high trafficked six lane road with
       signalised pedestrian crossings leading to St Pancras Station and I observed that
       it was a busy pedestrian area with people going to and from the stations.
11. The appeal site is located on the opposite side of Euston Road to the gothic revival
    building of St Pancras Station and the former Midland Grand Hotel, a Grade I
    listed building. To the front of the station there is a Grade II listed K6 telephone
    kiosk. It is also on the same side of the street and in proximity to Camden Town
    Hall, A Grade II Listed building clad in Portland Stone ashlar. These buildings are
    of architectural and historic significance. The site lies with the CA, the significance
    of which primarily derives from its architectural and historic interest, characterised
    by the prominent views along Euston Road towards the listed stations and the
    area’s function as a gateway to central London.
12. The proposed hub would be positioned approximately 1.3m from the edge of the
    pavement to the front of the Standard Hotel. The screens would display content at
    10-second intervals and automatically dim at night. Whilst I note that the height of
    the proposed hub is required from an ICNIRP perspective, its scale and
    encroachment into the pavement would be a prominent addition to the street
    scene. Furthermore, given the lack of existing furniture in this section of pavement
    it would add to the visual clutter. Notwithstanding that the proposed luminance
    levels would accord with industry recommendations, the digital advertisement
    screens would further intensify its visual impact due to the size of the
    advertisements, the internal illumination and moving images. Whilst the proposal
    would involve the removal of an existing BT kiosk at 75 King’s Cross Road, this is
    some distance from the appeal site and therefore would do little to reduce the
    harm which I have identified.
13. Despite being positioned sideways in the pavement, the width and height of the
    proposed hub would erode the immediate views towards St Pancras Station and
    the former Midland Grand Hotel and the Town Hall, when walking along this side
    of Euston Road and thereby detract from their setting. Accordingly, the proposals
    would be harmful to the amenity of the area, would not preserve or enhance the
    character or appearance of the conservation area, nor preserve the setting of the
    listed building.
14. The appellant has referred me to the advertisements on bus shelters which are
    located to the front of Kings Cross Station and whilst these are close to the appeal
    site, they are clustered around the busy station hub, whereas the appeal site is in
    a different section of pavement which is free from such development.
15. In relation to Appeal A, I find that the proposal would result in unacceptable harm
    to the setting of the listed buildings and the character and appearance of the CA. I
    find the harm to be less than substantial in this instance, and at the lower end of
    the spectrum, but nevertheless of considerable importance and weight. Paragraph
    215 of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) states that where
    harm is identified to the significance of designated heritage assets and their
    setting, it should be weighed against the public benefits of the proposal.
16. The proposal is part of a rollout of street hubs which would help to deliver a
    comprehensive network of connectivity across the Council area. The proposed hub
    would provide ultrafast public and encrypted Wi-Fi, improved 4G and 5G coverage
    to local communities, be powered 100% by renewable carbon free energy, provide


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6010059 and 6010061


       free phone calls, have a direct 999 call button, display community and emergency
       awareness messaging and would include sensors to measure air quality noise and
       traffic. Whilst I acknowledge these benefits they occupy only a small part of the
       structure, with the dominant element being the advertisements. Moreover, I have
       not been provided with any evidence that these benefits could not be provided in a
       way which does not result in the harm I have identified. Therefore, taken together,
       the public benefits before me are not sufficient to outweigh the less than
       substantial harm to the CA and setting of the listed building.
17. I conclude that, on balance, appeal A would harm the character and appearance of
    the area and fail to preserve and enhance the significance of the Kings Cross /St
    Pancras Conservation Area and nearby listed buildings through development
    within their settings. Appeal A would fail to satisfy the requirements of the LBCAA,
    and paragraph 212 of the Framework and conflicts with Policies D1 and D2 of the
    Camden Local Plan 2017, which amongst other things seeks high-quality design
    that integrates well with surrounding streets and protects Camden’s historic
    environment.
18. With regard to Appeal B, for the above reasons, I conclude that the proposed
    advertisements would result in unacceptable harm to the visual amenity of the
    area.
Community safety (Appeal A)
19. Policy C5 of the Camden Local Plan seeks to make Camden a safer place through
    requiring developments to demonstrate that they incorporate design principles
    which contribute to community safety and security particularly in wards with
    relatively high levels of crime and promote the development of pedestrian friendly
    spaces.
20. The Metropolitan Police states that the proposals fall within the policing ward of
    Kings Cross, where offences of note include drugs, vehicle crime, robbery and
    burglary. Although it is not specific to the appeal site itself, evidence has been
    submitted that shows that the surrounding area experiences high levels of drug
    and gang activity. These activities include increased instances of loitering, as well
    as usage of the free calls facility to coordinate drug deals. The Council also states
    that it has experienced anti-social behaviour from existing BT link panels and
    residents have reported an increase in anti-social behaviour and crime as a direct
    result of the installation of the kiosks.
21. The proposed hub would be greater in scale than the existing structure, providing
    a larger physical barrier within the pavement which would provide the opportunity
    for concealment, increasing the risk of potential theft. It is also in proximity to a
    hotel where travellers will be leaving their accommodation and are likely to be
    looking at their phone for directions or information making them vulnerable to
    phone theft. Furthermore, it would introduce a range of features which the
    Metropolitan Police have identified have led to increased criminal activity in the
    area.
22. The appellant contends that hubs can contribute to community safety through
    improved lighting, passive surveillance and emergency call functioning. The
    appellant has also referred me to a case study in Camden where community
    messaging, included as part of the proposal has resulted in the reduction of crime
    in the borough, in particular item snatching. However no detailed figures have

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decisions 6010059 and 6010061


         been provided, and this is not reflected in the concerns raised by the Metropolitan
         police. The Anti-Social Behaviour Management Plan recognises that hubs have
         resulted in the misuse of the free call services for drug dealing and that BT have
         worked with the police in developing call restriction capabilities. However, I have
         no evidence that this has successfully addressed this issue. Moreover, the Anti-
         Social Behaviour Management Plan does not demonstrate how the site-specific
         concerns relating to risks of increased phone theft and drug related criminal
         activity would be addressed. Therefore, given the lack of any compelling evidence
         to the contrary, I cannot be satisfied that the proposed hub would not lead to
         increased criminal activity.
23. The appellant has also referred me to appeals4 for similar development elsewhere
    in urban areas, however I have not been provided with the full details of these
    cases and therefore cannot be certain that they have directly comparable site
    characteristics, levels and types of criminal activity as the appeal site. Therefore, in
    the absence of appropriate mitigation the proposal would fail to reduce and could
    perpetuate the conditions that support opportunism crime.
24. Based on the evidence before me I conclude that the proposal fails to provide an
    appropriate level of community safety at the locality. It is therefore contrary to
    Policy C5 of the LP which amongst other things seeks to ensure the safer streets
    and public areas and promote the development of pedestrian friendly spaces.
Highway Safety (Appeals A and B)
25. Policy T1 of the LP requires development to improve the pedestrian environment
    by supporting high-quality public realm improvement works. The Camden
    Streetscape Design Manual recommends a gap of at least 3m to provide safe
    pedestrian flow. The plans show that approximately 5.7m of the pavement width
    would remain clear between the proposed hub and the Standard hotel. Although
    much of this area occupies the space underneath the hotel canopy, I have no
    evidence that this space would be restricted to the public in the future.
26. The Council have referred to the guidance set out in Appendix B of the Pedestrian
    Comfort Guidance for London (Transport for London) which indicates that
    footways in high flow areas should be at least 5.3m wide with a minimum effective
    footway width of 3.3m. However, this relates to areas of high pedestrian flow of
    greater than 1,200 people per hour. I have not been provided with any evidence of
    footfall and therefore whilst I acknowledge it is a busy area I cannot be certain that
    it would meet the threshold for high flow of pedestrians. In any event the remaining
    width of pavement to be maintained would meet this minimum requirement.
    Although the width of the hub would hinder the pedestrian flow, flow is already
    inhibited due streetlamp. The pedestrian flow narrows further where it meets the
    existing retail kiosk. Therefore, I do not consider that the proposed hub would
    materially alter the pedestrian flow line to an unacceptable level when compared to
    the existing situation.
27. I conclude that the proposal would not result in unacceptable harm to pedestrian
    safety and does not conflict with Policies G1, A1, C6 and T1 of the LP which seek
    amongst other things to avoid, hindering pedestrian movement and unnecessary
    clutter and ensure footpaths and pavements are wide enough for the number of
    people expected to use them.
4
    APP/X5210/W/22/3297263, 6003065, 600306, 6002333, 3376613, 6002191, 3376537


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            5
Appeal Decisions 6010059 and 6010061


Other Matters
28. In light of my findings on the main issues, it is unnecessary to consider the need
    for a maintenance arrangement by way of a S106 legal agreement, as it would not
    be determinative.
Conclusion
29. In respect of Appeal A, the proposal would be detrimental to the character and
    appearance of the area, would harm the CA and the setting of nearby listed
    buildings and would not achieve an appropriate level of community safety at the
    locality. There are no considerations including the public benefits identified of
    sufficient weight to outweigh the conflict with the development plan.
30. I conclude that in respect of Appeal B that the proposed advertisements would be
    harmful to visual amenity.
31. For the reasons given above, I conclude that both appeals should be dismissed.



C Skelly
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
