Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 September 2026
by M Clowes BA (Hons) MCD PG CERT (Arch Con) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010213
Disley Meadow, Lower Greenshall Lane, Disley, Stockport SK12 2HH
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Mr Christian Romero against the decision of Cheshire East Council.
•      The application Ref is 26/0974/FUL.
•      The development proposed is the retention of a small number of agricultural structures and
       associated areas of hardstanding. The holding is used for keeping and managing alpacas, which
       require daily husbandry, feeding, and welfare monitoring. The works comprise a storage container,
       two small timber shelters, and limited stone hardstanding.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       The description of development in the banner heading above is taken from the
         Council’s decision notice as it more accurately and concisely describes the
         proposal. I have removed the references to retrospective and providing essential
         infrastructure as they are not acts of development.
3.       During my site visit, I observed that the 2 timber shelters, shipping container and
         hardstanding shown on the submitted plans had been completed. Although the
         post-occupation site plan also identifies a proposed polytunnel, no such structure
         was present on the site and insufficient information has been provided regarding
         its proposed appearance and scale. I also observed a bell tent, hot tub and shower
         cubicle behind timber screening within the north-eastern part of the site. These
         features are not shown on the submitted plans and are not included within the
         description of development. Accordingly, my assessment focuses on the 2 timber
         shelters, shipping container and hardstanding which form the substantive
         development considered by the Council.
4.       I am aware that there is an ongoing enforcement investigation with regard to the
         use of the land, but this is a matter for the parties. It is not for me as part of this
         S78 appeal to determine the lawful use of the land and I have confined my
         considerations to those that relate to the development before me1.
5.       In August 2026, the Government published a revised National Planning Policy
         Framework (the Framework). The parties were given the opportunity to comment
         on the revisions during the appeal process, and I have taken into account the
         comments made.

1
    S78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010213


Main Issues
6.     The main issues in this appeal are:
     • Whether the development would be inappropriate development within the Green
       Belt having regard to the Framework and development plan policies;
     • The effect of the development on the openness of the Green Belt;
     • The effect of the development on the character and appearance of the area; and
     • If the development is inappropriate, whether the harm by reason of
       inappropriateness, and any other harm, would be clearly outweighed by other
       considerations so as to amount to the very special circumstances required to
       justify the proposal.
Reasons
Whether Inappropriate Development
7.     The appellant indicates that the timber structures, shipping container and areas of
       gravelled hardstanding are used in connection with the rearing of alpacas on the
       land and thus, it amounts to agricultural development.
8.     Policy PG3 of the Cheshire East Local Plan Strategy (CELPS) gives priority to the
       protection of the Green Belt. It states that the construction of new buildings should
       be regarded as inappropriate development in the Green Belt, unless falling within
       one of a closed list of exceptions. Whilst Policy PG3 predates the Framework's
       provisions relating to grey belt land, it remains broadly aligned with the
       Framework's overarching aim of safeguarding the Green Belt. I therefore attach
       significant weight to the policy.
9.     Policy GB7(1)(a) of the Framework provides that development for agriculture,
       horticulture and forestry, is not inappropriate development in the Green Belt. It
       should not therefore be regarded as harmful to the Green Belt or be required to
       demonstrate very special circumstances.
10. The Framework does not define agriculture. However, section 336 of the Town
    and Country Planning Act 1990 provides that agriculture includes, amongst other
    things, the breeding and keeping of livestock and the use of land for grazing. I am
    satisfied that alpacas are capable of falling within the definition of livestock.
11. I acknowledge that agriculture is not confined to large-scale commercial farming
    operations and that newly established enterprises may have limited outputs during
    their early stages. Even if I were to accept that the holding is at an early stage of
    establishment, the appellant must nevertheless demonstrate that the appeal
    development is genuinely for the purposes of agriculture.
12. Reference is made to breeding, wool production and other activities associated
    with the keeping of 4 alpacas on the appeal site. However, no documentary
    evidence of a breeding programme, breeding records, wool production or the sale
    of agricultural products has been provided. References to hay production and
    horticultural uses appear largely to comprise future aspirations rather than
    established operations. However, I do not have a business plan showing how the
    suggested agricultural use is proposed to develop and when.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010213


13. The appellant suggests that compliance with the Council’s request to cease further
    works interrupted the establishment of the holding before agricultural activities
    could fully develop. I have taken this submission into account. However, even if I
    were to accept that the development of the holding was curtailed at an early stage,
    this would not overcome the absence of substantive evidence demonstrating that
    an agricultural enterprise has become established.
14. Conversely, there is evidence before me that the site is promoted for camping,
    weddings, kayak hire and alpaca experiences, including through on-site signage
    and online booking facilities. This activity is characterised as diversification.
    However, diversification supplements, rather than replaces, an established primary
    use. No evidence has been presented regarding the extent of those activities
    within the overall enterprise. I am therefore unable to conclude that the
    development is associated principally with agriculture, instead of other activities.
15. Even if I were to accept that the site forms part of an establishing agricultural
    holding, the appellant has not demonstrated why the extent of the hardstanding
    and the shipping container are reasonably necessary to support the very limited
    livestock activity taking place on the site. I acknowledge the appellant's contention
    that the hardstanding is required to address poor ground conditions and historic
    degradation of the land, as well as to facilitate access and livestock management.
    However, the evidence before me does not demonstrate why hardstanding of the
    extent undertaken, is reasonably required for those purposes.
16. Whilst I accept that enclosed storage may be beneficial for keeping feed dry,
    secure and protected from vermin, the evidence before me does not demonstrate
    why a container of the size proposed is reasonably required for that purpose.
    Whilst it is being used in part for the storage of hay, I also observed a number of
    non-agricultural items such as outdoor decorative lanterns and camping chairs.
    There was no evidence of machinery storage and, whilst the appellant refers to the
    need to store water equipment, I observed water containers located on trailers
    externally. Moreover, I saw that the structure referred to as a biosecurity shelter
    was a tiled shower enclosure. Cumulatively, these observations do not support the
    appellant's contention that the development is functionally required for an
    agricultural enterprise.
17. Having regard to the limited scale of livestock activity present on the site, the scale
    and extent of development has not been shown to be reasonably required for
    agricultural purposes. Consequently, I am unable to conclude that the
    development benefits from the exception in Policy GB7(1)(a).
18. I now turn to whether the development would fall within the exception at Policy
    GB7(1)(g). The Council accepts that the appeal site comprises grey belt land and
    that development of the site would not fundamentally undermine the purposes,
    taken together, of the remaining Green Belt across the area of the plan. Having
    regard to the site's contained position and the evidence before me, I have no
    reason to reach a different conclusion.
19. However, all of the criteria of Policy GB7(1)(g) must be met for development to be
    considered as not inappropriate. In relation to criterion (ii), there must be an
    evidenced unmet need for the type of development. The appellant has explained
    why the shelters, storage container and hardstanding are considered necessary
    for the keeping of alpacas on the site. However, demonstrating that development


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010213


       may be useful or beneficial to an intended activity is not the same as
       demonstrating an evidenced unmet need for that development. Beyond the
       appellant's own assertions, I have not been provided with any evidence of an
       unmet need. As all of the criteria of Policy GB7(1)(g) must be met, the failure to
       satisfy criterion (ii) means that the development does not fall within the
       Framework's grey belt exception.
20. As I have found that the development does not benefit from either the agricultural
    exception in Policy GB7(1)(a) or the grey belt exception in Policy GB7(1)(g), I
    conclude that it constitutes inappropriate development in the Green Belt. It would
    also conflict with Policy PG3 of the CELPS as set out above.
Openness
21. Policy GB6(2) of the Framework indicates that openness is an essential
    characteristic of the Green Belt, with a key objective to keep land permanently
    open. Openness has both a visual and spatial dimension.
22. The majority of the field remains free from built development. Nonetheless, the
    shipping container and timber shelters have a physical presence and the extensive
    areas of hardstanding, alter the open character of parts of the site with an
    engineered rather than pastoral appearance. Consequently, the development
    diminishes openness in both visual and spatial terms. The location of the container
    alongside one of the field boundaries does limit its prominence in public views but
    it does not screen it completely and the hardstanding is highly visible from Lower
    Greenshall Lane and the towpath.
23. I find that the development results in a harmful loss of Green Belt openness in both
    spatial and visual dimensions, albeit to a limited and localised extent. The
    development therefore conflicts with the Framework in this respect.
Character and Appearance
24. Comprising an open field, the appeal site contributes positively to the verdant and
    spacious rural character of the area. Whilst boundary vegetation provides a degree
    of enclosure, the site remains visible from a number of public vantage points,
    including sections of Lower Greenshall Lane, the adjacent canal towpath as well
    as passing train services.
25. The timber shelters are modest in scale and utilitarian in appearance. In isolation,
    they broadly reflect the type of structures commonly associated with the keeping of
    animals in the countryside and have a limited effect on the character and
    appearance of the area.
26. However, the shipping container and extensive areas of stone hardstanding are
    materially different in character. The container is finished in a dark green colour,
    which assists in reducing its visual prominence to some degree. Nevertheless, its
    rectangular form, corrugated metal construction, exposed silver fixings and
    commercial markings, leave it with a distinctly utilitarian and industrial appearance.
    Consequently, it remains readily identifiable as a shipping container and appears
    incongruous within the largely undeveloped pastoral setting.
27. Although some hardstanding may reasonably be expected in association with rural
    land management, the extent of the surfacing, together with the large size and
    colour of the stone chippings, gives rise to a visually prominent and conspicuously

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010213


       engineered appearance. Consequently, these features extend beyond what would
       typically be experienced within a field used for grazing livestock and appear
       incongruous within their rural surroundings.
28. The dispersal of the development across the site does not materially lessen its
    visual impact. Whilst the structures are separated from one another, their
    distribution across the field increases the area over which the development is
    experienced and extends the extent of its influence within the rural landscape.
29. The railway line to the north and the canal to the south are established items of
    transport infrastructure that serve a public function. Their presence does not justify
    the introduction of unrelated structures within the appeal site, nor do they alter my
    assessment of the effect of the development on the character and appearance of
    the area. The potential removability of the container does not materially diminish
    the visual harm arising from its presence and in any case, permission is sought for
    its permanent retention.
30. Taking all matters into account, I find that the development harms the character
    and appearance of the area. I attach moderate weight to that harm. The
    development conflicts with Policies SE1 and SD2 of the CELPS, Policy GEN1 of
    the Cheshire East Site Allocations and Development Policies Document (2022)
    and Policy BE2 of the Disley Neighbourhood Plan (2018). Together these policies
    seek to secure high quality development that responds positively to local character
    and distinctiveness. It also conflicts with the Framework's design objectives
    requiring development to be sympathetic to local character and to contribute
    positively to the quality of an area.
Other Considerations
31. No very special circumstances have been advanced beyond the matters already
    considered in relation to the exceptions within Policy GB7 of the Framework.
    Nevertheless, I have had regard to the appellant's evidence concerning ecological
    enhancements on the site, including the creation of a wildlife pond and the
    provision of bird, bat and pollinator habitats. These measures have the potential to
    provide biodiversity benefits and weigh in favour of the development. However, the
    appeal relates to the retention of the structures and hardstanding rather than the
    ecological enhancements themselves, and limited evidence has been provided
    regarding the extent, implementation and long-term management of a number of
    the measures described. Consequently, the ecological benefits attract limited
    weight.
32. The prospect of alternative proposals coming forward if the appeal is dismissed
    does not justify development that conflicts with Green Belt policy. Any future
    proposal would require separate assessment against the relevant provisions of the
    development plan and the Framework.
Green Belt Balance and Conclusion
33. I have found that the development constitutes inappropriate development in the
    Green Belt which is, by definition, harmful and should not be approved except in
    very special circumstances. In addition, I have found that the development causes
    further limited harm to the Green Belt by reason of its effect on openness. In
    accordance with Policy GB6 of the Framework, I attach substantial weight to the
    Green Belt harm arising from the inappropriate development and its effect on

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010213


       openness. Similarly, I have found that the development results in moderate harm
       to the character and appearance of the area, contrary to the Framework's
       objectives requiring development to be sympathetic to local character and to
       contribute positively to the quality of an area.
34. Having regard to the other considerations set out above and the limited weight that
    I attach to the ecological benefits, the harm would not clearly be outweighed. The
    very special circumstances necessary to justify the development do not exist. For
    these reasons, the appeal is dismissed.

M Clowes - INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
