Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 August 2026
by G Sylvester BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010908
43 Woodgrange Drive, Southend-on-Sea SS1 2SD
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Mark Oliver of Oliver Assets LLC against the decision of Southend-on-Sea
     City Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00378/FUL.
•    The development proposed is to change the use of a dwellinghouse C3 to an 8-bed Sui generis
     HMO, erection of a flat roof dormer, insertion of three front rooflights, removal of the chimney, and
     refuse and cycle storage on site.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted to change the use of a
       dwellinghouse C3 to an 8-bed Sui generis HMO, erection of a flat roof dormer,
       insertion of three front rooflights, removal of the chimney, and refuse and cycle
       storage on site at 43 Woodgrange Drive, Southend-on-Sea SS1 2SD in
       accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 26/00378/FUL, subject to the
       conditions in the attached schedule.
Procedural Matter
2.     The main parties were given an opportunity to comment on the relevance of the
       revised National Planning Policy Framework ("the Framework"), published on
       17 August 2026, to their respective cases in this appeal. I have taken account of
       the comments received in reaching my decision. All references to the Framework
       are to the revised version.
Main Issue
3.     The main issue in this appeal is whether the proposed development would provide
       adequate living conditions for future occupants with particular regard to the size of
       the ground floor kitchen/diner and its location relative to bedrooms.
Reasons
4.     Policy DM8 of the Southend on Sea Borough Council Development Management
       Document 2015, insofar as it relates to non self-contained accommodation,
       requires the provision of a communal area containing either a living room, dining
       room or kitchen diner of a suitable size and layout to enable all occupants to use it
       simultaneously in a comfortable manner.
5.     Policy DM8 does not set quantitative floor space requirements for communal
       areas. Whether a proposal accords with the Policy is a matter of judgement taking


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010908


        account of several site-specific factors including the size and configuration of the
        communal area relative to the number of occupants it would serve.
6.      During consideration of the planning application, it appears that the appellant
        submitted a revised ground floor plan showing an open plan kitchen/dining room.
        The floor plan is listed in the case officer’s report and shows the floor space of the
        kitchen area and dining area as covering 14 and 10.6 square metres respectively.
        The plan shows the layout of the kitchen and dining areas as including work-top
        fixtures and a freestanding kitchen dining table and chairs.
7.      There would be no living room within the proposed HMO. It therefore meets the
        definition of a ‘HMO with shared kitchen facilities but no shared living room’ in the
        Essex Approved Code of Practice for HMOs (“the Code of Practice”). Although not
        development plan policy, the Code of Practice is a material consideration of
        relevance to this main issue that sets minimum room size requirements for HMOs
        of different types.
8.      In accordance with the Code of Practice, the floor space in the proposed HMO’s
        open plan kitchen/dining room would exceed the minimum size requirements for
        rooms of those types within an 8-bed 8-person HMO with a shared kitchen but no
        shared living room. There is nothing in the Code of Practice that I have read that
        would mandate the physical subdivision of the open plan kitchen and dining areas
        in the proposed HMO, nor is there any justification to do so on the evidence that is
        before me.
9.      The level of detail shown on the floor plans before differentiates the appeal
        scheme from that at Honiton Road1, in which the determining Inspector found that
        the ‘indicative’ nature of the floor plans did not show that the floor space of the
        dining area would meet the Code of Practice’s size requirement.
10. In this instance the proposed kitchen/dining room, which would have a practical
    rectangular shape, is shown by the drawings to accommodate a breakfast bar
    seating facility and a freestanding dining table and chairs, with worktops along the
    kitchen walls and cooking equipment and sinks.
11. Compared to the occupants of a conventional family home, it is reasonable to
    suppose that occupants of the proposed HMO would be unlikely to have a familial
    connection, and would be expected to have their own day-to-day routines, and
    patterns of comings and goings. The probability of the proposed HMO’s future
    occupants using the kitchen/diner at the same time for food preparation, cooking,
    eating meals, and washing up afterwards is therefore less likely than in a
    conventional family home.
12. However, if it were to happen, the proposed HMO’s compliance with the room size
    requirements in the Code of Practice is a relevant indicator that the shared
    kitchen/diner would, relative to the number of occupants it would serve, be of an
    adequate size. Even if I were to depart from those quantitative room size
    requirements, I am satisfied on the evidence before me that the size and
    configuration of the kitchen/dining room, including its facilities, would be sufficient
    to allow future occupants to use it simultaneously and in comfort.



1
    Appeal Ref APP/D1590/W/25/3373130


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010908


13. If all occupants were to eat meals at the same time, the drawings show that the
    proposed kitchen/diner would provide sufficient seating and dining space to
    accommodate them. Accordingly, the proposed HMO’s occupants would not need
    to eat meals in their bedrooms and therefore it would not be necessary for the
    occupants of the upper floor rooms to carry their meals up the stairs.
14. In my experience, it is not uncommon for residential properties of the type
    proposed to have a kitchen/dining room at ground floor level and bedrooms on the
    upper floors. The proposed HMO would also provide bedrooms that exceed the
    minimum standards set out in the Code of Practice. Those standards require larger
    bedrooms where no separate living room is provided, reflecting the greater
    importance of bedrooms as spaces for occupants to relax and undertake activities
    such as studying or home working.
15. In my judgement, it would not be inconvenient for future occupants to travel
    between second-floor bedrooms and the ground-floor kitchen/dining room. The
    floor plans show that the route is relatively direct, with no unduly long corridors and
    with the stair flights positioned one above the other.
16. For these reasons, I find that the absence of a separate living room, together with
    the relationship between the bedrooms and the kitchen/dining room, would not
    result in unacceptable living conditions for future occupants of the proposed HMO.
    Nor does the guidance in note 4 to Table 1 of the Code of Practice, concerning the
    relationship between kitchen and dining space and the distance from letting rooms,
    alter my conclusion on this main issue or weigh decisively against the appeal.
17. Together, those factors distinguish the appeal scheme from the HMOs at
    Ambleside2 where the lack of adequate dining space, combined with the layout of
    the rooms and corridors, meant that several occupants were likely to carry meals
    some distance from the kitchens and eat in their rooms. I have therefore reached a
    different conclusion on the effects of the proposal before me. Accordingly, my
    decision in this appeal is not inconsistent with the decision in that case.
18. For the reasons given above, I conclude on this main issue that the proposed
    HMO would provide adequate living conditions for future occupants with particular
    regard to the size of the ground floor kitchen/diner and its location relative to
    bedrooms. It is consistent with the overarching objectives of the Code of Practice
    in ensuring a good standard of amenity for occupants of HMOs.
19. Therefore, the proposal would comply with Policies DM1, DM3 and DM8 of the
    Southend on Sea Borough Council Development Management Document 2015
    (“the DMD”), and Policies CP4 and KP2 of the Southend on Sea Borough Council
    Core Strategy 2007 (“the CS”) so far as they seek to ensure development of a
    high-quality design that does not adversely impact upon the living conditions of the
    intended occupants.
Other Matters
20. The fallback developments, including the extant planning permission3 to change
    the use of the dwellinghouse to a 7-bed, 7-person HMO, would result in fewer
    occupants using its communal facilities. However, as the proposed HMO would


2
    Appeal Ref 6002178
3
    Appeal Ref 6003558


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010908


       provide adequate living conditions for future occupants, it follows that those
       fallback developments have no bearing on my decision in this appeal.
21. For the purposes of Policy HO9 of the Framework, the Council considers the
    proposal to be a specialist form of accommodation. Even if I were to agree, for the
    reasons given above I find no conflict with this Policy insofar as it requires such
    accommodation to provide living conditions appropriate to the needs of its
    residents, including adequate living and storage space. Although not decision-
    making policy, I find no conflict with the objective in Framework Chapter 12 of
    ensuring developments provide safe and healthy living conditions for occupants.
Conditions
22. I have considered the Council’s suggested planning conditions against the tests in
    the Framework and the Planning Practice Guidance. Where necessary I have
    adjusted the wording to ensure compliance with those tests.
23. Conditions are necessary to ensure the development is carried out in accordance
    with the specified plans and to control occupancy levels to those found acceptable
    in this appeal.
24. A condition is necessary to meet the objectives of CS Policy KP2, which seeks to
    ensure that all development mitigates climate change through securing non-
    exhaustive resource efficiency measures and, where feasible, for development to
    meet no less than 10% of its energy needs through onsite renewables. I have
    altered the wording of the suggested condition to give the main parties the
    flexibility to agree an appropriate mix of feasible measures.
25. Conditions requiring the provision of the approved cycle storage and bin storage
    facilities are necessary to encourage cycling and to ensure satisfactory servicing of
    the development. However, to avoid uncertainty and in the interests of precision, I
    have omitted the flexibility to agree alternative facilities. Planning legislation
    provides for the variation of planning conditions in any event.
26. A condition is necessary, given the nature of the residential surroundings to the
    appeal property, to control the hours of construction and demolition work, and thus
    safeguard the living conditions of nearby residents.
27. The proposal is for a residential use of a mid-terrace property fronting a relatively
    busy road in a residential area not far from the seafront. There is nothing before
    me to suggest that the approved use would require any departure from
    conventional arrangements for the storage and collection of waste and recycling.
28. Securing details of the location of the collection point for waste/recycling, the
    person(s) who will present it at the collection point and how they will get it there,
    and the person(s) responsible for its collection, how they will do so, and how they
    will tidy up afterwards, has not been justified by the evidence before me.
    Accordingly, in this instance the suggested condition for a waste management plan
    has not been shown to be necessary or reasonable within the bounds of landuse
    planning.
29. As the drawings provide visual clarity about the approved use of materials, it would
    be unnecessary to duplicate them by imposing a condition relating to materials.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010908


Conclusion
30. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the proposed development is
    consistent with the development plan as a whole and there are no material
    considerations to indicate otherwise. Consequently, the appeal is allowed, and
    planning permission is granted, subject to the conditions in the schedule below.



G Sylvester
INSPECTOR




                                           Schedule of conditions

     1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
        date of this decision.

     2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
        following approved plans: 949-100; 949-101; 949-103; 949-104 Rev: 05, and
        Location Plan.

     3) The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until a scheme for the
        provision of energy efficiency, water efficiency and sustainability measures to
        be included in the development has been submitted to and agreed in writing by
        the local planning authority and the measures implemented as approved.
        Thereafter the measures in the approved scheme shall be maintained and
        retained for the lifetime of the development.

     4) Prior to the first occupation of the development hereby permitted the bin
        storage facility shown on the approved drawings shall be provided, kept
        available for bin storage and thereafter retained for the lifetime of the
        development.

     5) Prior to the first occupation of the development hereby permitted the cycle
        storage facility shown on the approved drawings shall be provided, kept
        available for cycle storage and thereafter retained for the lifetime of the
        development.

     6) Works in the construction of the development shall take place only between the
        hours of 08:00 to 18:00 on Monday to Friday, and 08:00 to 13:00 on Saturday,
        and shall not take place at any time on Sundays or on Bank or Public Holidays.

     7) Notwithstanding the provisions of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as
        amended) the use of the building as a House in Multiple Occupation hereby
        permitted shall not be adapted to form more than 8 bedrooms, nor shall it be
        occupied by more than 8 residents at any one time.

                                              End of schedule


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         5
