Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 26 August 2026
by B Pattison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010334
 23 Westhill Road, Hoddesdon, Hertfordshire EN11 9DD
 •      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
        to grant planning permission under section 73 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 for the
        development of land without complying with conditions subject to which a previous planning
        permission was granted.
 •      The appeal is made by Mr Joe D'Urso, Sole Concepts Limited against the decision of the Borough of
        Broxbourne Council.
 •      The application Ref is 07/25/1003/CONRV.
 •      The application sought planning permission for single storey rear extension without complying with a
        condition attached to planning permission 07/21/0297/HF dated 26 May 2021.
 •      The condition in dispute is No 2 which states that: The development hereby permitted shall be
        carried out and completed in accordance with the proposals contained in the application and drawing
        numbers 3323-21A2-01, 3323-21A2-02, 3323- 21A4-03 and 3323-21A4-04 submitted therewith.
 •      The reason given for the condition is: To ensure the development is carried out as permitted.

 Decision
 1.       The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for single storey rear
          extension without complying with a condition attached to planning permission
          07/21/0297/HF dated 26 May 2021 at 23 Westhill Road, Hoddesdon, Hertfordshire
          EN11 9DD in accordance with the terms of the application Ref
          07/25/1003/CONRV, subject to the following conditions:
          1) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
             drawing: 3323-21A2-02/B (revision dated Feb 26) and site location plan.
          2) The proposed development shall be finished externally in materials to match
             the existing building.
          3) The roof area of the extension hereby permitted shall not be used as a balcony,
             sitting-out or amenity area.
 Preliminary Matter
 2.       The National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was updated on 17
          August 2026. Although I have made my determination against the updated
          national policy context, the relevant changes to the Framework are not
          fundamental to matters which are determinative to the outcome of this appeal.
 Background and Main Issue
 3.       Planning permission1 was granted in 2021 for a single storey rear extension. The
          approved drawings indicated that the extension would have two rooflights

 1
     Council Ref: 07/21/0297/HF

 https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010334


       positioned within the flat roof. However, the extension has been constructed with a
       roof lantern which projects above the extension’s flat roof. The appellant seeks
       retrospective permission for the amended design of the extension which includes
       the roof lantern.
4.     Consequently, the main issue is the effect of the proposal on the living conditions
       of the neighbouring occupiers of 11 College Road, with particular reference to
       outlook, perception of privacy and enjoyment of private amenity space.
Reasons
5.     The appeal property is a large, detached house located on Westhill Road, close to
       the junction with College Road. The appeal site runs perpendicular to the adjoining
       properties on College Road, and as a result its side boundary runs along the rear
       gardens of 7, 9, 11 and 13 College Road. There is a significant local levels
       difference so that the neighbouring properties on College Road are several metres
       higher than the appeal property.
6.     11 College Road (No 11) is the closest dwelling to the appeal property’s extension.
       Owing to its elevated position relative to the appeal site, the occupiers of the
       property have expansive views across properties on Westhill Road, particularly
       from No 11’s upper floor windows. No 11’s rear garden slopes down towards the
       appeal site. At the end of the garden is a patio area which, at the time of my visit,
       contained items including a small storage shed, sun loungers, outdoor tables and
       chairs and external lighting, indicating that this part of the garden is regularly used
       by the occupiers of No 11.
7.     The rear boundary of No 11 is defined by a timber panel fence which is
       approximately 1.8 metres in height. Due to the significant difference in ground
       levels between the two properties, the flat roof of the rear extension is of a similar
       height to the boundary fence, although it can be seen projecting slightly above it.
       However, at this height marginally above the boundary treatment, the flat roof of
       the extension does not have a harmful effect on the outlook from the garden.
8.     The roof lantern projects above the extension’s roof and is set back from the
       shared boundary with No 11. As a result, its relationship with the neighbouring
       property is different from that of a standard window facing a neighbouring dwelling.
       The lantern is positioned above the internal ceiling, several metres above the floor
       level of the room it serves. Therefore, it does not provide an angle for views
       towards No 11. Even if views towards the rear windows of No 11 were possible
       through the roof lantern, the significant separation distance is such that I do not
       consider that it would result in a loss of privacy or create a harmful perception of
       overlooking.
9.     The roof lantern is not a particularly large structure, does not project significantly
       above the roof plane, and is set back from the shared boundary with No 11. These
       factors reduce its visual prominence, particularly during daylight hours. Owing to
       its position, the roof lantern is viewed from most parts of No 11's garden against
       the backdrop of the appeal property's first floor elevation and roof, as well as the
       surrounding built form along Westhill Road. This context further mitigates its visual
       impact.
10. Whilst the lantern has a greater visual impact than the rooflights originally
    proposed, I do not find that it is unduly oppressive or results in significant harm to

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010334


        the outlook enjoyed by the occupiers of No 11 wither in the garden of from . In
        reaching this conclusion, I have taken into account that the part of No 11's garden
        closest to the appeal site is used frequently and forms an active part of the garden.
11. The lantern is clearly visible from the rear facing windows and garden of No 11. I
    accept that the roof lantern is more visually prominent during the hours of
    darkness due to illumination from the room it serves, as illustrated in the
    photographs submitted by the neighbouring occupiers. However, any illumination
    would be limited to periods when the room is in use. During my site visit, I
    observed that the ceiling lights within the room are directed downwards, away from
    the lantern. Consequently, light emitted through the roof lantern would be largely
    ambient in nature. A degree of ambient light from windows, glazed features and
    outdoor garden lighting is to be expected within a residential area such as this.
    Taking these factors into account, I do not consider that the level of illumination
    arising from the lantern would be harmful to the living conditions of the occupiers
    of No. 11, nor do I find that it would be unduly prominent when viewed from the
    property’s garden or from within the dwelling.
12. My attention has been drawn to an appeal decision2 which considered the impact
    of lighting from windows on neighbouring occupiers living conditions. In that
    instance, it seems to me that the three windows which were the subject of the
    appeal, directly faced the shared boundary with a neighbouring property without
    any set back. This differs to the situation before me where the roof lantern is set
    back on the roof away from the boundary. For this reason, the circumstances
    within the appeals differ to the proposal before me. Notwithstanding this, each
    development must be considered on its individual merits, and I have reached my
    conclusion based on the individual merit of the appeal proposal.
13. For the above reasons, I conclude that the proposal would not harm the living
    conditions of neighbouring occupiers, with particular reference to outlook.
    Accordingly, I find no conflict with Policies DSC1, DSC2 and EQ1 of the
    Broxbourne Local Plan (2020). Amongst other aspects, these seek development
    that is of a high standard of design which does not unduly impact upon the wider
    setting, and avoids detrimental impacts on the amenities enjoyed by the occupiers
    of neighbouring properties.
Other Matters
14. I have carefully considered the concerns within representations from the
    neighbouring occupiers. It has been put to me that the roof lantern is larger than
    that which would be allowed under the dwelling’s permitted development rights.
    Whilst this may be the case, the proposal before me relates to development for
    which planning permission was sought, and I have assessed it as such.
15. It has been suggested that the roof of the extension is taller than that shown on the
    approved drawings. However, the Council has confirmed that the structure is
    within the tolerance levels of what was approved. I have been referred to an
    ornamental stone window within the extension’s side facing elevation, which the
    Council state is permitted development. Consequently, I have determined the
    appeal based on the drawings and other information before me which was
    submitted to and determined by the Council.

2
    PINS Ref: APP/W1905/W/16/3151000



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010334


Conditions
16. In allowing this appeal, a new planning permission is granted. The Planning
    Practice Guidance advises that such decisions should restate the conditions
    imposed on earlier permissions that continue to have effect. As the works have
    commenced on site, I have not imposed a time limit condition.
17. The approved plans condition is imposed to define the permission, however I have
    amended it to reflect the updated, approved plans. A condition relating to the
    proposed facing materials is necesarry in the interests of character and
    appearance. I have imposed the previous condition to prevent the use of the
    extension’s roof as a balcony or sitting out area. I acknowledge neighbouring
    residents concerns in relation to the use of the roof, and this condition would
    prevent its use for these purposes in the interests of the living conditions of
    neighbouring occupiers.
Conclusion
18. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be allowed and the
    planning permission varied as set out in the formal decision.

B Pattison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
