Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 10 August 2026
by J Glasin RIBA SCA
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010418
Land to the south of Darlifields, Heywood Road, Tibenham, Diss, NR16 1PB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr S Bartram against the decision of South Norfolk District Council.
•    The application Ref is 2025/3159.
•    The development proposed is outline application for 2 new residential dwellings.


Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The appeal relates to an outline application for 2 self build dwellings with all
       matters reserved except for access. A proposed site plan has been submitted
       showing a layout and the proposed access. I shall treat the layout as indicative of
       a possible plan.
3.     During the appeal process, the appellant submitted an Arboricultural Impact
       Assessment and Tree Protection Plan. The Council has confirmed that it finds the
       submitted information acceptable and is no longer seeking to defend its third
       reason for refusal. Having reviewed and assessed the evidence before me, I
       concur with the Council's position. I am satisfied that the concerns underlying the
       reason for refusal relating to the potential loss of trees have been adequately
       addressed and overcome.
4. During the appeal process, the appellant submitted a legal agreement to secure
   contributions towards GIRAMS, which would mitigate the recreational effects of the
   development on protected sites within The Broads, Valley Fens and East Coast
   Zones of Influence. Although the agreement has not been signed, the Council has
   confirmed that, if duly executed, it would find the obligation acceptable and would
   no longer seek to defend its fifth reason for refusal. On the basis of the evidence
   before me, I concur with that view. Consequently, I am satisfied that the substantive
   concerns underlying the fifth reason for refusal have been overcome.
5.     During the course of the appeal, a revised National Planning Policy Framework
       (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. Annex 1A makes clear that
       the appeal proposal should be assessed against this version of the Framework.
       The main parties were given the opportunity to comment on the implications of the
       revised Framework for the appeal. However, no comments were received from
       either party within the specified timeframe. Accordingly, references to the
       Framework in this decision relate to the August 2026 version.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010418


Main Issues
6.     The main issues are:
       • The effect of the development on the character and appearance of the area.
       • Whether the proposed development would be a sustainable form of
         development.
Reasons
Character and appearance
7.     The appeal site is located outside the development boundary in the countryside for
       planning policy purposes. The site is rural area, adjacent to a dwelling and
       agricultural buildings on two sides, and a field and road on the other. The area is
       characterised by remote rural character with sparsely located buildings, and there
       is a clear separation to built up settlements.
8.     The site is located along a narrow country road characterised by sporadically sited
       one and two-storey detached dwellings and outbuildings within the countryside.
9.     The development proposes a new access for the two dwellings with gardens and
       parking, and would potentially include associated outbuildings and residential
       paraphernalia. While there are mature trees and vegetation to two boundaries of
       the site, the development would be visible from the road and from the surrounding
       countryside, and therefore result in change to the character and appearance of the
       area.
10. The proposed shared access would serve the two new dwellings. The proposed
    layout varies from the typical access layouts in the area, which serve
    predominantly single dwellings. The benefit of a shared access is to avoid creating
    two new accesses. Since the access arrangement would serve only two dwellings,
    the effect on the character and appearance of the area would result in limited harm
    in this location.
11. While the development is modest in scale as two dwellings, it would present a
    change to the sparsely settled rural character of this area. Even with surrounding
    mature vegetation, the development would still be visible and amount to a gradual
    increase of built development in this area. It would therefore represent an
    unwarranted incursion of residential development into the rural landscape,
    resulting in harm to the character and appearance of the area.
12. A consideration is whether the proposal would constitute infill development and
    make efficient use of a small parcel of land adjoining existing built form. While the
    site has a dwelling and an agricultural building to two sides, the opposite side of the
    site is an open field and a road. Therefore, the site does not constitute an infill plot,
    but an extension of built development into the countryside. Policy S5(e) of the
    Framework refers to limited infilling within groups of houses outside developments.
    In the wider context, the development could be viewed as a part of a group of
    houses. As such, the development falls within the scope of S5(e) of the Framework,
    which supports limited infilling within groups of houses outside developments.
    Nevertheless, having regard to the harm identified above, I find that the adverse
    effects of the development would substantially outweigh the benefits of permitting


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010418


     development in this location. Accordingly, the proposal would not gain support from
     Policy S5(e).
13. The appellant has referred to a number of appeal decisions in support of the
    proposal. However, the circumstances of those cases differ from the appeal before
    me, including in respect of their location, scale and setting. As such, I do not find
    them to be directly comparable. Nevertheless, it is acknowledged that the
    proposed development would be smaller scale than the schemes considered in
    those appeals, would not be located in a National Landscape or designated local
    landscape, and that the detailed design would be determined at the reserved
    matters stage.
14. Notwithstanding these factors, the proposed dwellings would remain visible from
    the road and from the surrounding countryside. The introduction of new dwellings
    in this particular location would result in change to the intrinsic rural character of
    this area. The development would therefore cause unacceptable harm to the
    landscape character and appearance of the immediate surroundings and the wider
    landscape.
15. Taking all matters into account, the proposal would result in harm to the character
    and appearance of the area. This would result in conflict with policies 2 and 7.5 of
    the LP, and policies DM1.4 and DM3.8 of the SNLP, which seek to protect and
    enhance the environment, and ensure new development respects the form and
    character of the settlement and landscape.
Sustainable form of development
16. The appeal site is located outside a defined settlement boundary. The proposed
    development would comprise two new self-build dwellings, situated in the
    countryside. Consequently, the development would need to satisfy the specific
    policy requirements that permit development outside the settlement boundaries
    defined in the South Norfolk Local Plan Development Management Policies
    Document 2015 (SNLP).
17. The site is remote from settlements, and the nearest services and facilities to the
    site are in the town of Diss, which is approximately 5 miles away. Notwithstanding
    this, it is acknowledged that the Framework recognises that opportunities to
    maximise sustainable transport solutions will vary between urban and rural areas.
18. The development would be located along a narrow country road with no footpaths
    or street lighting, but grass verges to both sides. The absence of safe walking and
    cycling routes would not promote travelling by foot, cycling or wheeling.
    Consequently, future occupants of this development would be heavily reliant on
    the use of a private car to access services, facilities and public transport. The
    proposal would therefore not represent a sustainable form of development due to
    its limited accessibility by sustainable modes of transport and would conflict with
    the SNLP.
19. As the proposal comprises two new self-build dwellings, it falls to be assessed
    against Policy 7.5 of the Greater Norwich Local Plan 2024 (LP), which sets out the
    criteria for self-build development outside defined settlement boundaries. Given
    that the site is located within an area characterised by sparsely distributed housing
    in the countryside, rather than within or adjacent to a settlement without a defined
    settlement boundary, the proposal would not satisfy the relevant criteria of the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010418


       policy. Consequently, the two self-build dwellings would not accord with Policy 7.5
       of the LP and would undermine the established settlement boundary strategy. The
       proposal would result in conflict with the LP and SNLP.
20. Policy S3 of the Framework engages the presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. In this case, Policy S5 is of particular relevance. Whilst criterion (j)
    recognises the potential to address an identified unmet need, the development is
    not physically well related to an existing settlement and therefore fails to satisfy
    criterion j(i). Consequently, the proposal would conflict with Policy S5, and would
    conflict with the spatial strategy of the development plan, by introducing two new
    dwellings in an unsustainable countryside location.
21. For the reasons set out above, the proposal would not satisfy the relevant policy
    criteria for self-build development outside defined settlement boundaries, and
    would not represent a sustainable form of development in terms of accessibility to
    services, facilities and public transport by sustainable modes of transport. It would
    therefore conflict with Policy 2(1) and 7.5 of the LP, and Policy DM3.10 of the
    SNLP, which seeks to guide change and new development to sustainable
    solutions and locations, and reduce the need to travel and to maximise the use of
    sustainable forms of transport. Furthermore, the proposal would conflict with Policy
    S5 of the Framework.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
22. I have considered the various benefits put forward by the appellant. These include
    the contribution the proposal would make to housing delivery and the supply of
    self-build plots, as well as the associated social and economic benefits through
    supporting local employment during construction and future occupiers contributing
    to local shops, services and facilities. Whilst I afford these matters some weight in
    favour of the proposal, I find that these benefits are modest and would not
    outweigh the harm I have identified.
23. I have found above that, taken as a whole, the proposal would not represent a
    sustainable form of development and would harm the character and appearance of
    the area. The identified harm would place the proposal in conflict with the relevant
    development plan policies referred to above.
24. Policy S3 of the Framework directs that Policy S5 should be applied in this case,
    with criteria (e) and (j) being of particular relevance given the site's location outside
    a defined development boundary. For the reasons set out above, I find that the
    harm arising from the proposal would significantly and demonstrably outweigh its
    benefits when assessed against the Framework taken as a whole. Accordingly, the
    proposal would not constitute sustainable development for the purposes of the
    Framework.
25. Taking all matters into account, the proposal would conflict with the development
    plan when read as a whole. Material considerations, including the Framework, do
    not indicate that a decision should be taken other than in accordance with the
    development plan. I therefore conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

J Glasin
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
