    Appeal Decision
    Site visit made on 5 August 2026
    By G Powys Jones FRTPI
    an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
    Decision date: 25 August 2026


    Appeal Ref: 6010839
    71 Finchley Lane, Hendon, London, NW4 1BY
    •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as
        amended) against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    •   The appeal is made by Mr Mike Doukaki against the decision of the Council of the London
        Borough of Barnet.
    •   The application Ref is 26/0451/FUL
    •   The development proposed is the change of use of the property from a single family
        dwelling (Class C3) to a 5-bed House in Multiple Occupation (Class C4) for up to 6 people.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed, and planning permission is granted for the change of use of
   the property from a single family dwelling (Class C3) to a 5-bed House in Multiple
   Occupation (Class C4) for up to 6 people at 71 Finchley Lane, Hendon, London,
   NW4 1BY in accordance with the terms of application Ref 26/0451/FUL, subject to
   the conditions set out in the accompanying Schedule.
Preliminary matters
2. In the interests of clarity, the description of the development used in the Council’s
   decision letter has been adopted rather than that used in the original planning
   application form. The appellant has made an application for costs against the
   Council which is the subject of a separate decision.
Main Issues
3. These are the need for this form of development and whether this is an appropriate
   location for a House in Multiple Occupation (HMO).
Reasons
4. Policy HOUS04 of the Barnet Local Plan (LP) is directed specifically to Specialist
   Housing, including HMOs. Part of the policy provides that proposals for new HMOs
   will be supported subject to meeting the terms of 4 criteria. The Council
   acknowledges that criteria (a) and (c) of the policy are or can be met. It also
   acknowledges that the provisions of criterion (b) are partly met since the proposed
   change of use would not result in a harmful concentration of such uses.
5. To fully meet the terms of the policy the appellant should also demonstrate that the
   proposal meets an identified need1 and show that the site is easily accessible by

1
    Criterion (a)

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
    Appeal Decision 6010839


       public transport, cycling and walking2. The policy is prefaced by a reasoned
       justification or explanatory text (ET). The appellant correctly points out that the ET
       does not form part of the policy. The principal purposes of the ET are to illuminate
       the justification for the policy and to aid its interpretation.
6. The policy and its ET are silent on how a ‘identified need’ for HMOs should be
   shown, and the Council has not elaborated on this in its’ submissions. However, I
   note that the ET explains that HMOs are an important source of low cost, private
   sector housing for students, those on low incomes and those seeking temporary
   accommodation3. The ET also explains that the loss of existing HMOs will be
   resisted as it impacts upon the choice and affordability of housing in the Borough –
   and this is reflected in part of the wording of LP policy HOUS04. It appears to me,
   therefore, that if the Council, as a matter of policy, seeks to resist the loss of
   existing HMOs it is a strong indication of the value attributed to and need for this
   form of housing for those sectors of the local population unable to access higher
   cost or higher quality housing.
7. In the Council’s view the greatest need in the Borough is for family housing, and it
   therefore seeks to prioritise it and resist its loss. It maintains in the officer report
   ‘that the additional demand for HMO is akin to the need identified for 1-bed units in
   the Local Plan and can be delivered within Town Centre boundaries where they are
   most appropriate, and family housing is less so’. I am not convinced that self-
   contained 1-bed units in the market sector are directly comparable with HMO
   accommodation, and I have been given no indication that the Boroughs Strategic
   Housing Assessment4 assessed the need for HMO based accommodation.
8. The Council is not persuaded by the appellant’s submitted material from local
   estate agents, but to my mind it provides firm evidence from those with a direct
   knowledge and experience of the local housing market that the area suffers a
   shortage of HMO accommodation for which there is an identified demand. The
   Council say, in effect, that demand and need are not the same thing. However, the
   appellant’s evidence shows that HMO accommodation in the area is in very short
   supply for those sectors of the population seeking it. That indicates to me that
   there is an identified local shortage of this type of accommodation for those who
   seek or need it.
9. The applicant considers that the greatest demand for the accommodation would
   arise from students attending Middlesex University. This was the case when the
   property was previously used as an HMO until the use was discontinued following
   the pandemic. The Council says that it has no planning record of such use.
   However, the Article 4 direction withdrawing permitted development rights was not
   introduced until 2016, and the use was said to be subsisting before then. Whilst
   there may be no planning record, the property was licenced under the Housing Acts
   as an HMO at this time, as the appellant has demonstrated.
10. Whilst not cited in the body of LP policy HOUS04, the widely acknowledged method
    of measuring accessibility to public transport in the Capital City is the PTAL5 rating.
    The site, albeit within a short stone’s throw of two bus stops with a regular6 local

2
  Criterion (d)
3
  The London Plan at para 4.9.4 also provides that HMOs are an important part of the Capital’s housing offer
4
  Referred to in the ET to LP policy HOUS02
5
  Public Transport Access Level
6
  Every 7.5 minutes


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                    2
    Appeal Decision 6010839


       service, has a rating of 2, which is deemed poor. Middlesex University is approx.
       800m away, as are local convenience stores and other service facilities. Whilst the
       Council describes the University as being ‘some distance away’, implying a certain
       remoteness, I consider it and local facilities to be easily accessible by cycle and on
       foot, especially so to those of an age most likely to be housed in the HMO. I note
       that the Council would require 6 cycle spaces to be provided on the site, which
       should assist in encouraging cycling.
11. The Council considers that accommodation of this nature would be better located in
    local centres. However, taking account of the local student population, and the
    likelihood that they would use forms of movement other than public transport for
    their main daily journeys, I would not regard it as objectionable if the previous use
    of the property was resumed, notwithstanding its PTAL rating.
12. Additionally, I note from Table 7 in the ET to LP policy HOUS02 that 5-bedroomed
    houses, such as the appeal property, have the lowest rating of need, in either
    tenure. Its loss should not therefore be widely felt.
13. In conclusion, I find the proposal addresses a need for HMO accommodation in the
    locality in a generally accessible and appropriate location. It satisfies almost all the
    criteria of acceptability of that part of LP HOUS4 directed to HMOs. Whilst the
    failure to meet the PTAL requirement7 would represent a slight departure from
    adopted policy, I consider this is justified in the light of other material circumstances
    including the history of the property and local circumstances.
Conditions
14. The Council has suggested the imposition of several conditions in the event of the
    appeal succeeding. A condition requiring the development to be carried out in
    accordance with the approved plans shall be imposed in the interests of certainty.
    Other conditions suggested by the Council in respect of refuse and cycle storage,
    car parking and screening shall be imposed in a slightly modified form for the
    reasons provided by the Council.
15. The Council’s suggested condition relating to a limit on the number of occupants is
    considered unnecessary having regard to the formal description of the approved
    development, which itself places a limitation on numbers.
Other matters
16. Reference has been made to other development plan policies, but those to which I
    have referred are the most relevant having regard to the main issues identified at
    the outset. I also note the references to the now superseded National Planning
    Policy Framework. Nothing in the newly published edition of the Framework and no
    other matter raised is of such strength or significance as to outweigh those
    considerations leading me to my conclusions.

G Powys Jones
INSPECTOR




7
    That is, 3-6 as set out in the ET to LP policy HOUS04


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                    3
 Appeal Decision 6010839


SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS
     1)     The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
            date of this decision.
     2)     The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
            the following approved plans: Drawings No 71FL/PL/001; 002; 003; 004; 005
            & 006.
     3)     Before the development hereby permitted is first occupied cycle parking
            spaces and cycle storage facilities shall be provided in accordance with a
            scheme previously submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
            Planning Authority. The development shall thereafter be implemented in
            accordance with the approved details, and the spaces shall be permanently
            retained thereafter.
     4)     Before the development hereby permitted is first occupied, details for the
            storage of recycling containers and wheeled refuse bins or other refuse
            storage containers, together with a satisfactory point of collection, shall be
            submitted for the Local Planning Authority’s approval, to be obtained in
            writing. The development shall be implemented in full accordance with the
            approved details prior to the first occupation of the HMO and shall be
            retained as such thereafter.
     5)     Before the development hereby permitted is first occupied, details of privacy
            screens to be installed to the rear, for the ground floor rear bedroom, shall be
            submitted for the Local Planning Authority’s approval, to be obtained in
            writing. The privacy screens shall be installed in accordance with the details
            approved before the permitted use is commenced and the screen once
            installed shall be retained as such thereafter.
     6)     Before the development hereby permitted is first occupied parking spaces
            shall be provided and marked out within the site in accordance with a
            scheme previously submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
            Planning Authority and the approved parking area shall not thereafter be
            used for any purpose other than for the parking and manoeuvring of vehicles.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          4
