Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 10 August 2026
by S Harrington MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 15 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010836
19 St Michaels Road, Newquay, Cornwall TR7 1LL
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Brian Taggart, St Michael’s Gate Limited against the decision of Cornwall
     Council.
•    The application Ref is PA25/06466.
•    The development proposed is proposed demolition of commercial building and construction of mixed
     use building, consisting of new offices, 9 No residential units, parking, 2 new vehicular accesses.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
       (the Framework) was published. The main parties have had the opportunity to
       comment on the implications of this change, and no parties will have been
       prejudiced by my having regard to the latest version in reaching my decision.
Main Issues
3.     The main issues are:
           •    the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area;
           •    the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of the occupiers of 2
                Ennors Road and 21-23 St Michaels Road, with particular regard to outlook
                and daylight; and
           •    whether the proposal makes adequate provision for infrastructure,
                particularly education and open space.
Reasons
Character and appearance
4.     The appeal site is currently occupied by a two-storey building of traditional
       appearance and is located within Newquay Character Study Area 10a: Mount
       Wise Residential. Built form in the area is of mixed scale and architectural styles,
       featuring close set terraces of modest two storey dwellings, larger villas, apartment
       developments, larger commercial buildings and open areas formed by car parks.
5.     This range of built form is particularly noticeable when viewing the appeal site from
       both St Michaels Road, as well as Manor Road, which due to the notable sloping

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010836


       topography, is located below the appeal site. Nevertheless, the traditional
       architecture of the existing building at the appeal site, combined with its villa like
       scale, provides some consistency with roof scape as well as rhythm of street
       frontage when viewed from St Michaels Road, despite it being within a transition
       area between more varied frontages.
6.     However, the adjacent Ennors Road has a strong intimate character due to its
       close-set terraces of dwellings which feature a pleasing scale and rhythm which
       terminates at the appeal site. Whilst the existing appeal building does not form part
       of Ennors Road, it is nevertheless visible and gains visual prominence when
       travelling along Ennors Road.
7.     Although of a larger villa scale, the existing appeal building does not interrupt the
       natural rhythm or appear otherwise incongruous with the existing street scene of
       Ennors Road, with a natural stone boundary wall within the appeal site providing a
       characterful and fitting visual stop. On the whole, the appeal site positively
       contributes to the character of the area.
8.     The proposal would result in the demolition of the existing building, with the
       replacement being built over a split level due to the topography of the appeal site.
       Contrary to guidance provided within the Newquay Pattern Book (NPB), the
       proposal would be of significantly larger scale than that existing, and would be of
       contemporary architectural style, influenced by flat roofs, projecting fenestration
       and balcony areas.
9.     Nevertheless, given the evolving character of Newquay, the NPB’s age and that it
       doesn’t form part of the development plan, I afford the NPB modest weight.
       Moreover, even given the proposed roof height would notably exceed that of
       adjacent properties, the appearance of the proposal would not interrupt the rhythm
       of development or be out of character, given examples of flat roof architecture in
       the wider area, when viewed from St Michaels Road.
10. However, even though the appeal site does not fall within the established Ennors
    Road terrace pattern, when viewed from Ennors Road, the proposal would be
    clearly visible as an important focal point at the end of the terrace.
11. Here, due to its size and footprint, a significant expanse of the side elevation would
    be visible that protrudes beyond the building line of the adjacent Ennors Road
    dwellings. This elevation would present as bulky, dominant and incongruous,
    failing to sufficiently integrate with the immediate surroundings of, and significantly
    diminishing the character of Ennors Road. Due to the notable differing scale and
    massing of the proposal to the modest terrace, the harm would not be lessened
    despite proposed architectural detailing and facade articulation, and the split-level
    design of the proposal stepping with the topography.
12. The proposal would therefore fail to contribute to, but significantly erode the strong
    sense of place created by Ennors Road, and would fail to respect the character
    and successfully integrate into the urban grain, contrary to guidance provided
    within the Cornwall Design Guide 2021.
13. Moreover, Framework Policy DP3 sets key principles for well-designed places,
    requiring proposals to respond to their context so that they integrate with and
    enhance their surroundings. Whilst the proposal would optimise the site’s potential,
    the increase in scale and density of built form within the site does not create a

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010836


       visually attractive, distinctive or characterful development when viewed through
       and alongside the traditional appearance and modest built form of Ennors Terrace.
14. Whilst the proposal may result in a development that provides an innovative
    contemporary appearance which is appropriate in the context of St Michaels Road,
    this does not lessen the significant harm created by the proposal’s failure to
    respond to, and significant erosion of the character of Ennors Road.
15. Consequently, I conclude that the proposal would harm the character and
    appearance of the area contrary to Policy 12 of the Cornwall Local Plan Strategic
    Policies 2010-2030 (LP) and Policy D1 of the Newquay Neighbourhood Plan 2019-
    2030 (NP). These policies seek, amongst other things, to achieve high-quality
    design in all developments which responds to its townscape setting and local
    character.
Living conditions
16. A Daylight and Sunlight Report (DSR) submitted in support of the proposal was
    prepared in relation to an earlier scheme which related to built form which
    extended further across the site and was higher than the proposal before me.
    Therefore, whilst not directly relating to the appeal scheme, given that it
    considered a proposal with a larger building envelope, it’s conclusions
    nevertheless are of relevance and represent a conservative assessment.
17. The DSR was prepared in accordance with BRE guidance and concludes that the
    proposal would not result in unreasonable overshadowing to 1 or 2 Ennors Road,
    and given the substantive evidence before me, I see no reason to disagree.
    However, in relation to 21-23 St Michaels Road, this property has a number of
    rooms with windows facing, and taking light from the appeal site side of the
    property.
18. In this respect, the DSR (albeit in relation to a larger scheme) states that 3 rooms
    would not meet the guideline criteria in terms of daylight (taking into account all
    windows serving each room), and 2 rooms in terms of sunlight. In respect of
    daylight, the DSR states that the 3 effected rooms would retain access to direct
    daylight from the sky to approximately 50% of the room.
19. Daylight and sunlight into these rooms is currently already somewhat restricted by
    the existing building at the appeal site. Furthermore, 21-23 St Michaels Road was
    approved as holiday flats, and therefore is occupied for tourism purposes.
    Nevertheless, the Framework at Policy P3.2 does not differentiate between the
    type of occupiers, referring to ‘occupiers and users’ and I see no reason why even
    short-term occupiers should not be afforded adequate living conditions.
20. The reduction in daylight and sunlight to these rooms from the proximity and height
    of the proposal before me would result in a noticeable reduction in living conditions
    for occupiers over and above those currently enjoyed. Moreover, whilst
    overlooking impacts have been partially mitigated by the use of angled bay
    windows and could further be mitigated by planning conditions requiring privacy
    panels and external louvres, the proposal would still present itself as a dominant
    feature in close proximity to the neighbouring properties.
21. From my observation of the relationship of the appeal site and the neighbouring
    properties, this would be the case for both 2 Ennors Road and 21-23 Michaels


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010836


       Road. Even given the appeal site is located to the side of these properties, the
       close spatial relationship, height and massing of the proposal would feel
       oppressive to occupants of these properties and markedly reduce outlook resulting
       in significant noticeable harm to the occupier’s living conditions.
22. Consequently to conclude, the proposal would have a harmful effect on the living
    conditions of the occupiers of 2 Ennors Road with regard to outlook, and 21-23 St
    Michaels Road with regard to outlook and daylight. The proposal would therefore
    be contrary to LP Policy 12 which seeks to ensure, amongst other things, that
    development protects individuals and property from overshadowing and
    overbearing impacts.
Infrastructure
23. During the appeal process, a planning obligation by way of a unilateral undertaking
    under Section 106 of the Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) dated
    the 3rd June 2026 (UU) was submitted. The UU seeks to provide financial
    contributions towards education, Public Open Space (POS) and a sports
    contribution. Legal and policy tests require that planning obligations should only be
    sought where they are: a) necessary to make the development acceptable in
    planning terms; b) directly related to the development; and c) fairly and reasonably
    related in scale and kind to the development.
24. In terms of education, the Education Infrastructure Needs Assessment provides a
    methodology and sufficient evidence that mitigation requirement in the form of a
    financial contribution is necessary due to the school infrastructure capacity being
    insufficient to support the occupants of the units proposed. The UU directs the
    contribution to the provision of additional secondary school places at the Newquay
    Shared Area.
25. Given the scale of the proposal, and that there is no on-site POS provision, the
    Council’s Principal Public Space Officer (OPEN Space) has outlined the need for a
    financial contribution to off site POS and playing pitches in line with the Council's
    adopted Playing Pitch Strategy and Framework. The UU directs contributions
    towards the Mount Wise Gardens and/or improvement of POS within the Newquay
    Parish, and the improvement of strategic outdoor sports provision within the
    relevant Community Partnership Area.
26. Given the substantive evidence before me, I find that the above obligations are
    necessary, directly related to the development and reasonably related in scale and
    kind.
27. Consequently, the proposal makes adequate provision for infrastructure,
    particularly education and open space. The proposal therefore accords with LP
    policies 1, 16 and 28 which amongst other things, seeks to improve the health and
    wellbeing of Cornwall’s communities and seeks developer contributions to ensure
    that the necessary physical, social, economic and green infrastructure is in place
    to deliver development.
Other Matters and Planning Balance
28. The proposal would result in harm to the character and appearance of the area,
    and neighbouring occupiers living conditions. It would therefore conflict with the
    development plan when read as a whole. From the evidence before me, the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010836


       Council is unable to demonstrate a five-year supply of deliverable housing sites
       and I have no evidence before me to suggest that this position is likely to improve
       in the short-term.
29. The appeal site is within the settlement of Newquay. In such locations, Policy S4 of
    the Framework states that proposals should be approved unless the benefits of
    doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
30. The proposal would achieve an increase in housing supply which would be energy
    efficient on previously developed land, in an area with an acknowledged lack of
    housing land supply. Despite the modest scale of residential units proposed, this
    would result in a substantial benefit as outlined within Framework Policy HO7.
31. Additionally, the proposal would provide short term economic benefits from the
    construction of the proposal and economic and social benefits will flow from the
    future occupation of the dwellings and associated support of local services and
    facilities. Further economic benefits will result from additional employment office
    space despite that the existing building is already utilised office space and the
    modest scale and scope of the proposal. Nevertheless, substantial weight is
    afforded to supporting business growth in accordance with Framework Policy
    E2.1(a).
32. The introduction of additional residential units and employment space would also
    aid the vitality and viability of Newquay town centre in accordance with Framework
    Policy TC2.1(a) to which substantial weight is afforded. Finally further benefits
    would be achieved through a net gain in biodiversity, which given the scale of the
    site, I afford modest weight.
33. The proposal would result in redevelopment and additional development within an
    existing plot where Policy L2.1(d) of the Framework is relevant. In this instance, I
    have found that the proposal would be inconsistent with the street scene when
    viewed from Ennor’s Road, as well as resulting in harm to living conditions of
    neighbouring occupiers contrary to the requirements of Framework Policy L2.1.d i
    and ii. As such, given the identified harm, whilst the proposal would redevelop and
    increase the scale and density within the site, I do not find that the proposal would
    result in an efficient use of land.
34. Moreover, due to the proposal not fully integrating and enhancing its surroundings
    as identified in the first main issue, the proposal would conflict with Framework
    Policy DP3, with no clear overriding justification.
35. Due to these conflicts, the proposal fails to comply with a national decision-making
    policy which state that development proposals should be refused in specific
    circumstances. Moreover, in view of the particular substantial adverse effects
    identified, I find in this instance the benefits of the proposal would be substantially
    outweighed by the adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in the Framework.
36. The appeal site is within the zone of influence of the Penhale Dunes Special Area
    of Conservation (SAC). The Cornwall Council European Sites Mitigation -
    Supplementary Planning Document – July 2021 (SPD) explains that the Penhale
    Dunes SAC is important and has qualifying features because of the specified
    range of rare plant species amongst the shifting sand dunes.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010836


37. In such an area, new residential development would lead to increased levels of
    recreational activity. This would be likely to have a significant effect on the
    designated features of the site either on its own or cumulatively with other similar
    development, without avoidance measures.
38. Notwithstanding, Regulation 63(1) of the Conservation of Habitats and Species
    Regulations 2017 indicates the requirement for an Appropriate Assessment is only
    necessary where the competent authority is minded to give consent for the
    proposal.
39. Given my conclusions, it is not necessary for me to consider this matter any further
    as the proposal would not take place and would not affect the habitat site.
    Moreover, even if I were to find that suitable mitigation was required and had been
    appropriately secured, a lack of harm would only be a neutral factor.
Conclusion
40. For the reasons given above, I find that the proposal would conflict with the
    development plan, read as a whole. No material considerations, individually or
    cumulatively, indicate that a decision should be taken otherwise than in
    accordance with it. Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.




S Harrington
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
