Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by D Harris-Watkins BA(Hons) PgD MRICS
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010826
Land at Main Street, Great Brington, Northampton NN7 4JA
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Elias Bell against the decision of West Northamptonshire Council.
•    The application Ref is 2025/4825/FULL.
•    The development proposed is new dwelling.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     Prior to submission of the application the appellant sought pre-application advice
       from the Council. The appellant has stated that elements of the Council’s
       reasoning for refusing the application were not raised within the pre-application
       advice given. I have not been provided with the pre-application advice given by the
       Council; however, I note that it was for a different design than that which is before
       me now. In any event the Council’s formal decision was to refuse the application. I
       have determined the appeal on its own merits based on the evidence before me.
3.     On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published. The main parties have been invited to comment on the
       relevance of the Framework to the appeal, I am therefore satisfied they have not
       been prejudiced. Consideration has been given to those comments received in
       reaching the appeal decision.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are:
         •     whether the site is a suitable location for the proposed development, with
               regard to the relevant development plan policies; and,
         •     the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of
               the area.
Reasons
Location of Development
5.     The Council’s spatial strategy for rural areas is based upon the rural settlement
       hierarchy outlined in policy R1 of the West Northamptonshire Joint Core Strategy
       Local Plan (Part 1) 2014 (the LP), aimed at securing development in the most

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010826


       sustainable locations. Great Brington falls within ‘Other Villages’ which is the third
       tier of the hierarchy. Criterion A of Policy RA3 of the Settlements and Countryside
       Local Plan (Part 2) For Daventry District 2020 (the LP2), states that development
       at Other Villages will be located within the confines of the village.
6.     The appeal site is noted as a ‘valued open green space’ within the Bringtons and
       Nobottle Village Design Statement 2018 (the VDS). Agricultural fields and the
       wider open countryside are located to the west of the appeal site. Kimbell’s Field
       located to the north of the site is an open grass field, used as a community open
       space. Winterell’s (the neighbouring dwelling to the east) is set away from its side
       boundary with the appeal site. Therefore, despite residential development being
       located to the south and east, the site is predominantly surrounded by open space
       and not built form. Due to these factors and the undeveloped nature of the appeal
       site means that it visually appears as part of the countryside.
7.     Furthermore, Table 3 of the LP2 outlines what is considered within the village
       confines. Though the site’s boundaries are contiguous with the neighbouring
       dwellings and Kimbell’s Field, it does not comprise buildings or curtilages that are
       visually separate from the open countryside that are clearly part of a coherent
       network of buildings that form the village. The appeal site also does not have
       planning permission for housing or a community use. Table 3 of the LP2 also
       states that gardens or areas of open space which relate to the open countryside
       taking into account the character and appearance of the garden and the
       surrounding area are considered outside the confines of the village. Therefore, in
       consideration of Table 3 of the LP2 the appeal site is not located within the
       confines of the village.
8.     Development outside the confines is strictly controlled in accordance with criterion
       B of policy RA3 of the LP2, policy RA6 of the LP2, policy R1 of the LP, and policy
       HS24 from the VDS. None of the types of development within these policies which
       could be acceptable within the open countryside apply to the current proposal.
       Consequently, the proposed development would be harmful in that the spatial
       strategy for housing would be undermined.
9.     For the reasons above, the site is not in a suitable location for the proposed
       development with regard to the relevant development plan policies. The proposal
       conflicts with the aims of RA3 and RA6 of the LP2, as well as R1 of the LP, which
       seek to control the location of development and protect the countryside.
Character and Appearance
10. The appeal site comprises an undeveloped parcel of land on the edge of the
    village with a wooden stable. The nearest residential properties are two stories and
    are set back from the road and have a variance of materials and style of
    architectural design. The siting of the dwellings and the undeveloped surrounding
    rural landscape create a verdant and spacious feel to the entrance to the village.
11. The appeal site is bordered by a combination of mature hedgerows, trees and
    fencing. Though the site’s southern and western boundaries comprise mature
    vegetation providing a degree of screening from Main Street and the Public Right
    of Way within the neighbouring agricultural field, this would be reduced in the
    winter months when the deciduous vegetation are not in leaf. The northern
    boundary comprises a few spaced out trees and fencing, resulting in the site being
    prominently visible from Kimbell’s Field. The site’s undeveloped nature and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010826


       surrounding mature vegetation contribute positively to the verdant approach to the
       village and the character and appearance of the area.
12. The proposal is to construct a large two storey dwelling on the appeal site, which
    has a broadly L shaped layout. The building would be located close to the
    boundary with Main Street. Due to the siting, massing and footprint of the
    development, this would result in the building being highly prominent from Main
    Street and create a sense of enclosure to the streetscape. This would not reflect
    the defined urban grain of development in the immediate area and would
    adversely affect the character of the approach into the village.
13. Though the appeal site is not within any views identified within the Great Brington
    Conservation Area Appraisal and Management Plan 2021, the site is within a
    significant view noted within the VDS. Due to the width and massing of the building
    it would also be highly visible from the Kimbell’s Field and the significant view. The
    recommended tree works on the northern boundary would increase the
    prominence of the development from this direction, exacerbating the harm caused
    by the proposal. Though the appellant has stated they would carry out additional
    tree planting on this boundary, due to the massing and siting of the building, I am
    not satisfied that conditions in relating to a landscaping scheme would sufficiently
    mitigate the harm identified.
14. While the proposed building shares a similar footprint, materials, and architectural
    style with other properties in the village, these factors do not sufficiently mitigate
    the harm caused by its massing and physical placement on the appeal site. The
    proposal would result in the introduction of a significant amount of built form in a
    prominent location that forms a key part of the verdant entrance to the village, the
    domestication and loss of openness of the site would harmfully reduce the sites
    contribution to the character and appearance of the area.
15. For the reasons above, the proposed development would have a significant
    harmful effect on the character and appearance of the area. The proposal would
    conflict with policy RA3 and ENV10 of the LP2 as well as R1 of the LP, which seek
    amongst other things to protect the form, character and setting of the village, that
    developments scale, density, massing, height and layout combine to ensure
    development blends well with its surroundings.
Other Considerations
16. Local Planning Authorities are required under the Self-Build and Custom
    Housebuilding Act 2015 (as amended) to give permission for enough serviced
    plots of land to meet the demand for self-build and custom housebuilding in the
    authority’s area in respect of each based period. However, I have not been
    provided with any details in relation to the Council’s demand and supply to
    determine if the proposal was constructed as a self-build how much of a benefit
    this would comprise. I have also not been provided with any means of securing the
    property as a self-build. Therefore, this carries little weight.
17. The Council have not raised concerns in relation to highway safety, and the
    proposed development would be within walking distance of several services and
    facilities, in accordance with policy S10 of the LP.
18. The Council have also not identified any harm in relation to living conditions, and I
    see no reason to consider otherwise. Though this would accord with criterion A.viii

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010826


         of policy ENV10 of the LP2, I have found conflict with this policy in respect of
         character and appearance. I have also not been directed to how the proposal
         would accord with policy S10 of the LP in relation to living conditions. Furthermore,
         the absence of harm in this matter is a neutral factor in the determination of the
         appeal.
19. The Council has an Emerging Local Plan1, however due to its stage of progress it
    may be subject to change, therefore it only attracts limited weight. Policy R3 of the
    Emerging Local Plan provides support for development located immediately
    adjoining the confines of Other Villages, including Great Brington. Nevertheless,
    the design criteria forming criterion C of policy R3 of the Emerging Local Plan
    remains largely consistent with that of policy RA3 of the LP, to which I have
    identified conflict with. It follows that I also find that the proposed development
    would also conflict with Policy R3 of the Emerging Local Plan in this regard.
20. My attention has been drawn to a number of applications2, some of which were
    appealed, within the area. I have however not been provided with sufficient details,
    including the context of these sites and the circumstances at the time of their
    approval to assess whether these other developments are directly comparable to
    that before me now. For the avoidance of doubt, I have determined the appeal on
    its own merits.
Planning Balance
21. The proposal would harm the character and appearance of the area and would
    undermine the Council’s spatial strategy. The conflict I have identified with policies
    ENV10, RA3 and RA6 of the LP2, as well as R1 of the LP, results in conflict with
    the development plan read as a whole.
22. Policy S3 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. For development inside and outside settlements, this means that
    policy S4 and S5 of the Framework should be applied respectively. For the
    reasons set out above, the appeal site is not within the settlement and therefore
    policy S4 does not apply.
23. Policy S5 of the Framework states certain forms of development should be
    approved outside of settlements unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects. This includes under criterion (j)
    where the development would address an evidenced unmet need, such as where
    the local planning authority cannot demonstrate a five-year supply of deliverable
    housing sites. It is agreed that the Council does not have a 5-year housing land
    supply. The site is physically well related to Great Brington, and I have not been
    provided with any evidence to suggest local infrastructure cannot accommodate
    one further dwelling, meeting the criteria (j)(i) and (j)(ii).
24. The contribution of one additional dwelling to the mix and supply of housing, even
    if secured for self-build, would be limited. The development would also generate
    economic benefits through the construction phase of the development and through
    future occupiers’ use of services and facilities within the area, though due to the
    scale of the development these would be modest. There would also be limited


1
    West Northamptonshire Local Plan - 2043
2
    WND/2022/0930, 2025/5267/S73, DA/2015/0534, DA/2018/0282, DA/2020/0735


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            4
Appeal Decision 6010826


       biodiversity benefits through the addition of boxes and housing for various species,
       and the building would provide passive surveillance of Kimbell’s field.
25. The Framework outlines circumstances in which the benefits of approving
    development proposals are likely to be substantially outweighed by the adverse
    effects. This includes situations where the development proposal would fail to
    comply with one of the national decision-making policies which state that
    development proposals should be refused in specific circumstances.
26. Policy DP3 of the Framework states development proposals should be refused if,
    without clear justification, they do not respond to their context, including the
    character and features of the site and their setting, so that they integrate with and
    enhance their surroundings; such as through the arrangement of development
    plots and buildings. As set out above, I have found significant harm to the
    character and appearance of the area, and I give this harm significant weight.
    Even taken together, I find the benefits of approving the development proposal
    would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects. As such, the
    presumption in favour of sustainable development does not apply.
Conclusion
27. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    Therefore, the appeal should be dismissed.

D Harris-Watkins
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
