Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 24 August 2026
by A Wright BSc (Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 11 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010023
111 to 113 Cauldwell Hall Road, Ipswich IP4 5BN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Danny Stephan of Sterling State Lettings Ltd against the decision of Ipswich
     Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is IP/26/00124/FUL.
•    The development proposed is the change of use from commercial use (Class E) to a mixed-use
     development comprising five dwelling flats (Class C3) and commercial use (Class E) including
     external alterations and removal of a pitched roof at first floor level.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The appellant submitted a proposed highway improvement plan with the appeal
       documents. The Procedural Guide for Planning Appeals states that the appeal
       process should not be used to evolve a scheme, and it is important that what is
       considered by the Inspector at appeal is essentially the same as that considered
       by the Council and by interested parties at the application stage. My consideration
       of this plan could cause procedural unfairness or prejudice to interested parties.
       Therefore, my decision is based only on the originally submitted drawings.
3.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
       August 2026. As this could affect the issues and matters in this case, the Council
       and the appellant were invited to make further comments. My decision reflects the
       latest version of the Framework, and the responses received on it.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue in this appeal is the effect of the proposed development on
       highway safety, with particular regard to parking and access arrangements.
Reasons
5.     The appeal site comprises a two-storey commercial building with a supermarket
       occupying part of the ground floor on the east side of the busy Cauldwell Hall
       Road. There is a wide section of footway outside the building which narrows
       further south along the road. Cauldwell Hall Road and other main roads in the area
       have parking restrictions, with double and single yellow lines, though there is
       unrestricted parking along nearby residential streets. The single yellow lines
       restrict parking from 8am to 6pm on Mondays to Saturdays.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010023


6.     At my daytime site visit, although only a snapshot in time, there was significant on-
       street parking on nearby roads with only a few spaces available. Due to the
       narrowness of some streets and few alternative available spaces, some cars were
       parked partly on footways resulting in only limited space for pedestrians,
       particularly on Springland Close.
7.     Further, I observed several vehicles stopping on and partly blocking the footway
       outside the appeal site whilst their occupants used the supermarket or delivered
       items to nearby houses, causing an obstruction to pedestrians using this part of
       the road. The proposal includes five two-bedroom flats on the first floor with the
       shop and some commercial space retained on the ground floor.
8.     Policy DM22 of the Council’s Core Strategy and Policies Development Plan
       Document Review 2022 (DPD) requires all development to have regard to the
       adopted car parking guidance. The Suffolk Guidance for Parking 2023 (the
       guidance) requires the provision of two parking spaces for each two-bedroom flat,
       with 0.25 visitor car parking spaces per dwelling. Therefore, according to the
       guidance, 11 car parking spaces should be provided, though a reduced figure may
       be considered with robust and agreed highway mitigation.
9.     Section 5 of the guidance lists the criteria where a relaxation of the parking
       standards may be acceptable in urban areas. This includes where on-street
       parking is generally restricted by legal orders, but that is not wholly the case in this
       instance given the unrestricted parking in residential streets close by.
10. Census data from 2021 indicates that 76.9% of households within the area own
    one car or more. Using this data, the appellant asserts that a worst-case scenario
    where 76.9% of the proposed flats have occupants who own two cars or vans
    would result in an additional eight vehicles parked on the surrounding highway.
11. The appellant carried out a parking stress survey at 00:30 on two weekdays in
    October 2025. This was in accordance with the Lambeth methodology which aims
    to capture maximum levels of residential parking demand when most residents’
    vehicles are reasonably expected to be parked up. Even discounting parking
    spaces on Spring Road and Cauldwell Hall Road, the survey found that there were
    12-17 available parking spaces on street at these times.
12. Nonetheless, the surveys were undertaken when significantly more on-street
    parking is available as there are no parking restrictions on single yellow lines at
    those times. From evidence submitted by interested parties and from my
    observations on site, there appears to be some parking stress in nearby residential
    roads at other times when the single yellow line restrictions apply.
13. There would be adequate space to store cycles and future residents would have
    access to local shops, services and buses into the town centre, with a train station
    just over 800m away. There is no opportunity within the site to provide off-street
    parking, so none is proposed. Whilst there are references to the scheme being ‘car
    free’, the Transport Statement confirms that there is no mechanism available to
    prevent future residents from owning private cars and parking on the streets close
    to the site.
14. The Framework Travel Plan includes measures to reduce the potential for private
    car ownership by future residents of the scheme, such as a travel information
    pack, bus vouchers and one free bike service per flat. However, as future

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010023


         residents of the new flats may well own vehicles, the proposed scheme would lead
         to an increase in demand for on-street parking spaces on nearby roads.
15. In the absence of any assessment of available spaces when the single yellow line
    parking restrictions apply, I cannot be certain that additional vehicles generated by
    the proposed development could be accommodated. This could lead to an
    increase in inappropriate parking, including further parking on footways on nearby
    residential roads and outside the site. This would exacerbate obstructions to
    pedestrians, particularly those with young children, pushchairs and disabilities,
    harming highway and pedestrian safety.
16. There would be four accesses at street level serving the proposed flats and
    commercial premises. The existing railings on the pavement outside the
    supermarket would avoid the access to flats 4 and 5 being blocked by parked
    vehicles. Nevertheless, indiscriminate parking on the footway outside the other
    accesses would restrict safe and suitable access to the other parts of the proposed
    development, including the communal bin and bike stores and the remaining three
    flats. It would also prevent the efficient delivery of goods and access by service,
    refuse collection and emergency vehicles.
17. The Transport Statement indicates that the appellant would consider a
    proportionate contribution towards a highways scheme designed and delivered by
    Suffolk County Council, the highways authority (HA), to deter informal parking at
    this location. The appellant also suggests a condition requiring a detailed scheme
    for off-site highway improvement works, including physical measures to deter
    indiscriminate parking along the site frontage. However, it is unclear how such a
    scheme would affect pedestrian movement, and there is no substantive evidence
    that the HA would support it.
18. I note that the HA state that some developments in highly sustainable urban areas
    can be considered car free, and it does not object to the proposal based on the
    site’s access to services and public transport and the parking survey results. It
    suggests several conditions, including one to ensure the provision and retention of
    the proposed secure cycle storage. Nonetheless, in this case there is no means to
    achieve car free development and insufficient evidence that the proposal would not
    result in further inappropriate parking.
19. Consequently, I conclude that the proposed development would harm highway
    safety, with particular regard to parking and access arrangements. This would be
    contrary to Policies DM21 and DM22 of the DPD. Amongst other things, these set
    out parking requirements and require development to not unacceptably impact on
    highway safety. They also seek to ensure safe and suitable access for all users,
    including people with disabilities and reduced mobility, and the efficient delivery of
    goods and access by service, refuse collection and emergency vehicles.
Other Matters
20. The proposal is for fewer flats than a previously refused scheme1. There is also
    reference to pre-application correspondence between the appellant and the
    Council on the potential number of flats which could be accommodated on the site.
    However, I must determine the appeal scheme on its merits based on the plans
    and information before me.

1
    Planning application ref: IP/25/00776/FUL


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
Appeal Decision 6010023


21. The Council did not find harm or development plan conflict in relation to several
    other matters, including character and appearance, living conditions, space
    provision, flood risk, cycle and refuse storage, biodiversity, noise, housing mix,
    impacts on heritage assets and trip generation. Nevertheless, even if I were to
    agree with the Council on these points, the absence of harm would be a neutral
    matter which would not carry weight in favour of the proposed scheme.
22. The proposal would be likely to have a significant effect, either alone or in
    combination on one or more of the European designated sites scoped into the
    Suffolk Coast Recreational Disturbance Avoidance and Mitigation Strategy
    (RAMS) due to its location within the 13km zone of influence of the protected sites.
    However, notwithstanding that the appellant has made the necessary RAMS
    contribution, given my conclusion below there is no need to consider the
    implications of the proposal on the protected sites because the scheme is
    unacceptable for other reasons.
Planning Balance
23. Policy S4 of the Framework states that proposals within settlements should be
    approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any
    adverse effects, when assessed against its national decision-making policies. The
    Framework supports the delivery of a substantial increase in the supply of homes,
    and Policies HO7, L2 and TC2 outline various benefits which should be given
    substantial weight in decision-making. These include providing homes which will
    contribute towards meeting evidenced accommodation needs, making better use
    of underutilised buildings, and supporting the vitality and viability of centres.
24. The Council accepts that it is currently unable to demonstrate a five year supply of
    housing referred to in the Framework. The appeal scheme would contribute five
    dwellings towards the supply of housing within the settlement of Ipswich, making
    more efficient use of underutilised floorspace in an urban location with good
    access to services and public transport. It would retain some commercial space,
    and provide some economic benefits, including supporting the vitality and viability
    of the local centre in which it is located. I accord these benefits substantial weight.
25. In contrast, the proposed scheme would harm highway safety, with particular
    regard to parking and access arrangements. Whilst it would not have a severe
    adverse impact on the transport network in terms of Policy TR3 of the Framework,
    the proposed scheme would contravene Policy TR4 where it seeks to minimise the
    scope for conflict between pedestrians and vehicles and requires proposals to
    allow for the efficient delivery of goods, and ease of access by service and
    emergency vehicles. This is a planning harm which attracts considerable weight.
    Consequently, in this case, the benefits of the proposal would not be substantially
    outweighed by the adverse effects, and thus the appeal scheme would be contrary
    to Policy S4 of the Framework.
Conclusion
26. For the reasons given above, the proposal conflicts with the development plan and
    the material considerations, including the Framework, do not indicate that the
    appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it. Therefore, the appeal
    should be dismissed.

A Wright INSPECTOR
https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
