Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 24 August 2026
by R Gravett BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 7th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010758
14 Blundell Drive, Birkdale, Sefton PR8 4RG
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
     to grant planning permission under section 73A of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 for the
     development of land carried out without complying with conditions subject to which a previous
     planning permission was granted.
•    The appeal is made by Mr David Tomlinson of Bella Homes NW Ltd against the decision of Sefton
     Metropolitan Borough Council.
•    The application Ref DC/2026/00394, dated 4 March 2026, was refused by notice dated 11 May 2026.
•    The application sought planning permission for erection of a dwellinghouse following the demolition
     of existing bungalow, including widening of existing vehicular access and rebuilding of garden wall
     without complying with a condition attached to planning permission Ref DC/2024/00988, dated
     1 October 2024.
•    The condition in dispute is No 2 which states that: “The development shall be carried out in
     accordance with the following approved plans and documents:
     2321 LOCATION PLAN.
     2321-01 REV A SITE PLANS (2321-01 REV A).
     2321-PA02 REV A PROPOSED SITE PLAN AND WALL DETAILS (2321-PA02 REV A).
     2321-PA03 REV B AMENDED PROPOSED PLANS, ELEVATIONS AND STREET SCENE (2321
     PA03 REV B).
     Arboricultural Impact Assessment with Arboricultural Method Statement received 12.08.2024.”
•    The reason given for the condition is: “For the avoidance of doubt.”

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (‘the Framework’) was published in
       August 2026. The Framework is a material consideration of critical importance
       which should be taken into account from the day of publication. However, there are
       no substantive changes in the new Framework relevant to this appeal, and it has
       not therefore been necessary to seek the views of the parties on this matter.
Background
3.     Under s73 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) (“the Act”),
       planning permission may be granted for the development of land without
       complying with conditions subject to which a previous planning permission was
       granted. Where such an application is made retrospectively, s73A of the Act
       provides that permission may be granted including development already carried
       out without complying with conditions to which planning permission was granted.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010758


4.     In this case, the Council granted planning permission in October 2024 1 (“the
       original permission”) for the demolition of an existing bungalow on the appeal site
       and the construction of a dwelling, together with the widening of the existing
       vehicular access and the rebuilding of a garden wall. Condition no.2 of the original
       permission specifies the approved plans. The approved Site Plan2 showed the
       existing garden wall along the Blundell Drive and Blundell Avenue frontages, and
       partly along the boundary with 11a Blundell Avenue (No 11a), to be replaced with
       a 1m high facing brick wall.
5.     However, the boundary treatment which has been erected on the site consists of a
       low brick wall with regularly spaced brick piers of around 2.1m in height and timber
       infill panels. This extends the length of the Brundell Drive frontage and returns the
       Blundell Avenue frontage up to the gated access to the driveway. Between the
       driveway and No 11a, the brick piers are lower with black metal railings between.
       The application which is subject to this appeal seeks to regularise this situation by
       amending the approved ‘Proposed Site Plan.’
Main Issue
6.     The main issue is the effect that varying condition no.2 would have on the
       character and appearance of the area.
Reasons
7.     14 Blundell Drive (No 14) is a recently constructed two-storey detached dwelling
       which is situated on a prominent corner plot at the junction of Blundell Drive and
       Blundell Avenue. It forms part of a wider residential area which comprises
       predominantly detached dwellings of various ages, size, form and design.
       However, the dwellings typically have generous, landscaped gardens and low
       redbrick front boundary walls which, together with street trees, contributes
       positively to the open and verdant character of the area.
8.     Both parties refer to the Council’s ‘Boundary Treatment Supplementary Planning
       Document’ (2024) (“the SPD”). Whilst this is a material consideration, the SPD is
       not part of the development plan and should not be treated as such. The SPD
       guidance is that timber infills, including infill panels above a low brick wall and
       between brick piers, can comprise a high-quality design and can be an appropriate
       boundary treatment for corner properties. Nevertheless, it also recognises the
       importance of replacement boundaries respecting and relating to the character of
       the local area, including in respect of height, design and materials used.
9.     The low facing brick wall along the full frontage of the appeal site broadly aligns
       with the height of the frontage walls of neighbouring dwellings and it assimilates
       within its surrounding context, despite the brick differing in colour and tone. It is
       also the same height as the wall granted planning permission in July 20253.
10. However, I observed that the height of the brick piers and the fence panels across
    the wide frontage of Blundell Drive, and around the corner with Blundell Avenue,
    results in a strident form of development in this prominent location. Having an
    overall height of more than 2m, the piers appear considerably and appreciably


1
  DC/2024/00988
2
  Drawing no. 2321-PA02 A
3
  DC/2025/00648


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010758


       taller than most built boundary treatments in the immediate and wider area and
       they noticeably step up in height from the piers either side of No 14’s driveway.
11. Furthermore, the solid vertical profile of the timber panels differs substantially from
    the natural forms of the hedges and shrubs prevalent along the frontage of close-
    by dwellings on either side of Blundell Drive and Blundell Avenue. As a result of its
    height and materiality, the boundary treatment has a ‘defensive’ appearance,
    which I observed to be entirely at odds with the typically more subdued visual
    qualities of boundary treatments in the area, and this detracts from the open,
    verdant character of the street scene.
12. Although there are examples of other tall and solid boundary treatments in the
    surrounding area, including on corner plots, these do not reflect the prevailing
    pattern and some of these structures illustrate the visually harmful effects of such
    development. Moreover, the circumstances in which those structures originated,
    for example whether any benefit from a recent grant of planning permission, is
    unclear and I note the Council’s comments that most pre-date the adoption of ‘A
    Local Plan for Sefton’ (2017) (LP) and the SPD guidance.
13. Rather than providing justification for the development in question, if anything the
    examples and photographs provided by the appellant points to a need for such
    proposals to be carefully controlled if the character and appearance of the area is
    to be safeguarded. Whilst the example provided at Palace Road appears to be
    similar in height to the appeal proposal, this property is some distance from the
    appeal site and therefore likely differs in its surrounding context.
14. I therefore conclude that varying condition 2 to allow the retention of the existing
    boundary treatment would cause significant harm to the character and appearance
    of the area. It would conflict with LP Policy EQ2 which requires that proposals
    make a positive contribution to their surroundings through the quality of their
    design, including in terms of scale, height, form and landscaping.
Other Matters
15. I note the absence of objections to the proposal from neighbours, but this does not
    in itself equate to an absence of harm. Further, matters relating to the Council’s
    handling of the planning application (or indeed previous applications) falls outside
    the scope of this appeal, which I have considered solely on its planning merits.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
16. The ‘Proposed Site Plan’ shows a patio and lawned area to the rear of No 14, but
    the largest part of the garden is to the side along the Blundell Drive frontage. I
    acknowledge that the increased privacy afforded by the development enables the
    appellant to make greater use of the garden, and it increases the safety and
    security of the dwelling. However, I have not been provided with compelling
    evidence to demonstrate that a boundary treatment of the height and design
    proposed would be necessary to meet the appellant’s objectives. Nor am I
    persuaded that planting a mature hedgerow would not equally achieve the
    objectives in a way which causes less harm.
17. Therefore, whilst I understand the concerns of the appellant, I conclude that the
    adverse effects to character and appearance substantially outweigh the benefits of
    the proposal, including the benefit afforded to development within a settlement.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010758


18. For the reasons given above, the proposal conflicts with the development plan and
    material considerations do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other
    than in accordance with it. I therefore conclude that the appeal is dismissed.

R Gravett
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
