Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by C McDonagh BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 9TH September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010714
66 Belbroughton Road, Blakedown, Kidderminster DY10 3JH
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs M Payne against the decision of Wyre Forest District Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/0005/HOU.
•    The development proposed is ‘two storey side extension, replacement single storey rear extensions
     and front garage and entrance canopy extension.’

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published by the Government. This is a material consideration in
       the decision-making process from the day of publication. The changes made to the
       Framework are not material to the main issues of this appeal and as such there
       was no need to seek comments on the revised version. This would not prejudice
       either of the main parties.
Main Issues
3.     The main issues are as follows:
         •    Whether the proposal would constitute inappropriate development in the
              Green Belt.
         •    The effect of the proposal on the openness of the Green Belt.
         •    The effect of the proposal on the living conditions of adjacent residents.
         •    Whether any harm to the Green Belt by reason of inappropriateness, and any
              other harm, is clearly outweighed by other considerations, so as to amount to
              the very special circumstances required to justify the proposed
              developments.
Reasons
Whether Inappropriate in Green Belt
4.     The appeal site is comprised of a two-storey, semi-detached dwelling with an
       attached single storey garage to one side and a conservatory to the rear. There
       are also gardens to the front and rear. The proposal seeks to remove the garage
       and conservatory and replace with a two-storey side extension, single storey rear
       extension and a front entrance canopy.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010714


5.       The appeal site is located within the Green Belt. I have therefore had regard to
         policy GB7 of the Framework which list exceptions to the presumption against
         development in the Green Belt. Of relevance to the proposal is the exception given
         in part b, which relates to the reuse, extension, alteration or replacement of an
         existing building, provided that the existing building is of permanent and
         substantial construction, is lawful in planning terms, and any extension or
         alteration will not result in a disproportionate increase in size compared to the
         original building.
6.       Policy DM.22 of the Wyre Forest District Council Local Plan 2016 – 2036 (LP)
         (adopted April 2022) largely repeats the aim of the Framework at section (iii). I
         have also had regard to the Design, Amenity and Shopfronts Supplementary
         Planning Document (the SPD) (adopted July 2024) which advises that dwellings
         within the Green Belt can extend 75% of the floor area and volume of the original
         dwelling including basements as of 1948. Any previous extensions to the original
         dwellinghouse must be added to the proposed extension floor area and volume
         allowance when calculating the 75%. In light of this any extension proposed must
         take into account any outbuildings within 5m of the original dwelling as part of the
         extension and this will count towards the 75% allowance.
7.       Guidance it may be, but the SPD is relatively recent, and I see no reason not to
         give it significant weight as a material consideration given it aligns with the aims of
         the Framework in protecting Green Belt land. There are conflicting calculations
         between the main parties as to what the 75% increase would equate to in this
         context. Either way, the parties agree that with a total volume of 661m 3 the
         proposals would exceed both figures by some way, even if I was to take the
         appellant’s 75% figure into account.
8.       To my mind this would significantly exceed the recommended 75% increase over
         the original dwelling and constitute inappropriate development in the Green Belt
         contrary to policy GB7 of the Framework and policy DM.22 of the LP.
Openness of the Green Belt
9.       The introduction to section 13 of the Framework is clear that the fundamental aim
         of Green Belt policy is to prevent urban sprawl by keeping land permanently open.
         Openness and permanence are essential characteristics of the Green Belt. As per
         the Planning Practice Guidance1 (PPG), openness is capable of having both
         spatial and visual aspects – in other words, the visual impact of a proposal may be
         relevant, as could its size.
10. The rear extension would replace an existing conservatory and alongside the
    ground floor section of the proposed side extension both would reach the same
    distance from the rear wall as the existing garage and conservatory. Given the
    location to the rear of the property and screening which exists from other buildings
    and hedgerows, the visual and spatial impact upon openness from these elements
    would likely be the same as the current situation.
11. However, the ground floor of the side extension would extend to the front elevation
    of the host building bringing it much further forward than the existing situation.
    Alongside the first floor element of the side extension, this would be clearly visible
    from Belbroughton Road to the front. Furthermore, despite the slight set down from

1
    Paragraph: 013 Reference ID: 64-013-20250225


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           2
Appeal Decision 6010714


       the host ridge, the height and width of the extension would add significant bulk and
       mass to the side of the property when viewed from the public domain to the front.
       Spatially and visually, this would reduce openness.
12. Taken together, there would be a limited overall loss of openness to the Green
    Belt. However, invariably this would result in harm to the Green Belt given its
    purposes, contrary to section 13 of the Framework.
Living Conditions
13. The SPD advises that all developments should accord with the 45 degree code in
    order to ensure the development does not result in a serious adverse effect on the
    amenity of neighbouring residents or occupiers in accordance with Policy DM.25 of
    the LP. This is taken from new extensions to avoid a loss of outlook or daylight to
    neighbouring properties to a habitable room. Habitable rooms are clarified as living
    rooms, bedrooms and kitchens.
14. I understand that the existing conservatory already breaches this 45 degree rule to
    No.64. However, it is built from light weight permeable material whereas the
    proposed rear extension would be more solid given its brick construction. The
    replacement of the conservatory in this manner would introduce a more imposing
    structure than the existing situation, causing a slight worsening of the living
    conditions of the occupiers of that property through a loss of outlook and natural
    light.
15. As per the SPD, if the proposed extension crosses the 45 degree code it will result
    in a conflict with Policy DM.25 of the LP. Any departures from the local plan will
    only be accepted where it can be demonstrated that there would be no serious
    adverse effect on the amenity of neighbouring occupiers or there is a realistic
    fallback position.
16. To my mind, the adverse impact would not be serious. The extension over the
    existing would be more solid but of the same scale and as such, I do not consider
    the proposal would be contrary to the SPD in this regard. As such, it would not
    harm the living conditions of occupiers of No.64 with respect to outlook and natural
    light. This would accord with policy DM.25 of the LP which seeks to ensure that
    extensions and alterations should not have a serious adverse effect on the
    amenity of neighbouring residents or occupiers. The proposal would also accord
    with policy L2(d)(ii) of the Framework which seeks to maintain acceptable living
    standards for residents and neighbours in terms of access to daylight, sunlight,
    privacy and external amenity space.
Other Considerations
17. I have found that the proposal would constitute inappropriate development in the
    Green Belt, while it would also not preserve its openness. Policy GB6 of the
    Framework is clear that inappropriate development is, by definition, harmful to the
    Green Belt and should not be approved except in very special circumstances.
    Such circumstances will not exist unless the potential harm to the Green Belt by
    reason of inappropriateness and any other harm resulting from the proposed
    development, is clearly outweighed by other considerations. In making this
    assessment, substantial weight should be given to the harm to the Green Belt
    which would be caused, including harm to its openness.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010714


18. I am informed that since the application subject to this appeal was refused, two
    applications have been approved by the Council at the appeal site. This includes
    prior approval2 for a larger home extension which allows for a single storey rear
    extension to extend 4.17m maximum from the original rear wall of the dwelling,
    which matches the depth of the existing conservatory. Alongside this, a certificate
    of lawfulness3 for a proposed single storey porch, single storey side extension and
    a hip to gable loft conversion. I don’t have plans or other substantive details of any
    of these before me.
19. The Courts4 have held that the prospect of the fallback position does not have to
    be probable or even have a high chance of occurring; it has to be only more than a
    merely theoretical prospect. Although the possibility of the fallback position
    happening may be very slight, this is sufficient to make the position a material
    consideration. I see reason to dispute that the fallback is a material consideration,
    although the amount of weight it should be given as a fallback depends on the
    particular circumstances of the case and is still at the discretion of the decision
    maker.
20. Implementing both the prior approval and certificate of lawfulness schemes would
    add significant volume to the dwelling as would the proposal. That being said, it
    would still be less than the proposal by a significant margin and would also fall
    below the 75% maximum increase that the SPD allows which the appellant has
    calculated. In any event, there would seemingly be no first floor which would
    alleviate much of the harm in Green Belt terms. There may also be scenarios
    where the rear extension could be reduced and the two-storey side element could
    be implemented within the 75% allowance, although that proposal is not before
    me.
21. The hip-to-gable would allow more mass to the side of the roof, although it would
    leave the first floor remaining free of development to the side. As such I disagree
    that the impact of this would be worse than the proposal. It is also suggested that
    an outbuilding could be constructed under Schedule 2, Part 1, Class E of the Town
    and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015
    (the GPDO).
22. The appellant is free to implement those extensions and permitted development
    schemes if they please, but they do not convince me the proposal is acceptable.
    They would not provide the same space and continuity as the proposal and as
    such I give them only limited weight as a material consideration.
Other Matters
23. The appellant may feel that the proposal would create an attractive frontage to the
    property while the extensions would use matching materials. Be that as it may, the
    reasons for refusal do not include harm to the character and appearance of the
    area and I see no reason to disagree.
24. I understand that other properties in the area have been extended. I have photos
    of some of these, although I do not have details of approved planning applications
    before me. It is therefore unclear whether they are similar to the proposal. In any
    event, I have assessed the appeal proposal on its own merits.
2
  26/0266PNH
3
  26/0265/CLP
4
  Schneck v SSHCLG & West Berkshire DC [2022] EWHC 3335 (Admin)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          4
Appeal Decision 6010714


Green Belt Balance and Conclusion
25. Taking the above under consideration, the benefits of the proposal would not
    clearly outweigh the harm to the Green Belt, which is given substantial weight.
    Therefore, they do not represent the very special circumstances required.
26. The proposal therefore conflicts with the development plan as a whole, as well as
    the relevant provisions of the Framework and supplementary guidance.
    Accordingly, for the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal is dismissed.

C McDonagh
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
