Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by K Townend BSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010537
Land to the rear of 6-12 Long Lane, Newtown, Wolverhampton WS6 6AU
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Richard Rudd against the decision of South Staffordshire District Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00161/PIP.
•    The development proposed is permission in principle for residential development.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed, and permission in principle is granted for residential
       development at Land to rear of 6-12 Long Lane, Newtown, Wolverhampton WS6
       6AU in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 26/00161/PIP.
Applications for costs
2.     An application for costs was made by Mr Richard Rudd against South
       Staffordshire District Council. This application is the subject of a separate
       Decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     The proposal is for permission in principle. Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
       advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
       housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has two
       stages: the first stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site
       is suitable in-principle, and the second (‘technical details consent’) stage is when
       the detailed development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first
       of these two stages.
4.     The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
       land use and the amount of development permitted. All other matters are
       considered as part of a subsequent technical details consent application if
       permission in principle is granted. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
5.     An applicant can apply for permission in principle for a range of dwellings by
       expressing a minimum and maximum net number of dwellings as part of the
       application. In this instance, permission in principle has been sought for a
       minimum of four and a maximum of five dwellings on the appeal site.
6.     Any reference to the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) in this
       decision, unless otherwise specified, will be in relation to the August 2026 version.
7.     As part of their appeal submission the appellant submitted a Unilateral
       Undertaking (the UU) which relates to mitigation for the Cannock Chase Special
       Area of Conservation (the SAC). I have addressed this in my reasoning.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010537


8.     The Council has referred to the Emerging Local Plan and advised that the
       Examination in Public has concluded. However, I cannot be certain when the plan
       is likely to be adopted, if any policies are to be modified, or if there are any
       unresolved objections. Therefore, I attach limited weight to the emerging policies.
Main Issues
9.     The main issues are:
     •        whether the proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt,
              having regard to the Framework and any relevant development plan policies;
              and
     •        whether the site is suitable for residential development, having regard to its
              location, the proposed land use, and the amount of development, with
              particular regard to the effect of the proposal on the Cannock Chase Special
              Area of Conservation (the SAC).
Reasons
Whether inappropriate development
10. The appeal site comprises a parcel of land to the rear of numbers 6 to 12 Long
    Lane. At the time of my visit the site was not in use as gardens, nevertheless, both
    main parties agree that the site is, and always has been, used as gardens. It is
    enclosed on two sides by existing housing, on Stafford Road and Long Lane, and
    on the other sides by well-established trees and hedges which lie on the
    boundaries with other domestic gardens.
11. Part of the site is within the development boundary of Newtown which is listed in
    Core Policy 1 of the South Staffordshire Council Core Strategy, December 2012
    (the CS) as an ‘other village and hamlet’. However, part of the site is outside of the
    development boundary, it is, therefore, considered as open countryside for
    planning purposes, even if the site is garden land associated with the houses that
    are within the development boundary.
12. Core Policy 1 advises that housing in ‘other villages and hamlets’ should be limited
    to rural affordable housing schemes, conversion of buildings, or to meet identified
    local needs. The appeal proposal is not for any of the forms of development listed.
    As such, even if part of the site is within the development boundary, the proposal
    conflicts with the requirements of Core Policy 1 of the CS.
13. Part of the site also lies within the Green Belt. Given the size and shape of the site,
    and that more than half of it is within the Green Belt, I cannot be certain that there
    is sufficient space, within the part of the site that is not within the Green Belt, for
    four to five dwellings. Consequently, I have assessed the proposal as being
    development within the Green Belt.
14. Policy GB7 of the Framework sets out the categories of development which may
    be regarded as not inappropriate in the Green Belt, subject to certain criteria. New
    buildings within the Green Belt are inappropriate unless, amongst other things,
    they represent either (d) limited infilling in villages, (e) redevelopment of previously
    developed land which would not cause substantial harm to the openness of the
    Green Belt, or (g) development that would utilise grey belt land, subject to other
    criteria.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010537


15. Policy GB1 of the CS advises that development that is acceptable within the terms
    of the Framework will normally be permitted and lists the forms of development
    that would not be inappropriate. These include limited infilling but do not include
    the redevelopment of previously developed land or grey belt developments. In this
    regard, Policy GB1 of the CS is only partially consistent with the Framework.
16. Policy GB1 of the CS defines limited infilling as the filling of small gaps (1 or 2
    buildings) within a built-up frontage. Even though four to five houses would not fall
    within the 1 or 2 buildings advised in the footnote it would not be large-scale
    development and I, therefore, find the number of houses proposed to be limited
    development. Nevertheless, the appeal site is not a gap within a built-up frontage
    and would, in my judgement, not constitute limited infilling in the village for the
    purposes of either Policy GB1 of the CS or Policy GB7:1(d) of the Framework.
17. Annex B of the Framework defines previously developed land. The annex advises
    that such land excludes residential gardens in built-up areas. Contrary to the
    appellant’s assertion, the site’s location outside the development boundary does
    not preclude it from being considered part of the built-up area.
18. Even though the appeal site is partially in the Green Belt and in open countryside
    for planning purposes, as it is outside the settlement boundary, it is garden
    associated with existing housing along Long Lane and it also lies to the side of
    houses on Stafford Road. The houses in Newtown extend along two roads and are
    not a small cluster of properties. For these reasons, I find that Newtown is a built-
    up area and the appeal site, as part of the gardens associated with the houses on
    Long Lane, are part of the built-up area. The site would, therefore, not be
    previously developed land and would not meet the exception at Policy GB5:1(e).
19. Annex B of the Framework also defines grey belt land as land in the Green Belt
    comprising previously developed land and/or any other land that, in either case,
    does not strongly contribute to any of purposes (a), (b) or (d) of Policy GB2 of the
    Framework. Although I have already found that the site is not previously developed
    land the definition of grey belt includes other land. A site does not have to be
    previously developed to be grey belt.
20. The South Staffordshire Green Belt Study Stage 1 and 2 Report, dated July 2019
    (the Green Belt Study) advises that the appeal site forms part of a larger parcel of
    land which makes a strong contribution to purposes (a), (b), and (c) and a weak or
    no contribution to purpose (d).
21. However, the Green Belt Study is a high level assessment which considers the
    contribution large parcels of land make to the Green Belt purposes. Even the
    Stage 2 section includes the appeal site as part of a larger parcel of land. The
    Council has not provided any compelling evidence that the contribution the appeal
    site makes to any of the purposes of the Green Belt has been assessed, separate
    to the wider parcel of land in which it is included in the Green Belt Study.
22. Purpose (a) of Policy GB2 of the Framework is to check the unrestricted sprawl of
    large built-up areas. By reason of being a ‘other village or hamlet’, albeit a built-up
    area, it is not a large built-up area. The appeal site is not on the edge or close to a
    large built-up area and the development proposed would not result in unrestricted
    sprawl of such an area. Even if the larger parcel of land strongly contributes to
    purpose (a) the appeal site is a small parcel of land enclosed by houses, gardens,
    and landscaped boundaries. The land further to the west is open and free from

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010537


       development, but this is beyond the existing gardens around the appeal site. For
       these reasons, as a small part of the larger parcel of land assessed in the Green
       Belt Study, the appeal site does not make a strong contribution to purpose (a) of
       Policy GB 2 of the Framework and the appeal development would not result in
       unrestricted sprawl of a large built-up area.
23. Purpose (b) is to prevent neighbouring towns from merging into one another. The
    appeal site is included as part of a larger area that strongly contributes towards
    purpose (b). The larger area, as a whole, is seeking to ensure the separation of
    the towns listed in table 3.1 of the Green Belt Study. However, the appeal site itself
    is not next to any of the listed towns and the proposal would not result in any
    neighbouring towns merging, or even the impression of them merging. The
    development of the appeal site would not significantly reduce the separation
    between neighbouring towns as it would not extend any closer to any town than
    the existing housing along Stafford Road or Long Lane. For these reasons, I find
    that the appeal site does not strongly contribute to purpose (b) of Policy GB2 of the
    Framework.
24. Purpose (d) is to preserve the setting and special character of historic towns. This
    is not relevant to the appeal site as it is not within the setting of a historic town.
25. For the above reasons, I find that the appeal site, when considered on its own
    merits, would not strongly contribute to purposes (a), (b) or (d) of Policy GB2 of the
    Framework. In considering compliance with Policy GB7:1(g)(i), it is also necessary
    to determine whether the proposal would fundamentally undermine the purposes
    (taken together) of the remaining Green Belt across the area of the plan.
26. One of those purposes, namely purpose (c), is to assist in safeguarding the
    countryside from encroachment. The appeal site is enclosed by existing housing
    and hedge and tree boundaries. Although the appeal proposal would be
    development on open countryside, by reason of being outside the development
    boundary, it would be contained by the existing housing and landscaping and only
    be within the existing gardens of the houses on Long Lane.
27. For these reasons, the appeal development and associated encroachment into
    open countryside would not fundamentally undermine the purposes of the
    remaining Green Belt. Moreover, the appeal proposal would not substantially alter
    the openness and permanence of the Green Belt as a whole.
28. The Council accepts that it cannot demonstrate a five-year supply of housing
    across South Staffordshire. There is, therefore, a demonstrable unmet need for the
    development for the purposes of criterion (ii) of Policy GB7:1(g). Moreover, the
    appeal site is in a suitable location with convenient access to public transport and
    opportunities for walking to a range of services and facilities. It would, therefore,
    meet the requirements of criterion (iii) of Policy GB7:1(g). As the proposal is not a
    major development it would not need to meet the ‘Golden Rules’ in criterion (iv).
29. For the above reasons the development would comply with the relevant criterion of
    Policy GB7:1(g) of the Framework insofar as they relate to this case. Having
    regard to the Framework, the proposal would, therefore, not be inappropriate
    development in the Green Belt and would be capable of being approved under
    Policy GB6 of the Framework.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010537


Effect on Special Area of Conservation (SAC)
30. The site lies within the zone of influence for the Cannock Chase SAC. The
    Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended) (the
    Habitats Regulations) requires the decision maker to undertake an Appropriate
    Assessment (AA) where there are likely significant effects from the proposal, either
    alone or in combination with other plans or projects. This responsibility falls to me
    as the competent authority in the context of this appeal.
31. The SAC is designated due to its unique heathland habitat. As a development for
    new houses within the zone of influence there is a high likelihood that the future
    occupants of the proposed development would visit the SAC for recreation
    purposes. In this regard, it is clear that the proposal, when combined with other
    development in the area, would likely have a significant effect on the qualifying
    features of the SAC through increased disturbance.
32. The SAC would be affected by increases in recreation and the subsequent
    creation of new paths, path widening, erosion and nutrient enrichment from visitor
    use and vehicle emissions. Given these factors, the proposed development would
    adversely affect the integrity of the SAC. I must, therefore, carry out an AA.
33. The Cannock Chase Special Area of Conservation (SAC) Guidance to Mitigate the
    Impact of New Residential Development (March 2022) (the Mitigation Guidance)
    seeks to mitigate impacts upon the SAC. Development would be expected to
    contribute towards strategic access management and monitoring measures
    (SAMM) which include resources/events for engagement, creation of circular
    routes, orientation panels, additional staffing, and improvement and maintenance
    of car parks, amongst other things.
34. The appellant has submitted an executed UU which would secure £1675.10 (index
    linked) to mitigate the adverse effect of recreational activities from the
    development on the integrity of the SAC. This would comply with the requirements
    of the Mitigation Guidance. I have no evidence to show that this figure is not
    proportionate to this appeal proposal or that the Council would not be able to use
    the contribution as per the Mitigation Guidance.
35. I have consulted Natural England, and it has confirmed that the proposed
    mitigation measures are sufficient to avoid an adverse effect to the integrity of the
    European Sites and relevant features. Natural England has also confirmed that the
    mitigation measures will suitably be secured via the UU.
36. I accept that Planning Practice Guidance advises that planning obligations cannot
    be secured at the permission in principle stage. However, there is no legal reason
    why an obligation cannot be entered into at any time and the appellant has drawn
    my attention to similar appeals where a UU was accepted for a permission in
    principle. The appeals referred to by the Council, in the Officer report, are
    materially different to the appeal before me in that, in those cases, the appellants
    had not submitted UUs with the appeals. Therefore, the mitigation was not capable
    of being secured. In the appeal before me the appellant has provided a completed
    UU which would ensure that the required financial contribution towards mitigation
    would be paid prior to the commencement of development.
37. The UU would ensure that there would not be an adverse effect on the integrity of
    the SAC. As the competent authority for the purpose of the habitat regulations, I

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010537


       am satisfied that permission in principle could be granted, as described in PPG,
       and that the site is suitable for residential development, having regard to its
       location, the proposed land use, and the amount of development, with particular
       regard to the effect of the proposal on the SAC.
38. The development would, therefore, not constitute habitats development as it would
    not have a significant effect on the SAC. Consequently, permission in principle is
    not resisted under Part 2A 5B of the Town and Country Planning (Permission in
    Principle) (Amendment) Order 2017. Moreover, given I have found that the AA has
    concluded that the proposal would not adversely affect the integrity of the SAC,
    Policy N6 of the Framework would not direct me to refuse the development.
39. With the mitigation proposed the development would comply with Policy EQ2 of
    the CS, which only permits development where it can be demonstrated that it will
    not be likely to lead directly or indirectly to an adverse effect upon the integrity of
    the SAC and that a net increase in housing within the zone of influence should
    mitigate for such effects.
40. Furthermore, with the mitigation proposed the appeal would comply with Policy
    NB3 of the South Staffordshire Council Publication Plan (Regulation 19), April
    2024, in that it would secure a financial contribution to mitigate the potential to
    have an adverse impact upon the SAC.
Other Matters
41. Interested parties have raised a range of concerns including, but not limited to, the
    effect of the development on parking, highway safety and the living conditions of
    the occupiers of neighbouring properties. While I have had regard to these
    comments, I have already set out that a permission in principle is not a planning
    permission in itself and my consideration of the case is limited to very specific
    matters. As such, these issues would be considered at the subsequent Technical
    Details Consent stage.
Planning Balance
42. There is no dispute that the Council cannot demonstrate a five-year supply of
    deliverable housing land with the figure quoted in the Council officer report
    advising of a supply of 0.87 years. This is a significant shortfall below the five-year
    requirement.
43. Core Policy 1, Policy GB1 and Policy EQ2 of the CS are the most relevant in
    considering the proposal. For the above reasons I find no conflict with either Policy
    GB1 or EQ2 of the CS. Nevertheless, the appeal proposal conflicts with Core
    Policy 1 in that it is not for a form of development permitted by the policy. The
    proposal, therefore, conflicts with the development plan as a whole.
44. However, given that Core Policy 1 seeks to restrict development and given the
    significant shortfall in housing land supply I, therefore, attribute limited weight to
    the conflict of the development with Core Policy 1 of the CS.
45. The proposal would provide between four and five additional houses in an area
    with some services and facilities. The development would also contribute towards
    the borough’s housing supply, would boost the supply of housing, and would
    provide some economic benefits both during and post construction.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6010537


46. I afford substantial weight to the provision of these new houses and their
    associated benefits. Although, as only between four and five dwellings are
    proposed the benefits are moderate when weighing the merits of the scheme. I
    therefore afford substantial weight to the moderate benefit the development would
    make to addressing the housing shortfall.
47. Consequently, the harm from the conflict with the development plan would not
    significantly and demonstrably outweigh the benefits that would arise from the
    development, when assessed against the policies in the Framework as a whole.
48. For these reasons, the development would comply with Policy S5:5 of the
    Framework which advises that, where development would not be inappropriate in
    Green Belt locations, proposals should be approved unless the benefits of doing
    so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed
    against the national decision-making policies in the Framework. Accordingly, there
    are material considerations, which indicate a decision should be taken other than
    in accordance with the development plan.
Conditions
49. The PPG makes it clear that it is not possible for conditions to be attached to a
    grant of permission in principle, whose terms may only include the site location,
    type, and amount of development. Therefore, I have not imposed any conditions.
Conclusion
50. The proposed development conflicts with the development plan. However, there
    are material considerations, notably the provisions of the Framework, which
    indicate that the decision should be taken other than in accordance with the
    development plan. The appeal is therefore allowed.

K Townend
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
