Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 9 September 2026
by B Pattison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22nd September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010085
16 Whitecroft Way, Beckenham, Bromley BR3 3AG
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
     to grant planning permission under section 73 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 for the
     development of land without complying with conditions subject to which a previous planning
     permission was granted.
•    The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Dove against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
     Bromley.
•    The application Ref is 22/01138/S73A2.
•    The application sought planning permission for Two storey side and rear extensions with raised roof
     height, flank dormer window/roof lights with elevational alterations, demolition of garage without
     complying with a condition attached to planning permission DC/22/01138/FULL6 dated 1 July 2022.
•    The condition in dispute is No 2 which states that: The development hereby permitted shall not be
     carried out otherwise than in complete accordance with the plans approved under this planning
     permission unless previously agreed in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
•    The reason given for the condition is: In order to comply with Policy 37 of the Bromley Local Plan and
     in the interests of visual and residential amenity.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for Two storey side and
       rear extensions with raised roof height, flank dormer window/roof lights with
       elevational alterations, demolition of garage without complying with a condition
       attached to planning permission DC/22/01138/FULL6 dated 1 July 2022 at 16
       Whitecroft Way, Beckenham, Bromley BR3 3AG, in accordance with the terms of
       the application Ref 22/01138/S73A2, subject to the following conditions:
       1) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
          drawings: WW-992-PD-R-0400/B; WW-992-PD-R-0300/C; WW-992-PD-R-
          0200/B.
       2) The materials to be used for the external surfaces of the building shall be as
          set out in the planning application forms and / or drawings unless otherwise
          agreed in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
       3) The development shall not be occupied until any side facing first and second
          floor windows/rooflights have been obscure glazed to a minimum of Pilkington
          privacy Level 3 and shall be non-opening unless the parts of the window which
          can be opened are more than 1.7 metres above the floor of the room in which
          the window is installed and the windows shall subsequently be permanently
          retained in accordance as such.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010085


Preliminary Matter
2.       The National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was updated on 17
         August 2026. Although I have made my determination against the updated
         national policy context, the relevant changes to the Framework are not
         fundamental to matters which are determinative to the outcome of this appeal.
Background and Main Issue
3.       Planning permission1 was granted in July 2022 for two storey side and rear
         extensions with raised roof height, flank dormer windows/roof lights with
         elevational alterations, demolition of garage.
4.       In July 2024 planning permission2 was granted for a proposal to vary the design of
         the approved extensions with amendments which included changes to the design
         of the side and rear extensions. The description of development was “Variation of
         condition 2 of permission granted under reference 22/01138/FULL6 for Two storey
         side and rear extensions with raised roof height, flank dormer window/roof lights
         with elevational alterations, demolition of garage to allow the substitution of revised
         plans for amendments to the approved scheme (proposed amendments comprise
         the side and rear extensions to be part one/two storey rather than two storey, and
         without raising the roof height and the flank dormer window/ rooflights)”.
5.       The two storey side extension has been constructed. However, it features a flat
         roof rather than a pitched roof as shown on the approved drawings. The appellant
         is seeking to vary condition 2 of the original planning permission (Council Ref:
         22/01138/FULL6) to allow the substitution of amended drawings, which include
         changes to the design of the two storey side extension. Specifically, in relation to
         this appeal, the amended drawings show a pitched roof that is broadly similar in
         design to that approved under the most recent planning permission (Council Ref:
         22/01138/RECON) which sought design amendments. However, the proposal
         involves raising the eaves of the side extension’s roof so that they would align with
         the eaves height of the main roof of the host dwelling.
6.       Consequently, the main issue is the effect that the variation of condition 2 would
         have on the character, appearance and significance of the Park Langley
         Conservation Area (the CA).
Reasons
7.       The appeal property is a large, two storey dwelling located in a residential area
         within the CA. The CA features a mix of spaciously laid out detached houses,
         many of which were developed in the early twentieth century in a Garden City
         character. The Supplementary Planning Guidance for Park Langley Conservation
         Area (SPG) notes that whilst houses were often grouped in blocks of four or five
         that shared a similar design approach, very rarely were any two adjacent houses
         identical in layout, design and materials. A variety of facing materials are used
         across the properties which include timber framing, render, hanging tiles and
         brickwork.
8.       The character of this part of the CA and its significance stems from, amongst other
         aspects, the variation of building styles and forms of the individual houses which

1
    Council Ref: 22/01138/FULL6
2
    Council Ref: 22/01138/RECON


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6010085


       are set within generously sized, verdant plots which create a pleasant spacious
       character. With its hanging tile front elevation, and visually interesting front gable
       incorporating bay windows, the appeal site could positively contribute to the
       character of the CA. However, its current flat roof side elevation is a prominent and
       uncharacteristic addition which, as constructed, negatively contributes to the
       character or appearance of the CA.
9.     As the proposal is in a conservation area, I have paid special attention to the
       desirability of preserving or enhancing the character, appearance and significance
       of that area, as set out in section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
       Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act).
10. The proposal would not result in a significant alteration to the roof form of the side
    extension when compared with that approved under the most recent planning
    permission. However, the eaves would be raised to align with those of the main
    dwelling. This minor amendment would not introduce appreciable additional bulk or
    massing to the side extension. Furthermore, the alignment of the eaves would
    assist the extension in integrating with the host dwelling’s roof form.
11. The proposal would retain the host dwelling’s mansard roof form and clay roof tiles
    which is one of its more notable features. The variety in the design of dwellings is
    a key contributor to the character of the CA. The dwellings within this part of the
    CA exhibit significant variation in the design of their roof forms. As a result, the
    side extension’s eaves height would not appear as an unusual feature within the
    street scene.
12. Therefore, I find that the proposal would not cause harm to the character or
    appearance of the CA, nor any harm to its overall heritage significance. I find no
    conflict with Policies 6, 37 and 41 of the Bromley Local Plan (2019), Policies D3
    and HC1 of the London Plan (2021), the SPG and Bromley Council’s Urban
    Design Supplementary Planning Document insofar as they require residential
    extensions to be of a scale and form that respects the host dwelling, and require
    that proposals preserve and enhance the character and appearance of
    conservation areas.
Conditions
13. In allowing this appeal, a new planning permission is granted. The Planning
    Practice Guidance advises that such decisions should restate the conditions
    imposed on earlier permissions that continue to have effect. As the works have
    commenced on site, I have not imposed a time limit condition.
14. The PPG outlines circumstances where planning conditions should not be used. It
    states that conditions requiring a development to be carried out in its entirety will
    fail the test of necessity by requiring more than is needed to deal with the problem
    they are designed to solve. For this reason, I have not imposed a condition which
    requires the development to be completed within six months.
15. The approved plans condition is imposed to define the permission, however I have
    amended it to reflect the approved plans. A condition relating to the proposed
    facing materials is necesarry in the interests of character and appearance. I have
    imposed the previous condition relating to obscure glazed windows in the interests
    of the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers. However, I have amended the
    wording to reflect the proposal’s amended design.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010085


Conclusion
16. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be allowed and the
    planning permission varied as set out in the formal decision.

B Pattison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
