Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 September 2026
by A Fulford BSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010946
38 Highfield Road, Nottingham NG7 2JE
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Singh Bains (Unique Homes Living Ltd) against the decision of
     Nottingham City Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00156/PFUL3 (PP-14657438)
•    The development is a proposed rear ground floor and first floor extension, removal of chimneys and
     Internal alterations to create 7 bed HMO with ensuite (Class-Sui Generis).

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published. Those parts of the Framework most relevant to this
       appeal have been amended. As a result, parties have been provided with an
       opportunity to make further submissions. I have referred to the latest version of the
       Framework where relevant in this appeal.
3.     There is a dispute between the parties over the existing use of the property. The
       appellant suggests that the property has historically been used as a house in
       multiple occupation (HMO) (use class C4) given that the property was previously
       owned by the University of Nottingham. Evidence has been provided in the form of
       addressed mail to previous tenants and images of the fire-rated doors and the
       interconnected fire alarm system within the property. Whilst the appellant always
       has the option to apply for a Lawful Use Certificate under S191 of the Town and
       Country Planning Act 1990, no such certificate exists at present and it is not my
       role, in the context of a S78 appeal, to make a determination on the lawful use of
       the appeal property. On that basis, I will treat the existing lawful use as a
       dwellinghouse (use class C3).
4.     The scheme includes ground and first floor extensions and the removal of
       chimneys. There is no disagreement between the main parties over the
       acceptability of the physical impact of these elements of the scheme. Based on the
       evidence before me and my site visit, I find no reason to conclude otherwise. On
       that basis my assessment will focus on any impacts arising from the change of use
       to a 7-bed HMO.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010946


Main Issues
5.     The main issues are:
           •    The effect of the development on the housing mix in the area and the
                creation and maintenance of a balanced community;
           •    The effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of nearby
                occupants with particular reference to noise and disturbance and parking
                availability.
Reasons
Housing Mix and Balanced Community
6.     Policy 8 of the Aligned Core Strategies Part 1 Local Plan (September 2014) (the
       ACS) seeks a mix of housing tenures, types and sizes in order to create
       sustainable, inclusive and mixed communities, with an emphasis on providing
       family housing, including larger family housing, to address a lower than the
       national average stock of such accommodation. Point 4 of the policy states that
       the appropriate mix of housing will be informed by several indicators, including the
       need to redress the housing mix within areas of concentration of student
       households and HMOs.
7.     This approach is further advocated through Policy HO1 of the Land and Planning
       Policies Development Plan Document (January 2020) (the LAPP). Policy HO2
       presumes against the loss of dwellinghouses (Class C3) unless certain criteria are
       met, one of which is where it is shown that the property is no longer suitable for
       family occupation. Policy HO6 reinforces the need for proposals to accord with
       Policies HO1 and HO2, adding among other criteria that consideration will be
       given to the existing proportion of HMOs and/or student households in the area
       and whether this amounts to a ‘significant concentration’, which is defined as a
       concentration exceeding 10%.
8.     The Council argues that where concentrations of HMO uses develop, this can
       have a distorting effect on neighbourhoods with many residents not having a long-
       term stake in the community and some service needs of longer-term residents,
       such as schools, becoming unsustainable. The effects of this in Nottingham have
       long-term recognition and are addressed through the aforementioned development
       plan policies and the introduction of an Article 4 Direction in 2012 to manage the
       change of use from C3 family dwellings to C4 HMOs.
9.     The Council sets out that the concentration of HMO/student housing in this case is
       65% in the output area within which the appeal site is located. The wording of
       Policy HO6 that ‘regard will be had’ to the concentration of HMOs does not
       automatically mean that any exceedance of the 10% figure will mean a proposal is
       unsuitable. However, a concentration of 65% is very significantly beyond the 10%
       threshold and indicates that nearly two thirds of dwellings within the output area
       are HMOs/student accommodation, which I understand is a consequence of the
       site’s proximity to the University of Nottingham. My observations on site were not
       conclusive as to obvious visible adverse effects of this HMO concentration, with
       the possible exception of ‘to let’ signs outside a number of properties.
       Nonetheless, the Council’s evidence regarding the proportion of HMOs is not
       countered by the appellant and, by any reasonable measure, over half of all


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010946


       dwellings in the area being HMO/student accommodation is strongly suggestive of
       an overconcentration.
10. The appeal property is a detached, two storey building laid out with a
    kitchen/dining area, separate lounge, utility, WC and bedroom on the ground floor,
    with a further three bedrooms and a bathroom on the first floor. Consequently, the
    dwelling provides well-proportioned accommodation that is suitable for family living
    in its current form.
11. The appellant has provided a letter by a local estate agent, Purple Frog Asset
    Management Ltd. It is suggested that this letter confirms that the property has not
    attracted demand for class C3 occupation. However, this is not reflective of the
    contents of the letter.
12. The letter highlights the site is well located for student accommodation and
    demand would be high. The letter also emphasises that there is already a high
    student population in the area so the character of the area would not be changed if
    the appeal were to be allowed. Whilst I accept that the location of the appeal site
    would be popular with students, no evidence has been provided to indicate that
    there is not a demand for family housing in this location. On my site visit I did not
    observe anything to suggest that the property was unsuitable for occupation by a
    family or that the area was inappropriate for a family to reside. In fact, the location
    would be ideal for employees of both the adjacent University and nearby hospital.
13. In this case, the evidence indicates that the balance of uses has moved very
    significantly away from owner-occupied dwellings towards shared forms of
    accommodation, intensifying the distorting effect on the balance of the community
    and risking the viability of local services, such as schools. The more transient
    nature of HMO occupants further makes neighbourly relationships and community
    links difficult to foster, undermining social cohesion in the area.
14. In conclusion, the appeal scheme would have an adverse impact on the housing
    mix in the area and fail to maintain a balanced community. The proposal would
    therefore be contrary to Policy 8 of the ACS and Policies HO1, HO2 and HO6 of
    the LAPP. Amongst of other matters these policies seek to create or maintain a
    balanced community and address the shortage of homes for family occupation.
Living Conditions
15. Highfield Road is a residential street with a mix of family housing and HMOs which
    is located in close proximity to the University of Nottingham and the Queens
    Medical Centre (which includes a 24-hour Accident and Emergency Department).
16. The appeal property is detached dwelling within the middle of the street. A narrow
    front garden is provided with a low brick wall and pedestrian gate located adjacent
    to the pavement. The metro line runs adjacent to the rear boundary of the site and
    the A52 is located at the north-eastern end of the street.
17. The proposed extensions would result in the creation of three additional bedrooms.
    Given that the lawful use of the property is as a family dwelling, this would amount
    to an intensification of the use so there would be an increase in the number of
    comings and goings as the additional occupiers go about their separate daily lives.
    However, given the mix of adjacent uses and nearby tram network and main road
    this is not an overly quiet location. Also, given that the appeal property does not


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010946


         share a party wall with any adjacent dwellings the potential for the transference of
         noise is reduced. Furthermore, given the high proportion of HMOs in the locality it
         is not considered that one further HMO would noticeably increase levels of noise
         and disturbance above what is currently experienced by neighbouring occupiers. I
         also consider that any impacts could be mitigated through a Property Management
         Plan.
18. The supporting text to Policy HO6 refers to a 2008 Government report 1 which
    found high concentrations of HMOs can lead to negative effects in several areas
    for existing residents, including anti-social behaviour, noise and nuisance, the
    physical environment and streetscape, parking pressure and crime. That said, it
    does not follow from this that all HMOs are occupied by disruptive tenants and that
    harm to neighbouring occupants is inevitable. Specific evidence of harm should be
    adduced to demonstrate any adverse effects alleged.
19. The Council points to the aforementioned national level research and concern that
    the change of use to a large HMO would in its view exacerbate these adverse
    impacts, in particular to noise and disturbance and parking stress. However, the
    Council does not offer any site-specific evidence of harm in these respects.
20. The appeal property has no off-street parking, which is the case for the majority of
    surrounding properties. On-street parking within Highfield Road and the
    surrounding streets is restricted to permit holders only between 9am and 5pm
    Monday to Friday. There are also stretches of road with both single and double
    yellow lines further limiting off-street parking.
21. I have not been provided with any parking standards for HMOs and I have no
    evidence of typical levels of car ownership by HMO tenants. However, given such
    accommodation is at the lower end of the market in terms of cost, it is reasonable
    to consider that ownership levels would be no greater than that of owner/occupiers
    of single family dwellings.
22. It seems highly unlikely that the proposal would generate a demand for seven
    parking spaces as suggested by the Council. The site is directly adjacent to the
    University of Nottingham and is well-positioned to access public transport given
    the proximity to bus and tram stops. Furthermore, cycle storage provision would be
    provided within the site. It is therefore evident that there would be a good range of
    sustainable travel options available to future occupiers. I am therefore satisfied
    that any arising parking demands would not have an adverse impact on the living
    conditions of adjacent occupiers.
23. The Council have also raised concerns over property upkeep, waste storage, the
    high turnover of occupiers and the absence of residents during term-time. These
    generalised assertions have not been evidenced in any great detail by the Council.
    A designated area for waste storage would be provided within the rear garden and
    could be secured by condition. Property upkeep would be a matter for the landlord
    and there is no evidence before me to suggest that this wouldn’t be undertaken
    appropriately. The likely annual turnover and absence of occupiers during the
    summer months from this one property would not harmfully impact on nearby
    occupiers.



1
    Evidence Gathering: Housing in Multiple Occupation and possible planning responses - Final Report


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  4
Appeal Decision 6010946


24. For these reasons, I conclude that the proposal would maintain acceptable living
    conditions for the occupiers of nearby properties. This would be in accordance with
    Policy 10 of the ACS and Policies DE1, DE2, HO6 and IN2 of the LAPP. Amongst
    of matters these policies require a consideration of the impact of development on
    the amenity of nearby residents with reference to noise and nuisance and the
    provision of adequate management arrangements including car parking.
Other Matters
25. It has been suggested that the dismissal of the appeal would lead to the under-
    utilisation or vacancy of the property. However, no compelling evidence has been
    provided to suggest that the property could not be let or sold for occupation as a
    family dwelling.
26. I am aware that the proposal did not receive any objections from local residents.
    Nevertheless, I have determined this appeal on its individual planning merits, and
    this lack of objection does not outweigh or overcome my conclusions on the main
    issues in this case.
Planning Balance
27. Policy S3 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. For development inside settlements, this means that policy S4 of the
    Framework should be applied.
28. Policy S4 of the Framework, states that development proposals within settlements
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in the Framework.
29. The proposal would provide additional specialist residential accommodation in
    accordance with Policies HO7 and HO9 of the Framework. The site would also be
    well located to support sustainable patterns of movement and therefore accords
    with Policy TR3 of the Framework. The proposal would also make more effective
    use of the existing building in accordance with Policy L2 of the Framework.
    However, given that the scheme would provide just one HMO only limited weight is
    attached to these benefits.
30. The proposal would result in the loss of a family dwelling, for which there is an
    evidenced need. This is contrary to Policy HO1 of the Framework. Given the high
    level of need for family housing, I attach significant weight to this harm.
31. Overall, the benefits of the proposal would be substantially outweighed by the
    adverse effects. The presumption in favour of sustainable development does
    therefore not apply.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010946


Conclusion
32. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the proposal would conflict with the
    development plan and there are no material considerations that indicate that the
    development should be determined otherwise than in accordance with it.
    Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.



Andrew Fulford
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
