Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 July 2026
by P Hatch BA (Hons) Ad. Dip MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010069
2 Ridge Hill Lane, Stalybridge, Tameside, SK15 1NF
• The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal to
  grant planning permission.
• The appeal is made by Mr Christopher Lewis against the decision of Tameside Metropolitan Borough
  Council.
• The application Ref is 25/00875/FUL.
• The development proposed is a change of use from 4 bed dwellinghouse (Use Class C3) to 6-
  bedroom HMO (Use Class C4).
Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. For clarity and certainty, I have used the description of development given on the
   Council’s Decision Notice in the banner heading above.
3. On 19 August 2026 a new National Planning Policy Framework (‘the Framework’)
   was issued replacing the version of the Framework published in December 2024.
   The parties were invited to comment on this document and the comments received
   have been taken into account in the determination of the appeal.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are:
     •     the effect of the proposal on the parking conditions in the area and
           consequently the safety of users on the highway, including whether future
           occupiers would be encouraged to use alternative modes of transport to the
           private vehicle;
     •     whether future occupants of the proposal would be afforded acceptable living
           conditions, with specific regard to internal space, outlook, daylight, noise and
           external space;
     •     the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of the neighbouring occupiers
           of 4 Ridge Hill Lane, with specific reference to noise; and
     •     whether the proposal would provide adequate waste and recycling facilities.
Reasons
     Highway Safety
5. The appeal property is located on Ridge Hill Lane, which is a well-trafficked route
   through Stalybridge, and is positioned in close proximity to the busy junction of


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010069


     Ridge Hill Lane with Stamford Street. Immediately to the front of the property the
     carriageway widens to accommodate right and left filter lanes onto Stamford Street.
6. There are no parking restrictions to Ridge Hill Lane or on Cumberland Street and
   Hannover Street in the surrounding area. The on-street parking in these locations
   is, therefore, available for both local residents and visitors / employees of nearby
   businesses to use. I observed during my site visit that there was a high demand for
   on-street parking within the local area, with few opportunities for off-street parking
   due to the high density nature of terrace properties within the area.
7. Whilst future occupants of the proposed House in Multiple Occupation (HMO) may
   not have access to a vehicle, this is not guaranteed. Consequently, in the absence
   of dedicated or allocated spaces, future occupants would need to park in the
   surrounding streets. In the case of all six occupants needing to park a vehicle
   nearby, this would lead to an increase in the demand for on-street parking over and
   above the property’s existing use as a four-bedroom dwelling.
8. The additional demand for parking is likely to result in a greater propensity for on-
   street parking to the front of the appeal property onto Ridge Hill Lane. The close
   proximity of the appeal property to the road junction coupled with the positioning of
   the filter lanes, means that the additional demand for car parking increases the
   likelihood for greater traffic conflict and reduces the capacity for traffic to
   adequately access the filter lanes at the junction. These conflicts would be
   exacerbated by drivers having to wait for spaces to become available or
   undertaking unexpected manoeuvres in order to secure a space.
9. As a result, the proposed change of use would lead to increased demand on and
   pressure for car parking, particularly to the frontage of the appeal property onto
   Ridge Hill Lane. Given the proximity to the busy junction of Ridge Hill Lane and
   Stamford Street, the lack of off-street parking provision and the high demand for
   on-street parking within the surrounding area, the proposed development would
   further exacerbate such demands which, as a consequence, would further reduce
   the capacity for vehicles to enter the filter lanes at the junction. This would lead to
   greater levels of congestion and increase the opportunities for conflict between
   vehicles, creating an unacceptable risk to highway safety in this location.
10. Although the submitted plans include a cycle store in the rear yard area, it has not
    been demonstrated that it would accommodate 6 bikes (one per future occupant).
    Nonetheless, subject to the imposition of a reasonably worded condition, were I to
    allow the appeal, I see no reason to conclude that a cycle store of the required size
    could not be accommodated. As a result, this would increase the range of
    alternative modes of transport to the private vehicle available to future occupiers.
11. Nevertheless, I would conclude that the proposal would worsen the parking
    conditions in the area and, consequently, would result in harm to the safety of users
    of the highway, contrary to Policy T1 of the TUDP and Policy JP-C8 of the PEJDP.
    These policies, amongst other matters, require development to be designed to
    improve the safety of all road users, ensure safe management of congestion
    problems and provide adequate car parking provision.
     Living Conditions – Future Occupiers
12. The proposed development involves the creation of a shared kitchen and dining
    room space which would be positioned to the rear of the property at a ground floor
    level. This would serve as the only shared internal communal space within the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010069


     property as the original living room area will be converted to be used as a private
     bedroom area.
13. There are no national or local standards set out either via the Nationally Described
    Spacing Standards (NDSS) or by the Council in regard to the levels of communal
    space which should be provided within an HMO. Nonetheless, in the absence of
    suitably detailed floor plans, it has not been demonstrated how the kitchen / dining
    area could accommodate sufficient circulation space and the necessary goods and
    furniture to meet the needs of all future occupiers. This is exacerbated by the lack
    of other communal spaces within the property as the kitchen / dining area would
    need to support the future occupiers preparing, cooking and eating meals
    potentially at the same time.
14. While some matters of detail could be dealt with via the HMO licencing agreement,
    including internal arrangements, this does not negate the requirement for a
    proposal to demonstrate that acceptable levels of living conditions would be
    provided for future occupiers.
15. Bedrooms 5 and 6, located in the second floor roof space would be affected by the
    sloping nature of the roof. This inhibits the useable floorspace for future occupiers
    as they would not be able to stand up in parts of the room. Bedroom 5 occupies a
    significantly larger portion of the floorspace on the second floor and is afforded a
    reasonable outlook from the existing dormer window. Therefore, despite the
    constraints described, it would provide suitable living space for its future occupier.
16. However, Bedroom 6 occupies a notably smaller footprint in terms of room size. As
    the only outlook from this room is provided by a small rooflight, living conditions
    within it for a future occupier would be oppressive and far poorer than it is
    reasonable to expect. This harm would be further exacerbated by the lack of
    communal space afforded to occupiers of the appeal property on the ground floor,
    thus placing a greater importance in creating acceptable living space within the
    bedroom itself.
17. The positioning of Bedrooms 1 and 2 to the front of the property at a ground floor
    level would bring future occupants into close proximity with the activities which take
    place on Ridge Hill Lane. This is particularly the case given the sole windows to
    both bedrooms directly front onto the public pavement. As already described, Ridge
    Hill Lane is a busy road in terms of the level of traffic and has many associated
    comings and goings along the pedestrian footway including pedestrian passers-by,
    the parking of vehicles and the opening and closing of vehicle doors. These
    activities would occur directly in front of the windows of Bedrooms 1 and 2.
18. The close proximity of these activities to the windows of Bedrooms 1 and 2 would
    result in significant noise and disturbance to the future occupiers of these rooms,
    exacerbated as the activities described could occur at any time but would be
    particularly intrusive when occupants are trying to sleep and when the windows are
    open.
19. The external amenity space comprises the rear yard area of the appeal property.
    The high density nature of residential properties within the vicinity of the appeal site
    results in small rear yard areas forming part of the external amenity space of the
    terraced dwellings. The external space afforded to the appeal property is therefore
    not materially different to others nearby. However, the role and importance of the
    private external amenity space is heightened due to the limited level of internal
    communal space afforded to future occupants and the need for it to accommodate


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010069


     the bike and bin storage facilities. The small size of the external amenity space
     would therefore be detrimental to the living conditions of future occupiers.
20. To conclude, future occupants of the proposal would not be afforded acceptable
    living conditions, with specific regard to internal and external space, noise and
    outlook. As a result, the proposal is contrary to Policy H10 of the TUDP which
    states that development should be designed to meet the needs of potential
    occupiers. The proposal is also not reflective of the ambitions set out in R12 of the
    Council’s Residential Design Supplementary Planning Document which
    encourages private amenity space to be fit for multi-resident use.
     Living Conditions – Existing Occupiers
21. Ridge Hill Lane is a busy route through Stalybridge. It is characterised by
    residential uses but also includes scattered commercial and business premises. I
    observed during my site visit a notable level of activity in terms of vehicular and
    pedestrian traffic and comings and goings from local businesses.
22. The proposed development comprises an increase in the number of bedrooms
    within the property and, as an HMO, would be likely to be occupied by 6 people
    largely living independent lives. In turn, this would result in a reduction in the
    dependence on shared travel and lead to an increase in the number of coming and
    goings, deliveries and the use of external communal areas. As such, these
    activities are likely to generate increased noise and disturbance levels above the
    use of the property as a traditional dwellinghouse.
23. Policy H10 of the TUDP indicates that new development should be of a design
    which meets the needs of the potential occupiers and that there should be no
    unacceptable impact on the amenity of neighbouring properties through noise.
    However, the submission of a HMO Management Plan does not appear to be a
    policy requirement, and no objection was received from the Council’s
    Environmental Health Team.
24. Whilst this may be the case, it remains a reasonable expectation that information is
    provided which sets out the management arrangements regarding the activities
    described. The absence of this information leads to a lack of clarity over the levels
    of activity expected, when such activity will occur and how any impacts which could
    arise could be satisfactorily managed. Such information would ensure that the living
    conditions of the neighbouring occupants of No.4 are appropriately protected.
25. Notwithstanding, there is no evidence before me to conclude that matters relating
    to noise and disturbance could not be addressed through the submission of an
    HMO Management Plan secured through the imposition of an appropriately worded
    condition should the proposed development have been otherwise acceptable.
    Therefore, subject to the imposition of such a condition, I conclude that the
    proposed development would not harm the living conditions of the neighbouring
    occupiers of 4 Ridge Hill Lane, with specific reference to noise, and so would
    accord with Policy H10 of the TUDP in this regard.
     Waste and Recycling Facilities
26. The submitted plans indicate that a waste and recycling area will be provided in the
    rear yard of the appeal property. This would be reflective of the waste and recycling
    facilities for other properties within the terrace. The Council have suggested that
    insufficient information has been provided to demonstrate that appropriate



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010069


     arrangements have been made to manage and collect the waste, therefore creating
     the potential for a negative impact on the amenity of surrounding residents.
27. However, I am satisfied that sufficient information has been provided as part of the
    submitted plans to demonstrate that waste and recycling facilities can be
    adequately achieved at the appeal property. Notwithstanding, the provision of more
    detail in regard to facilities, particularly the arrangement around the collection and
    management of waste in the property could be reasonably incorporated into a HMO
    Management Plan which could have been imposed via a planning condition should
    the proposed development have been otherwise acceptable. Subject to the
    imposition of such a condition, I conclude that the proposed development would
    provide adequate waste and recycling facilities and so would be consistent with
    Policy JP-P1 of the PEJDP which seeks the provision of such facilities.
Other Matters
28. My attention has been drawn to a separate decision made by the Council in regard
    to the conversion of 8 Stocks Lane, Stalybridge to an HMO. However, due to the
    scale of development proposed, its former use as a public house and its
    relationship with the surrounding highway network, it is not materially comparable
    to the scheme before me.
29. The Council have put forward a series of conditions, including an occupancy
    condition which would limit the number of occupants of the appeal property to 4
    people. However, as the condition would conflict with the operative part of the
    description of development, it would not meet the Frameworks planning and
    condition tests and would not adequately address the matters which have been
    raised.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
30. The proposal would not adversely affect the living conditions of the occupiers of the
    neighbouring property, 4 Ridge Hill Lane, and it would provide adequate waste,
    recycling and cycle parking facilities for future occupiers of the proposed HMO.
    However, given that it would harm highway safety and future occupiers of the
    proposal would experience poor living conditions, I find that the proposal would be
    contrary to the development plan taken as a whole.
31. Policy S4 of the Framework sets out that development proposals within settlements
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in the Framework.
32. Policy H07 of the Framework states that substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community, including people who rent, as identified
    through needs assessments prepared for the area of the local planning authority
    and other relevant evidence. There is no substantive evidence before me which
    identifies such a need for additional HMO accommodation, though I accept the
    proposal would add generally to the overall supply of homes in line with the aims of
    the Framework.
33. Policy L2 of the Framework also states that substantial weight should be given to
    the benefits where a development would, amongst other matters, create additional
    homes. This policy though also states such development should provide acceptable



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010069


     living standards for residents in terms of, amongst other matters, external amenity
     space. The proposal would not do so.
34. In providing additional housing, the proposed accommodation would conflict with
    other policies of the Framework, including policy TR4 with regard to parking
    provision and policy P3 in respect of the living conditions that would be provided for
    future occupiers. Taken together, I find the benefits of the proposal would be
    substantially outweighed by its adverse effects when assessed against the national
    decision-making policies in the Framework. As such, the presumption in favour of
    sustainable development within settlements contained within Policy S4 of the
    Framework does not point to permission being granted in this instance.
35. In terms of environmental and social benefits, the six bedroom HMO would be in a
    sustainable location and provide a form of accommodation that caters for
    individuals. Economically, the increase in residents would help support local
    business and services. However, as the development would be small in scale, I
    attach modest weight to these considerations in favour of the appeal.
36. In the final balance, material considerations in the proposal’s favour are not of
    sufficient weight to suggest the decision should be made other than in accordance
    with the development plan. Therefore, for the reasons given, and having regard to
    all other matters raised, the appeal should be dismissed.
P Hatch
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
