Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by P Barton BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 7th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010701
96 Church Road, Blurton, Stoke-on-Trent ST3 3BB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for outline
     planning permission
•    The appeal is made by Mr Karl Hemmings against Stoke-on-Trent City Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/OUT/00727.
•    The development proposed is 3no. dwellings (including the reserved matter of ‘access’).

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed and planning permission for 3no. dwellings (including the
       reserved matter of ‘access’) is refused.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A new version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published on 17 August 2026. The main parties were given the opportunity to
       comment, and the comments received have been taken into account in the
       determination of the appeal.
3.     The appeal scheme relates to an outline proposal, with access to be considered at
       this stage, and with all other matters reserved for future consideration. Plans
       before me show the layout of 3 detached dwellings. I have taken these plans into
       account for indicative purposes only.
4.     The appeal relates to a planning application that was not determined by the
       Council within the prescribed period. I note that the Council would have refused
       planning permission, should it have made a decision on the proposal, on the
       grounds of insufficient information having been provided in relation to protected
       species, highway safety, and trees, including protected trees.
5.     Whilst not expanded upon in the Council’s appeal statement, there is evidence
       before me of its concern of the proposal’s impact on the character and appearance
       of the area, and interested parties have also raised similar concerns. The
       appellant’s submission also covers this matter. It is incumbent of me as the
       decision maker to consider these points in making my decision.
Main Issues
6.     Having regard to the parties’ submissions, I have established the main issues to
       be the effect of the proposed development on:
           •    the character and appearance of the area;


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010701


           •    protected species, namely roosting bats; and
           •    highway safety, with particular regard to the proposed access arrangement.
Reasons
Character and appearance
7.     The appeal site forms part of 96 Church Road’s garden and occupies a large
       portion of the land to the rear of the house and a linear strip that runs between No.
       96, and 92 Church Road. These houses and those adjoining them on the western
       side of Church Road are predominantly set within more spacious plots than those
       found elsewhere in the locality.
8.     The rear gardens of these dwellings along with adjoining land, the grounds of St
       Bartholomew’s Church, and the church yard opposite, which collectively contain a
       generous number of mature trees, as well as the wide highway with grass verges,
       give this particular stretch of Church Road an open and verdant feel. This is also
       enhanced by mature trees that are visible behind the semi-detached houses that
       face the appeal site on the opposite side of Church Road. Due to the size of the
       grounds to No. 96 and its heavily vegetated condition, the appeal site makes a
       significant contribution towards the character and appearance of the area.
9.     Shown on the indicative layout is a new detached dwelling adjacent to No. 96 with
       a new access road running between it and No. 92, leading to 2 further detached
       dwellings to the rear of No. 96. Although the final details of the proposed houses
       are reserved for future consideration, the introduction of this level of development
       within the site would erode its current open nature compared to that of the modest
       existing domestic outbuildings I observed within the garden.
10. Furthermore, the introduction of houses behind No. 96 would result in a level of
    development where there is currently nothing of that nature positioned to the rear
    of the houses along this part of Church Road. It would create more constrained
    plots, which would contrast with the more generous size of those surrounding
    them. Consequently, the development to the rear of the site would appear
    incongruous with its surroundings.
11. The harm would be compounded by the width of the access road leading to the
    rear of the site and its positioning close to dwellings flanking it where, with the
    exception of 102 Church Road, there is an absence of such accesses serving
    houses located to the rear along this distinct stretch of Church Road. I found that
    No 102 was particularly noticeable in the locality, as it was sited behind Hollydene
    and visible from Church Road, with access via a narrow drive. However, rather
    than providing justification for the appeal scheme, if anything, its presence points
    to a need for such proposals to be carefully controlled if the character and
    appearance of this stretch of Church Road is to be safeguarded.
12. Consequently, the proposed development would introduce a level of development
    that would fail to reflect the established pattern of development, which would result
    in significant harm to the character and appearance of the area. In addition to
    users of Church Road, the proposal would also be highly prominent to occupiers of
    the surrounding dwellings.
13. My attention has been drawn to a number of other developments in the locality in
    support of the appeal scheme, and I have found these to be materially different. I

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010701


         saw that Blurton Farm Lodge was located to the west of St Batholomew’s Church
         and No. 102, and visible from Church Road across the church yard. However, I
         saw that this property was facing the road that wrapped around the church and a
         park opposite. As such it does not form a backland location.
14. Due to the tighter grain of development surrounding 59 Church Road and 6
    Elsmere Avenue, as well as the developments on Church View, Wedgewood
    Crescent, Critchlow Crescent and Charsley Place, I observed that the character
    and appearance of these localities to be markedly different to that of the appeal
    site. Although the properties on Charsley Place sit perpendicular to those on
    Consett Road, they face an area of open space that forms part of the overall street
    scene and do not occupy a backland position.
15. In all these cases, including No. 102 and the approval1 for 2 dwellings behind the
    properties on Charsley Place, I have little information relating to the particular
    circumstances of these developments, and whether the circumstances are
    comparable to the proposals before me. As such a comparison is of limited
    relevance in this instance. I have therefore considered the proposed development
    on its individual planning merit.
16. A number of the trees on the application site are subject to a Tree Protection Order
    (TPO). The appellant’s Arboricultural Impact Assessment (AIA) concludes that 12
    of the trees covered by the survey were subject to the TPO, of which 2 would need
    to be removed to accommodate the development with all others being retained.
    The AIA also identifies that these 2 protected trees, as well as 3 further trees not
    covered by the TPO and also indicated to be removed, are classed as Category C
    trees of low quality. 2 further unprotected Category U trees that are unsuitable for
    retention would also be removed. In the absence of compelling contrary evidence,
    I see no reason to reach different conclusions on the classification of these trees.
17. Although 3 of the 7 trees to be removed are in a prominent position along the site’s
    frontage with Church Road, a good proportion of the protected and unprotected
    trees would be retained, including a number of Category B trees that represent
    trees of moderate quality and are close to or visible from Church Road. On the
    basis of the evidence before me including taking into account the landscaped-led
    indicative layout and the scope for further tree planting, the reduction in the site’s
    tree canopy would cause moderate harm on the character and quality of the
    surrounding environment.
18. For the above reasons, the proposed development would have an unacceptable
    effect on the character and appearance of the area. This would conflict with Policy
    CSP1 of the Newcastle-under-Lyme and Stoke-on-Trent Core Spatial Strategy
    2006-2026 (CS), which requires new development to, inter alia, be well designed
    and contribute positively to an area’s identity including in terms of density, layout
    and access.
Protected species
19. The Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended)
    imposes a duty on me to consider whether European Protected Species would be
    affected by the development and whether associated mitigation measures would
    be effective. Bats and their roosts are thereby protected.

1
    Planning Decision Ref: 69056/FUL


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010701


20. Breeding, foraging and resting bats were identified as being locally present within
    the Preliminary Ecological Appraisal (PEA), which refers to 19 urban trees on the
    site. The accompanying Preliminary Bat Roost Assessment (PBRA) refers to 23
    urban trees on the site, of which most have negligible potential for roosting bats.
    However, 2 of these trees (T18 and T20) were classified as having low potential,
    requiring a Bat Emergence Survey (BES). However, the submitted BES covers 3
    different trees (T3, T4 and T17) classified as having low potential for roosting bats.
21. Although no bats were seen emerging from the trees during the BES, there is
    inconsistency between the PEA, PBRA and the BES, particularly in relation to the
    number of trees on the site, and the trees identified as having a low potential for
    roosting bats and requiring an emergence survey. Claims from the ecologist who
    produced these reports, including that the four trees missed from the PBRA have
    been added and they had negligible potential for roosting bats, as well as
    confirmation that there is no evidence of bat roosting within the trees proposed for
    removal, are noted. However, updated reports reflecting these matters are not
    before me.
22. On the basis of the evidence before me, I cannot conclude with reasonable
    certainty that the correct trees with a low potential for roosting bats have been
    appropriately surveyed. Therefore, I am unable to determine the full effect of the
    appeal scheme on protected species.
23. In conclusion, the proposal would have an unacceptable effect on protected
    species, namely roosting bats, contrary to CS Policy CSP4, which seeks to
    protect, maintain and enhance the quality and quantity of the plan area’s natural
    assets.
Highway safety
24. In support of the proposed access, swept paths2 illustrating a fire tender accessing
    and egressing the site from Church Road, in both directions, has been submitted.
    It is not clear whether this plan has been considered by the highway authority.
    However, based on the evidence before me, in the absence of contrary comments
    on this plan, and from my own observations, I am satisfied that the proposed
    access is suitable for vehicles, including larger emergency service vehicles.
25. Although concerns are raised in relation to the swept path not showing the turning
    manoeuvre of the vehicle, the internal layout of the site would be subject to future
    consideration if I were to allow the appeal.
26. Therefore, the proposed development would have an acceptable effect on highway
    safety, with particular regard to the proposed access arrangement. The Council
    has not identified conflict with the development plan in terms of highway safety.
    However, it would accord with the Framework, which requires development to
    have an acceptable impact on highway safety.
Other Matters
27. Blurton Church Conservation Area (BCCA) is located to the immediate south of the
    appeal site. Setting of a heritage asset is defined in the Framework as the
    surroundings in which it is experienced.


2
    Drawing No: T24560-004


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010701


28. I have not been provided with a Conservation Area Appraisal or Statement and
    from my observations, the BCCA’s significance primarily lies on the historical
    interest of St Bartholomew’s Church and its churchyard within a heavily treed area,
    and the adjoining park. The Council has raised no concerns on this matter. On the
    basis of my own observations including the substantial vegetation and tree cover
    between the appeal site and the church, with limited intervisibility, I find no reason
    to reach a different conclusion. Consequently, the proposed development would
    have a neutral effect on the setting and significance of the BCCA and would
    preserve its character and appearance.
Planning Balance
29. I give significant weight to the conflict with CS Policies CSP1 and CSP4, which are
    consistent with the Framework in requiring development proposals to respond to
    their context, so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings, as well
    as minimise any adverse impacts on biodiversity. As a result, I find that there is
    conflict with the development plan as a whole.
30. Policy S4 of the Framework states that development proposals within settlements
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in the Framework.
31. The proposal would make a positive contribution in the delivery of three dwellings,
    where the Council has stated that it has a deliverable housing supply of 3.73
    years, in a sustainable location. The Framework instructs substantial weight to be
    given to the provision of homes as well as making better use of vacant and
    underutilised land. There would also be associated social and economic benefits
    during the period of construction and once the dwellings are occupied, as well as
    the delivery of Biodiversity Net Gain.
32. On the other side of the balance, there would be an unacceptable effect on the
    character and appearance of the area and protected species, contrary to Policies
    DP3(1) and N2(1)(f) of the Framework. Given the long- lasting effects of these, I
    attribute substantial weight to this conflict.
33. A list of circumstances in which the benefits of approving development are likely to
    be substantially outweighed by adverse effects are given in S4(2). This includes at
    S4(2)(a)(ii) where the development proposal would have a substantial adverse
    effect in relation to the application of policy L2(1)(d) for development within
    residential curtilages.
34. For the reasons given earlier, the appeal scheme would be visible from the street
    frontage and would not be consistent with the overall street scene of this section of
    Church Road. In addition, less than 50% of the non-developed area would be
    retained within the curtilage of No. 96 and the appellant recognises that the
    proposed development would occupy more than twice the footprint of existing
    buildings on the site. Therefore, as I have found that the proposed additional units
    within a residential curtilage cannot be accommodated without harm to the overall
    character of the area, the proposal fails to meet the requirements of L2(1)(d). Due
    to the significant level of harm I have identified on this matter, it represents a
    substantial adverse impact.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6010701


35. Moreover, Policy S4(2)(c) applies as the proposal fails to comply with Policy
    DP3(3) which instructs development proposals to be refused, without clear
    justification, as is the case here with the evidence before me, if they conflict with
    DP3(1).
36. Therefore, I conclude that the benefits of the proposed development would be
    substantially outweighed by the adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework. As such the presumption in
    favour of sustainable development set out in Policy S4 of the Framework does not
    apply.
Conclusion
37. The proposal conflicts with the development plan as a whole and the material
    considerations, including the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal should be
    decided other than in accordance with it. Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.

P Barton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
