 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 15 July 2026
 by JJ Packman MPlan MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 4 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010641
 38 Byfleet Road, Surrey, New Haw, KT15 3JX
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Baker and Cox against the decision of Runnymede Borough
      Council.
 •    The application RU.26/0214.
 •    The development proposed is side first floor extension to create increased bedroom size.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2. Since the Council made its decision, the National Planning Policy Framework was
   revised in August 2026. The revised Framework is a material consideration in this
   appeal, and I have taken relevant national decision-making policies into account.
Main Issue
3. The main issue is the effect of the proposed first-floor side extension on the
   character and appearance of the host dwelling and the surrounding area, having
   particular regard to the visual separation between Nos. 38 and 40 Byfleet Road.
Reasons
4. The appeal property is a two-storey semi-detached dwelling situated on Byfleet
   Road within an established residential area. It forms part of a frontage of similarly
   designed post-war semi-detached dwellings, characterised by consistent
   proportions, pitched roof forms and spacing.
5. A notable characteristic of this part of Byfleet Road is the visual separation between
   pairs of semi-detached dwellings. These gaps provide a sense of openness
   between buildings and contribute to the spacious appearance of the street frontage,
   establishing a consistent pattern and rhythm of development. Whilst some
   properties have been altered or extended, this characteristic has generally been
   retained.
6. The proposal is for a first-floor side extension projecting from the side elevation of
   the dwelling into the existing gap between the appeal property and No. 40. Whilst
   the space beneath the extension would remain open, the extension would occupy
   the full width of the gap between the host property and the boundary at first floor
   level.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6010641



7. Although the proposal would retain an open space at ground-floor level, the first-
   floor extension would significantly reduce the visual separation between Nos. 38
   and 40, interrupting the established spacing between the dwellings which
   contributes positively to the character of this part of Byfleet Road. Whilst the
   extension would have a pitched roof with a lower ridge than the existing dwelling
   and be constructed in materials to match the existing dwelling, these design
   features would not overcome the visual effect of the projection at first-floor level.
8. The proposal would interrupt the established spacing between the dwellings,
   eroding the sense of openness that contributes positively to the pattern and rhythm
   of development along this part of Byfleet Road. As a result, it would represent an
   uncharacteristic and visually intrusive addition that would detract from the character
   and appearance of the host dwelling and the surrounding area.
9. My findings are supported by the Council's Design Supplementary Planning
   Document (2021), which advises that two-storey and first-floor side extensions
   should, in most cases, retain a gap of at least one metre between the extension
   and the side boundary. This seeks to protect the character of established
   residential areas and avoid adjacent properties taking on the appearance of a
   terrace where this would be harmful to the character of the area. By extending to
   the boundary, the proposal would not accord with this guidance.
10. Taking the above into account, I find that the proposal would erode the visual
    separation between the appeal property and No. 40, interrupting the established
    pattern and rhythm of development that characterises this part of Byfleet Road. As
    a result, it would detract from the character and appearance of the host dwelling
    and the surrounding area. It would therefore conflict with Policy EE1 of the
    Runnymede Local Plan (2020), which requires development to respond positively
    to its local context through high-quality design, the Runnymede Design
    Supplementary Planning Document (2021), and Policy DP3(1) of the Framework,
    which requires proposals to respond to their context.
Conclusion
11. For the reasons given above, and taking into account all other matters raised, I
    conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

JJ Packman
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
