Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 20 August 2026
by J Smith MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 August 2026
Appeal Ref: 6010751
Land off Carr Lane, Alderley Edge SK9 7SL
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Daniel Ingham against the decision of Cheshire East Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/1399/FUL.
•    The development proposed is an agricultural barn to support agricultural use of the site.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The evidence suggests that the appeal has been made retrospectively. During my
       site visit, it was confirmed that the development under consideration appeared to
       be in general accordance with the plans submitted. I have therefore considered the
       appeal on a retrospective basis.
3.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published on 17 August 2026. I have considered its amendments against the
       December 2024 version, which was before the parties when submitting their
       evidence. Although there have been significant amendments to its layout and
       formatting such that previously cited paragraph references are no longer relevant,
       other changes are not substantive or determinative to the outcome of this appeal. I
       have therefore not gone back to the parties to seek any comment.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are:
       •   whether there is a demonstrated operational need for the development; and,
       •   the effect of the scheme with regard to flood risk.
Reasons
Operational Need
5.     The appeal site is located within the open countryside. Policy PG6 of the Cheshire
       East Local Plan Strategy 2017 (CELPS) sets out that within such areas, only
       development that is essential for the purposes of agriculture, forestry or for other
       uses appropriate to a rural area will be permitted.
6.     Policy RUR1 of the Site Allocations and Development Policies Document 2022
       (SADPD) is concerned with new buildings for agriculture and forestry. It notes that
       such buildings will only be permitted where they accord with a set criterion.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010751


       Critically, a long-term need for the development in connection with an agricultural
       enterprise must be demonstrated. The proposal must also make best use of
       existing infrastructure, and the new building must be restricted to the minimum
       level reasonably required for the existing or planned operation of the enterprise.
       Proposals must also not unacceptably affect the amenity and character of the
       surrounding area and provide appropriate landscaping and screening.
7.     The appeal is accompanied by a Supplementary Agricultural Justification
       Statement, which seeks to explain the claimed requirements for machinery
       storage, hay and forage storage, ancillary storage for fencing materials, fertilisers
       and seed stock, together with a workshop area. At the time of my site visit, I noted
       a small number of horses, some chickens, a pair of goats, geese and an individual
       sheep within the appeal site and in other areas of land owned by the appellant.
       Some machinery was stored within the building in question, along with other
       machinery located outside within the wider premises. Whilst not located within the
       appeal building, it is not unreasonable to assume that given the time of day of my
       visit, this machinery had been utilised prior to my arrival and were left outside for
       later use.
8.     The Supplementary Agricultural Justification Statement provides an estimate of
       hay and forage yields. However, these figures are derived from average UK
       grassland production rates. They are not specific to the agricultural enterprise
       operating at the appeal site. No evidence has been provided regarding any historic
       yields from the holding, nor are there any site-specific projections to substantiate
       any future production or usage levels. The statement also identifies six individual
       items of machinery, which it states form part of the appellant's inventory either
       currently or within the foreseeable operational cycle. The reference to a
       "foreseeable operational cycle" suggests that not all of the listed machinery is
       presently owned by the appellant.
9.     The Appeal Statement (prepared by Lambert Smith Hampton, dated May 2026)
       further asserts at paragraph 5.2 that the building has been erected, in part, to
       provide shelter for livestock. Whilst I recognise that the operational needs of a
       farming enterprise may evolve in response to seasonal factors, weather
       conditions, and business opportunities, it is nevertheless necessary for an
       appellant to provide evidence demonstrating that the proposed development is
       required to support the activities claimed to demonstrate compliance with Point i of
       Policy RUR1 of the SADPD. During my site visit, the building was set up with no
       internal provision for livestock, other than a small area for one individual sheep. It
       is therefore difficult to conclude that the building is indeed required for the keeping
       of the livestock identified as being present during my site visit. Consequently, there
       is insufficient evidence to conclude that the building is indeed required to provide
       livestock shelter.
10. The proposal is not supported by a business plan, operational assessment,
    investment strategy, procurement timetable, livestock management proposal,
    financial forecast, purchase agreement, or any other substantive evidence
    demonstrating how the enterprise currently operates, its long-term viability, or the
    necessity for the proposed building. While reference is made to storage and
    operational requirements, no clear justification has been provided to explain why
    the listed machinery and equipment are required in connection with the specific
    enterprise at the appeal site, when they are expected to be acquired, or how they


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6010751


       relate to the future operation of the business. Equally, there is no evidence of a
       committed livestock enterprise over a significant period. Consequently, insufficient
       information has been submitted to demonstrate a clear and demonstrable
       operational need for the proposed development, or that the claimed storage and
       operational requirements are justified by the needs of the agricultural business.
11. Therefore, the absence of such evidence on the matters raised above collectively
    leads me to the conclusion that there is no genuine, demonstrated need for a new
    agricultural building to further support an agricultural enterprise. Therefore, the
    development would conflict with Point i of Policy RUR1 of the SADPD.
12. Through the exploration of the evidence before me, it is clear that there are
    existing buildings sited in other land owned by the appellant. During my site visit, I
    noted that these appeared to be utilised for the storage of horses and general
    equipment. However, in line with Policy RUR1, the proposed development must
    set out how the proposals make best use of existing infrastructure, such as
    existing buildings. The evidence before me does not do this. Therefore, I also find
    conflict with Point ii of Policy RUR1.
13. Point iii of Policy RUR1 of the SADPD requires that new agricultural buildings are
    restricted to the minimum level reasonably necessary to support the planned
    operation of the enterprise. As set out above, the absence of convincing and
    substantive evidence leads me to conclude that a functional need for a new
    agricultural building at this location has not been satisfactorily demonstrated. In the
    absence of a clearly evidenced operational requirement, I am unable to conclude
    that the scale and provision of the building represents the minimum level
    reasonably necessary for the operation of the enterprise.
14. Point iii of Policy RUR1 further requires that new buildings are well-related to one
    another and to existing buildings, thereby avoiding isolated or sporadic forms of
    development in the countryside. In this case, the building is positioned slightly
    away from the existing stables located within the appeal site. However, this is not
    at a position so far away that it could reasonably be described as isolated from
    these existing structures. Consequently, I find that the proposal would satisfy this
    specific requirement of Point iii of Policy RUR1. However, it would fail to satisfy the
    first element of Point iii, as set out in my reasoning within the paragraph above.
15. The Council have not cited conflict with Points iv or v from Part 1 of Policy RUR1
    of the SADPD. However, for completeness, I have an undertaken an assessment
    on these points. The building is constructed in an appearance of a typical
    agricultural building. It would not appear particularly dominant in the landscape
    when viewed from public vantage points. Owing to its physical separation from
    neighbouring residential properties, there would be no clear impact upon the living
    conditions of the occupiers of these properties. Therefore, the development would
    not conflict with Points iv or v of Part 1 of Policy RUR1 of the SADPD.
16. To conclude, the development would conflict with Points i, ii and iii of Part 1 of
    Policy RUR1 of the SADPD, along with Policy PG6 of the CELPS. The
    requirements of these policies have been outlined throughout this main issue. The
    proposal would not however conflict with Policies SD2 and SE1 of the CELPS,
    along with Policy GEN1 of the SADPD. Collectively, these policies seek for
    development to make a positive contribution to their surroundings whilst following



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6010751


       a set of design and sustainable development principles, amongst other
       considerations.
Flood Risk
17. The appeal is accompanied by a Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) (prepared by
    GeoSmart Information). The FRA confirms that the proposed development is
    located within Flood Zone 3b. Flood Zone 3b comprises the functional floodplain,
    where floodwater is expected to flow or be stored during flood events. Annex F of
    the Framework classifies the proposed development as a less vulnerable use.
    Importantly, the FRA acknowledges that the development's location within Flood
    Zone 3b is contrary to national policy, which does not permit less vulnerable
    development within the functional floodplain.
18. Policy F5 of the Framework requires the application of the Sequential Test, the
    purpose of which is to direct development towards areas with the lowest probability
    of flooding. The appellant contends that the search area for reasonably available
    alternative sites should be restricted to land within their ownership that is capable
    of accommodating the building and serving the operational needs of the holding.
19. The submitted FRA notes that the proposed building is located within Flood Zone
    3b and acknowledges that, from a flood risk perspective, a location within Flood
    Zone 3a would be preferable. The appellant, however, maintains that the proposed
    siting is necessary because the building must be closely associated with the
    existing operational area and its intended use. It is argued that alternative
    locations within the appellant's landholding that may be at a lower risk of flooding
    would be less practical and less accessible, reducing the efficiency of the
    operation. On that basis, the appellant contends that there are no reasonably
    available alternative sites capable of meeting the operational requirements of the
    development.
20. I have had regard to the appellant's claim that relocating the building would
    adversely affect the efficiency and viability of the agricultural operation. On this
    basis, it is argued that the Sequential Test is satisfied because no other suitable
    location exists within the ownership. However, I am not persuaded by this
    argument. The evidence before me does not demonstrate a clear operational need
    for the development or establish that the proposed building is necessary to support
    a viable agricultural enterprise. Consequently, I am not convinced that locating the
    development in an area of lower flood risk would prejudice an agricultural
    operation to the extent claimed, as the actual operation has not been outlined and
    demonstrated with sufficient rigour.
21. Even if the Sequential Test were considered to be satisfied, Policy F6 of the
    Framework remains a significant consideration. Paragraph 1(a) states that
    development should be refused where the proposed use is incompatible with the
    level of flood risk. Annex F, Table 3 of the Framework identifies whether
    development is appropriate within different flood zones and whether the Exception
    Test applies. Crucially, the table makes clear that less vulnerable development
    within Flood Zone 3b should not be permitted.
22. I have nevertheless considered the benefits advanced by the appellant. It is
    submitted that the development would support the continuation of a viable farming
    operation and meet a genuine rural business need. However, for the reasons set
    out above in the first main issue, the evidence does not substantiate either claim.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6010751


       Furthermore, whilst the building would not be used for permanent habitation, it
       would involve regular human activity. If the operation did actually function at a
       certain scale, the building would be accessed frequently by individuals despite
       being located within the functional floodplain. The Framework seeks to avoid
       placing vulnerable development in areas subject to the highest flood risk. Given
       that the proposed development falls within a category that is explicitly identified as
       inappropriate within Flood Zone 3b, I conclude that the proposal is unacceptable in
       flood risk terms.
23. In summary, the proposed development would conflict with the flood risk
    provisions of the Framework. The proposal therefore conflicts with Policies SD2
    and SE13 of the CELPS and Policy ENV16 of the SADPD, which seek to steer
    development away from areas at high risk of flooding, ensure that development
    does not increase flood risk either on-site or elsewhere, and secure opportunities
    to reduce overall flood risk where possible.
Conclusion
24. For the reasons given above and in taking all material considerations into account,
    I conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.



J Smith
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
