Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by O Marigold BSc DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6010706
Sleepy Corner, Stibb Cross, Torrington, Devon EX38 8LH
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a grant of outline planning permission subject to conditions.
•    The appeal is made by David Adams against the decision of Torridge District Council.
•    The application Ref 1/0425/2025/OUT was approved on 27 February 2026, and planning permission
     was granted subject to conditions.
•    The development permitted is ‘outline application for 1no. dwelling with all matters reserved except
     for access and layout (self-build) (Amended plans and ecology report)’.
•    The condition in dispute is No. 10 which states that: Prior to any occupation of the approved
     development a footway of minimum with 1.2m shall be provided from the site to the existing footway
     network within Stibb Cross, the location of the footway is identified by the Block Plan reference 05
     date received 09.09.2025 and the specification of the footway is detailed on the Proposed Site Plan
     reference 02R2 date received 09.09.2025.
•    The reason given for the condition is: To provide safe and suitable access for all people.

Decision
1.    The appeal is allowed and the planning permission Ref 1/0425/2025/OUT for
      ‘outline application for 1no. dwelling with all matters reserved except for access
      and layout (self-build) (Amended plans and ecology report)’ at Sleepy Corner,
      Stibb Cross, Torrington, Devon EX38 8LH granted on 27 February 2026 by
      Torridge District Council, is varied by deleting conditions 3 and 10 and substituting
      condition 3 with the following condition:
      (3) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
      following approved plans: Proposed Site Plan 02r1, Location Plan 04.
Background and Main Issue
2.    The appeal application proposes the erection of a dwelling accessed from the
      A388. During the course of the application, the Council sought provision for a
      footway from the site to a bus stop, replacing what is currently a grassed verge.
      Amended plans were submitted to show a new footway, and planning permission
      was granted on this basis.
3.    Condition 10 was imposed, and it requires that the footway is provided prior to the
      occupation of the dwelling. The Council and the appellant dispute whether the
      requirement for the footway would be necessary and reasonable in respect of
      access and highway safety. This is the main issue.
4.    Since the appeal was made, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
      Framework) has been published, on 17 August 2026. The Council and the
      appellant have had the opportunity to comment on this change. I have determined
      the appeal on the basis of the current planning policy position.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6010706


Reasons
5.    Policy ST10 of the North Devon and Torridge Local Plan (the Local Plan), adopted
      October 2018, seeks to resist unacceptable impacts on highway safety, and
      encourages sustainable travel options. Framework policy TR3 seeks to locate
      development where it can support sustainable patterns of movement, enable good
      accessibility for different users and make the most of existing and proposed
      transport infrastructure. It states that, in rural areas, opportunities to improve
      walking, wheeling and public transport should be taken where they exist and can
      be supported by the development proposed. Relevant to this appeal, policy ST10
      is therefore consistent with the Framework.
6.    That said, Framework policy DM3 requires a proportionate approach reflecting the
      scale, complexity and potential impact of a development. Framework policy DM6
      states that conditions should only be imposed where they are necessary to make
      the development acceptable, and are reasonable in all other respects. The
      Planning Practice Guidance1 (PPG) confirms that conditions placing unjustifiable
      and disproportionate financial burdens upon applicants will fail the test of
      reasonableness.
7.    The A388 carries a high volume of traffic, including large vehicles. Part of the
      Council’s reasoning for allowing the appeal dwelling here was its proximity to the
      facilities at Stibb Cross. To access these, occupiers of the proposal would need to
      walk along the A388. There is no dispute that walking within the carriageway itself
      would not be safe, given the nature of the traffic and the width of the road.
8.    The existing verge is raised and grassed. Accordingly, it would not be suitable for
      some people, for example those who need to use a wheelchair. During inclement
      weather, the verge may well become muddy and thus difficult to use. Even so, it is
      reasonably wide and flat, and has generally good forward visibility. The somewhat
      raised height of the verge gives its users a degree of protection from traffic.
9.    It is not uncommon in rural areas for sections of road serving houses to have no
      dedicated pavement. This includes properties along the A388 in the vicinity of the
      site. The unchallenged evidence before me is that no pedestrian injury collisions
      have been recorded hereabouts in recent years, despite the reliance of these other
      properties on use of the verge. Moreover, the development is for a single dwelling.
      As such, the size of the proposal and the number of additional people using the
      road as a result is likely to be small. Consequently, I am not persuaded that the
      footway is necessary.
10. No detailed viability figures or quotes have been provided to demonstrate the cost
    of installing the footway. However, I do not doubt that its design and installation
    would be expensive, particularly given its length. This would be disproportionate to
    the size of the proposal and therefore unreasonable, given the PPG advice.
11. My attention has been drawn to an appeal decision2 on another limb of the A388 in
    Stibb Cross. In that case, the Inspector found that harm to highway safety would
    result from the need for pedestrians to use the road to access facilities in the
    village. Nevertheless, that case involved a section of the A388 which in places has
    little or no verge or refuge. Furthermore, it involved a scheme for up to 10

1 Paragraph: 005 Reference ID: 21a-005-20190723
2 PINS reference APP/W1145/W/20/3249942



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      2
Appeal Decision 6010706


      dwellings, and so was likely to generate much greater numbers of pedestrians
      using the road than the proposal before me. As such, this decision does not
      change my conclusions.
12. In light of the above factors, I am not convinced that the provision of the additional
    footway as required by condition 10 is reasonable or necessary in respect of
    access and highway safety, including when considered against Local Plan policy
    ST10 and the Framework.
13. I am mindful of the Public Sector Equality Duty contained in the Equality Act 2010,
    including the protected characteristic of disability. I have kept these matters at the
    forefront of my mind, but they are qualified rights and interference may be justified
    where in the public interest. The removal of condition 10 may well result in access
    not being suitable for all people. I have had due regard to the need to eliminate
    discrimination and to promote equality of opportunity. Nonetheless, for the reasons
    given, I conclude that requiring provision of the footway would not be proportionate
    in the public interest.
Conditions
14. For the reasons already given, I shall delete condition 10. Plans showing the
    footway were included within condition 3 which relates to drawing numbers.
    However, I have deleted and reimposed this condition, referring to the location
    plan and to the version of the site plan without the footway.
Conclusion
15. I conclude that the appeal should be allowed and the outline planning permission
    amended as set out in the formal decision.

O Marigold
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
