 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 17 August 2026
 by C J Leigh BSc(Hons) MPhil MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date:09 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6010929
 2 Palma Close, Dunstable, LU6 1BU
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Jess George, Brighter Stays Ltd against the decision of Central Bedfordshire
     Council.
 •   The application Ref is CB/26/00075/FULL.
 •   The development proposed is the change of use from a 3 bed dwelling (C3a) to a one bed children’s
     care home (C2 residential institution).

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the change of use
   from a 3 bed dwelling (C3a) to a one bed children’s care home (C2 residential
   institution) at 2 Palma Close, Dunstable, LU6 1BU in accordance with the terms of
   the application ref CB/26/00075/FUL, subject to the following conditions:
     1)      The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
             the date of this decision.
     2)      The premises shall be used as a children’s care home and for no other
             purpose (including any other purpose in Class C2 of the Schedule to the
             Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended) (or in
             any provision equivalent to that Class in any statutory instrument revoking
             and re-enacting that Order with or without modification).
     3)      No more than one child in care shall reside at the children’s care home
             hereby approved at any one time.
     4)      The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
             the following approved plan: 11-02 Rev A.
Main issue
2. The main issue in the appeal is whether occupiers of the proposed development
   would have reasonable access to public amenity space, local facilities and other
   services.
Reasons
3. The appeal property lies on a residential road, within a wider residential area where
   I saw there is a variety of housing types. The appellants have drawn my attention to
   facilities in this area which would be available for the future occupants of the appeal
   property, which include open spaces and sports facilities, schools, retail facilities,
   health facilities and access to public transport. Those facilities are typical of what

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6010929


     might be expected in a residential area, and details have been provided that show
     these are within convenient walking distance of the site. The appellant states that
     the looked after child in the property would be supervised and accompanied for any
     trips out of the property to such facilities.
4. From my observations at the site visit I concur that there is a good range of facilities
   and those are within walking distance. Furthermore, I have no sound evidence to
   suggest that the residents of the many other houses in the vicinity of the appeal
   property have difficulty in also accessing those facilities by foot, and hence that the
   location might be seen as notably deficient in the ability to be served by (and to
   easily access) local facilities.
5. The proposed use of the property would be to accommodate one child, along with
   associated staffing requirements which the appellant states would amount to no
   more than three staff at the property at any one time. Such a level of occupation is
   no greater than might be expected if this three-bedroom property was lived in by a
   household or family. Thus, there would not be any materially greater pressure for
   accessing local facilities by foot or other means of transport than if the property was
   in use as a dwellinghouse.
6. On the basis of what I have read and seen I see no reason why the appeal property
   is one that cannot be accessed in a sustainable way, and hence provide the local
   amenities suitable for the needs of a looked after child. It is therefore my conclusion
   on the main issue that future occupiers would have reasonable access to public
   amenity space, local facilities and other services.
7. The proposal would thus satisfy the relevant policy of the development plan,
   namely Policy HQ1 of the Central Bedfordshire Local Plan 2015-2035 which states
   development (including change of use) will be permitted where, amongst other
   matters, proposals are well connected to surrounding areas, and provide safe,
   attractive and convenient routes that encourage travel by sustainable modes. It
   would also be consistent with Policy HO9 of the National Planning Policy
   Framework that provides for specialist forms of accommodation where it has
   access to services appropriate to the needs of their residents and users which, for
   specialist community-based accommodation (including accommodation for looked
   after children), is located where residents will be able to access frequently-used
   services easily and safely.
Other matters
8. Concerns have been raised by third parties regarding the potential impact of the
   proposed use on the residential amenity of the area. The proposed use would be to
   accommodate one child. I am informed by the appellant there would be supervision
   of this use at all times by at least two qualified staff. Those staff would also be
   responsible for cooking and cleaning. I have no sound reason to doubt that such
   staff could not carry out their duties to manage the proposed use in terms of
   potential for noise or disturbance by occupiers. The level of occupation and
   activities is commensurate with what might be expected with the use of the property
   as a three-bedroom dwelling, which could be expected to be occupied by a family
   with all the associated movements, disturbance and noise from a household with
   children (young, teenage or older). I therefore consider there would not be any
   material impact on residential amenity arising from the use of the property.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision 6010929


9. The property has a driveway that can accommodate three vehicles. The appellant
   states that, with a maximum of three staff on site, there would be a maximum
   requirement for three parking spaces, which would thus be accommodated. The
   Highways Authority commented that there may be some additional parking demand
   by occasional other visits, including by family, but considered there was sufficient
   off-street parking in the area for such occasions and raised no objection to the
   proposed development. I consider the three spaces on the driveway sufficient for
   the anticipated pattern of use. I note concerns from third parties regarding pressure
   for parking on surrounding streets and have seen examples of existing parking.
   However, there is no objective evidence that any occasional additional parking
   could not be adequately accommodated in the wider area or that any increase in
   parking might cause harm to highway safety. Furthermore, parking on the street is
   a situation that might occur for any residential property in the vicinity which
   experiences an occasional demand for parking from visitors. I am also mindful that
   the site is well located to be reached by foot or by public transport. Thus, on the
   basis of what I have read and seen, I consider sufficient parking provision is
   provided and there would not be any harm to highway safety.
10. The drawings show a bedroom for the looked after child and a bedroom for a staff
    member, and that is the layout sought by the appellant in order to provide the
    proposed facility they seek permission for. I am informed the two overnight
    members of staff would work on shift, and that if on duty and not at sleep they
    would return to their own homes for sleep. The staff would not be living at the
    property as their own living accommodation, and so would not have their own
    possessions or private living space at the property. The application to the Council
    was made by the intended provided of the car home, and sets out what their
    requirements are in order to operate from the property. On the basis of the
    information before me I am satisfied the layout and provision of accommodation
    within the property would provide sufficient space and a suitable layout for the
    proposed use.
11. Concerns have been raised regarding the potential impact on crime and anti-social
    behaviour. The use of the property as a children's home will be subject to relevant
    regulation and controls to manage such matters. I have no reasonable evidence to
    suggest that the use of the property as proposed will lead to an increased risk of
    crime and anti-social behaviour in the area.
12. The site lies within the Zone of Influence of the Chiltern Beechwoods Special Area
    of Conservation (SAC). The proposed development would operate in the same way
    as the arrangement of a family dwellinghouse and not represent an increase in
    occupancy likely have a material impact upon the integrity of the SAC. Natural
    England had no specific comments at the application stage. I concur with the local
    planning authority that the proposal should not be subject to an Appropriate
    Assessment, and there would be no impact upon the SAC.
Conditions and conclusion
13. The Council have suggested conditions limiting the use within the premises and the
    number of children accommodated, to ensure the pattern of use is appropriate to
    the area and in the interests of highway safety. I agree such conditions are
    necessary and so have attached them (though modified in the interests of
    precision). I have also attached a condition specifying the drawing that shows the
    proposed layout, in the interests of precision.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
 Appeal Decision 6010929


14. For the reasons given above I conclude the proposed development is consistent
    with the development plan. The appeal is allowed.

C J Leigh
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    4
