 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 18 August 2026
 By Martin H Seddon BSc MPhil DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 14 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011603
 Land at junction of Newton Street and Clark Way, Hyde SK14 4RY
 •   The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
 •   The appeal is made by Wildstone Estates Limited against the decision of Tameside Metropolitan
     Borough Council.
 •   The application Ref is 26/00187/ADV.
 •   The advertisement is removal of existing billboard and erection of a D48 digital advertisement
     display.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2. A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework was published after
   the Council’s decision to refuse the application.
Main Issue
3. The main issue is the effect of the proposed digital advertisement display on public
   safety. The Council raised no objections on the grounds of the effect on amenity. I
   see no reason to disagree given that land uses in the locality are primarily
   commercial.
Reasons
4. The appeal site is located at the north-east corner of the A627 Clark Way/Newton
   Street signalised roundabout. The A627 is a busy ring road which passes around
   the northern edge of Hyde town centre. It has nearby junctions with the M67
   motorway. Clark Way and Newton Street are single carriageway roads with a
   30-mph speed limit.
5. The digital advertisement display would replace an existing 96 sheet billboard by a
   smaller 48 sheet display, set on a grassed area with a backdrop of trees. The
   Highway Authority concluded in its application consultation response that the
   proposed digital advertisement would introduce a prominent and distracting feature
   within a sensitive and safety-critical highway environment. It added that the
   development would be likely to reduce driver attention and increase the risk of
   collisions, particularly in relation to traffic signal compliance and pedestrian safety.
6. The appellant has submitted a Highway Safety report. It advises that the centre of
   the junction is visible for at least 100 metres along all its approaches. The report

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6011603


     estimates that the proposed LED display would be primarily visible to vehicles
     approaching in the north-east bound direction along Clark Way. In addition, that the
     proposed display would only be visible along the Newton Street and Clark Way
     south-westbound approaches for a very short distance. There are footways present
     on both sides of the carriageway on all of the approaches to the Clark Way/Newton
     Street junction. Dedicated signal-controlled pedestrian crossing facilities, including
     dropped kerbs and tactile paving are present, and street lighting around the
     junction.
7. Only static images would be displayed, but the advertisement would be capable of
   changing to display new adverts every ten seconds. The changeover between
   adverts would take place instantly with no fading or other effects to minimise the
   potential for driver distraction and to reduce the effect of flashing images.
8. At my site inspection it was clear that the junction of Newton Street with Clark Way
   was busy with traffic. The appellant has advised that traffic data from a permanent
   Department for Transport automatic traffic count site located on the A627 Clark
   Way, approximately 100m south-west of the proposed display location, shows a
   two-way average annual daily flow along the A627 of approximately 18,500
   vehicles. The appeal site was visible at the approach along Clark Way from the
   southwest and the direction of the town centre, with Clark Way crossing the M67
   motorway by a bridge at that point. The traffic signals could be seen against the
   backdrop of the existing billboard, which was insitu, but without advertisements.
   The western part of Clark Way also has access to a car park and an access to
   commercial premises on the opposite side of the road, adding to the complexity of
   the road layout near the main junction. There are 4 signalised pedestrian crossing
   routes at the junction, which are likely to be frequently used given the proximity of
   the town centre shops and services.
9. LED advertisement displays are designed to attract attention. The proposed digital
   advertisement would be prominent because of its size, illumination and location
   Drivers approaching the junction, particularly along Clark Way from the southwest
   and town centre direction would see the display behind some of the traffic signals.
   The proposed display would meet the national guidance in terms of its illumination
   levels, use of static images, frequency and change of images. However, the
   change in images would still be likely to attract the attention of approaching drivers
   along Clark Way. Drivers would need to be alert and not distracted when making
   decisions at the junction, having regard to other vehicle and pedestrian
   movements. Whether a driver would be likely to see more than one image would
   depend on their arrival time relative to the change of image and time spent queuing
   at the junction.
10. The appellant’s Highway Safety report indicates from 2021-2026 a total of six
    accidents occurred at or close to the Clark Way/Newton Street junction, all of which
    resulted in slight injury. Three of these occurred in positions very close to the
    junction on the Clark Way approach from the town centre. The appellant considers
    that the accident record does not represent a cause for concern, and it is
    considered unlikely that the proposal would result in an increased risk of accidents
    occurring due to driver distraction. I accept that the accident rate is relatively low
    compared to the high traffic flow. Nevertheless, recorded accidents involving
    colliding with the rear of a car and turning across the path of other cars suggest that
    an attention to traffic signals and vehicle movement is essential at this junction.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision 6011603


11. The appellant has submitted copies of appeal decisions for advertisement
    proposals where public safety was a consideration. The LED sign at Paisley Road,
    Glasgow was installed in 2016. The appellant advises that the accident rate peaked
    at 2 accidents per year during years 2012, 2014, 2018, 2020 and 2021. No data is
    provided post 2021, but clearly the location was not accident free for the quoted
    years. The information for the LED sign at Station Road, Portsmouth incudes a
    summary of the accident record between the 10-year period of 2011–2020 inclusive
    and therefore covering a period both before and after the implementation of the
    LED screen in 2015. Apart from the years 2019 and 2020, the location was not
    accident-free post installation, and no data is provided post 2020.
12. Data for the 2 LED screens at St Philips Causeway, Bristol indicate that no
    accidents occurred between 2014 and 2016 after the LED signs were installed, and
    only two slight-severity accidents occurred in the most recent 5-year period quoted
    between 2016 and 2020 inclusive. The LED sign at Mancunian Way/Princess
    Road, Manchester involved totem signage and therefore is not directly comparable
    to the appeal proposal.
13. The appellant considers that above advertisements do not point towards any
    discernible impact on road safety from LED advertisement signage at any of the
    case study sites considered. However, the data does not include more recent years
    up to 2026. None of the sites quoted were accident-free post installation of the LED
    advertisement signage and the site circumstances would not be identical to those in
    the appeal before me. I must consider this appeal on the basis of the highway
    layout, traffic controls at the Newton Street/Clark Way junction and potential impact
    of the proposed digital advertisement on vehicle drivers and pedestrians associated
    with the use of that junction.
14. Although the site has been the basis for a large externally illuminated billboard, I
    consider that a digital advertisement display with changing illuminated static images
    would have different characteristics and would be visually prominent and eye-
    catching. In the particular circumstances of this busy junction, and its array of
    primary and secondary traffic signals, and pedestrian crossing points, I consider
    that the proposed digital advertisement display would be very likely to result in
    distraction to drivers, even if momentarily, because of its siting, size and
    illumination. It would therefore result in a potential cause of vehicle and pedestrian
    accidents through driver distraction, lack of attention to the traffic signal changes,
    and vehicle and pedestrian movements. Although the appellant has referred to the
    model conditions for advertisements their imposition would be insufficient controls
    to mitigate the harm to public safety that I have identified.
Conclusion
15. For the reasons given above I find that the proposed digital advertisement would
    be significantly harmful to public safety. It would therefore be contrary to policy T1
    of the Tameside Unitary Development Plan. This is a general policy regarding
    highway improvement and traffic management and refers to improving safety for all
    road users. I conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

Martin H Seddon
INSPECTOR



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
