Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by Rachael Pipkin BA (Hons) MPhil MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011775
26 & 28 Milton Road, Bournemouth BH8 8LP
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mrs & Miss Amanda & Christina Thorp & Thorp-West against the decision of
     Bournemouth Christchurch and Poole Council.
•    The application Ref is 7-2024-6309-M.
•    The development proposed is Alterations and conversion of House in Multiple Occupation (Class C4)
     and a flat (Class C3) to 6 flats (Class C3) with associated parking, cycle and bin storage area.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.    I have taken the description of development from the appeal form and decision
      notice as this more accurately describes the proposed development.
Main Issue
3.    The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the integrity of protected European
      habitat sites.
Reasons
4.    The site lies within 5 kilometres of a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI). This
      SSSI is located within the 400 metres to 5 kilometres zone of the Dorset
      Heathlands Special Protection Area (SPA) and Ramsar Site, and part of the
      Dorset Heaths Special Area of Conservation (SAC). Collectively referred to as The
      Dorset Heathlands, these areas host protected priority habitats and species
      including the Dartford warbler, nightjar, woodlark, hen harrier, merlin, sand lizard
      and smooth snake as well as other typical species of lowland heathland, wetlands
      and dunes.
5.    The appeal site also lies within the 13.8 kilometres zone of influence of the New
      Forest SAC, SPA and Ramsar site (the New Forest sites). Like the Dorset
      Heathlands, these habitats support internationally important breeding bird species,
      including the Dartford warbler, nightjar, woodlark, honey buzzard, hobby and wood
      warbler, as well as overwintering hen harrier populations. The designation
      comprises a mosaic of priority habitats comprising heathland, grassland,
      woodland, wetland, bog and open water habitats and non-avian species such as
      stag beetle, southern damselfly and great crested newt. The Ramsar site is also
      internationally important for its wetland habitats and associated flora and fauna.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011775


6.    All these sites are subject to statutory protection under the Conservation of
      Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (the Regulations). Regulation 63 prevents
      the competent authority from granting permission unless the proposal would not
      adversely affect the integrity of the protected sites.
7.    Generic conservation objectives for all these European protected sites can be
      summarised as to ensure that they are maintained or restored as appropriate.
      Together with Natural England, it has been established that additional residential
      accommodation in combination with other plans and projects within these zones of
      influence would be likely to have an adverse effect on the habitat sites and their
      special features through increased public access for a range of recreational
      purposes.
8.    A strategy for the avoidance and mitigation of impacts of new residential
      development upon the Dorset Heathlands has been put in place. This is set out in
      The Dorset Heathlands Planning Framework 2020-2025 Supplementary Planning
      Document (SPD). Required mitigation in association with additional housing
      development includes a financial contribution to Strategic Access, Management
      and Monitoring (SAMM) and Heathland Infrastructure Projects calculated per
      additional residential unit. This should be secured through a planning obligation.
9.    Based on the SPD, the scheme would deliver a net gain of 4 residential units. The
      Council has confirmed that a contribution to mitigation of £1,230 plus a £75
      administration fee is required for the Dorset Heathlands. It is not evident on what
      basis that contribution has been derived since the charging schedule is at a rate of
      £376 per flat, and therefore a total of £1,504 would be required. Had I been
      minded to allow the appeal, I would have sought further clarification on this point.
10. Likewise, the New Forest SAMM Strategy 2023 sets out that a financial
    contribution towards SAMM for the New Forest sites calculated on a per dwelling
    basis would be required. This would also need to be secured through a planning
    obligation. The Council’s Planning Position Statement: New Forest SAC, SPA and
    Ramsar site (November 2025) sets out that the contribution would be £300 per
    additional dwelling with an administration fee of £60.
11. The appellant has submitted an executed unilateral undertaking (UU) under
    section 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) which
    makes provisions for contributions towards the Dorset Heathlands, although
    potentially not the correct amount, but not the New Forest sites. However, as well
    as the absence of the New Forest contributions, there are shortcomings to the UU
    in that it does not provide the necessary evidence of title, such as an entry from
    the Land Registry. The Council has also advised that their legal team have not
    been paid any fees to cover their legal costs associated with their handling of the
    planning obligations.
12. In the absence of suitably secured mitigation for the protected habitats, I therefore
    conclude that the proposed development would adversely affect the integrity of the
    protected Dorset Heathlands and New Forest sites. In the light of my conclusions,
    Regulation 63(5) of the Regulations would preclude the proposal from proceeding.
    It would also conflict with Policy CS33 of the Bournemouth Local Plan: Core
    Strategy 2012 which does not permit development unless it will not lead to adverse
    effects upon the integrity of the Dorset Heaths international designations.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011775


Conclusion
13. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

Rachael Pipkin
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
