Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 30 June 2026 by Elizabeth Davies BSc (Hons) MISEP, CEnv
Decision by A M Nilsson BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011100
76 Roberts Road, High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire HP13 6XD
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mrs Kathryn Taylor against the decision of Buckinghamshire Council.
•   The application Ref is PL/26/02347/FA.
•   The development proposed is a 4.6m drop kerb.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matter
3. On 17 August 2026 the Government published a new National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework). Having reviewed the changes to the Framework, I am
   satisfied that they do not affect the substance of the main issues in the appeal.
   Since they would not therefore be prejudiced, I have proceeded without further
   consultation with the main parties.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on highway and
   pedestrian safety.
Reasons for the Recommendation
5. The appeal property is a relatively narrow two-storey semi-detached dwelling
   located on Roberts Road. The frontage of the appeal property is paved and open.
   The proposal would introduce a dropped kerb at the front of the appeal property to
   allow for the paved area to be used as a parking space.
6. Roberts Road has a mixture of on-street parking spaces and dropped kerbs which
   allow for off-street parking at the front of some properties. The frontages of the
   properties on the road vary in size. Where larger properties feature off street
   parking, it appears to me that parking can be adequately accommodated. However,
   at some of the properties with smaller frontages, similar in size to the appeal
   property, cars parked on driveways extend onto the pavement.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011100


7. The Highways Officer has noted that the depth of the paved area at the appeal
   property does not meet the dimension guidance in the Buckinghamshire
   Countywide Parking Guidance Policy (September 2015) (the Parking Guidance) to
   allow direct access perpendicular parking. On this basis, it is likely that any vehicle
   using the paved area for parking would overhang onto the pavement. The
   pavement in front of the appeal property is not particularly wide. A parked vehicle
   extending over the pavement would result in an unacceptable impediment to users
   of the pavement, potentially forcing pedestrians onto the road to get around the
   vehicle. Even if the vehicle was parked at an angle, as suggested by the appellant,
   there is still potential for a vehicle to overhang and specifying a parking position
   would not be enforceable.
8. The appellant has highlighted that their immediate neighbour at No 78 Roberts
   Road has a dropped kerb which allows driveway parking. The appellant has also
   drawn my attention to No 89 Roberts Road as an example of a property with a
   similar size frontage which was recently granted permission for a dropped kerb. I
   am unaware of the detailed circumstances of these arrangements and so I am
   unable to conclude that the Council has been inconsistent in its approach to
   considering proposals for dropped kerbs in the local area. However, these
   properties are also likely to encounter similar issues in terms of highway safety and
   do not serve to demonstrate that similar off-street parking would be acceptable.
   The proposal would only exacerbate the potential for highway safety issues.
9. In terms of manoeuvring in and out of the off-street parking space, I am not
   concerned that the proposal would impede highway or pedestrian safety in this
   regard. Roberts Road is quiet and residential in nature, with traffic calming features.
   The paved area at the front of the property is open with good visibility. There are
   already a number of off-street parking spaces along Roberts Road which means
   drivers would anticipate vehicles manoeuvring in and out of driveways. The flow of
   traffic is unlikely to be impeded to a degree that any harm would occur.
10. For the reasons above, the proposal would result in an unacceptable impact on
    highway safety. This would be contrary to Policy DM33 of the Wycombe District
    Local Plan (August 2019) which seeks, amongst other things to ensure
    development provides sufficient parking. It is also contrary to Buckinghamshire’s
    Local Transport Plan 4 (March 2016-March 2036) and Highways Development
    Management Guidance: Managing the transport and travel impact of new
    developments (July 2018) which seeks to ensure development provides
    appropriate parking. As set out above, the proposal would not meet the parking
    dimensions set out in the Council’s Parking Guidance document. It would also
    conflict with the Framework which sets out that development should be refused on
    highways grounds if there would be an unacceptable impact on highway safety.
Other Matters
11. The appellant has stated that there is no access to the rear of the appeal property
    to charge their electric car and the proposal would allow them to charge the car on
    the driveway. Whilst I understand these circumstances and the environmental and
    climate change benefits of electric vehicles, the benefits a single electric vehicle
    would bring do not outweigh the harm to highway safety.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011100


12. The appellant has outlined how the proposal would result in a more convenient and
    accessible parking arrangement. However, whilst this would be a private benefit to
    the appellant, it does not lend any positive weight of significance to the proposals.
13. The appellant has highlighted that the proposed dropped kerb would improve
    visibility for cars parking on the driveway of the neighbouring property (No 74
    Roberts Road). I can see that a small improvement in visibility along Roberts Road
    may occur if the dropped kerb prevented on-street parking in front of the appeal
    property. However, a vehicle on the driveway at the appeal property may reduce
    visibility of pedestrians using the pavement for drivers of vehicles exiting No 74. I
    therefore do not agree that safety would be improved along Roberts Road.
Conclusion and Recommendation
14. The proposal would conflict with the development plan as a whole and there are no
    other considerations, including the provisions of the Framework, which outweigh
    this finding. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters
    raised, I recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

Elizabeth Davies
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
15. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

A M Nilsson
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
