Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 14 September 2026
by H Whitfield BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011432
7 Grayling Close, Canning Town, Newham, London E16 4PB
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Jahvanne Wilson (IRENIC CARE) against the decision of the Council of the
       London Borough of Newham.
•      The application Ref is 26/00517/COU.
•      The development proposed is application for the change of use of a dwelling (Class C3b) to a
       children's home for a single child, with a manager and two carers who would stay overnight, working
       on a rota basis (Class C2).

Decision
1.       The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a change of use
         from existing dwellinghouse (Use Class C3) to a Children's Home (Use Class
         C2) for a single child at 7 Grayling Close, Canning Town, Newham, London E16
         4PB in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 26/00517/COU and
         subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.       For the avoidance of doubt, I have used the description from the Council’s decision
         notice in my formal decision above as this has been used by the appellant on their
         appeal form and more accurately describes the scheme. However, I have added
         reference to the home being for a single child in accordance with the application
         form.
3.       The Officer Report refers to an issue with the ownership certificate served with
         the planning application. To rectify this matter, the appellant has served
         Certificate B and given notice to all known owners of the land to which the
         appeal relates during the course of this appeal. Based on the evidence before
         me, I am satisfied that this has avoided any procedural unfairness.
4.       My attention has been drawn to a Lawful Development Certificate 1 (LDC) that has
         been granted on the appeal site for the change of use of the dwellinghouse from
         C3 to C3(b) as a children’s home. I have had regard to this consent in my
         determination of this appeal.
5.       During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy
         Framework (2026) (the Framework) was published. The main parties were
         provided with an opportunity to comment on the implications of the revised
         Framework, and I have had regard to any comments received.

1
    Council Ref. 24/00634/CLP dated 03.05.2024

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011432


Main Issues
6.    The main issues in this appeal are:
      •    the effect of the proposed development on the supply of family housing in the
           Borough;
      •    whether the proposed development would accord with the Council’s strategy for
           delivering specialist accommodation, having regard to relevant development
           plan policies for specialist accommodation needs; and
      •    whether the development would make adequate provision for sustainable
           travel.
Reasons
Family housing
7.    The appeal building is a two-storey, three bedroomed end-of-terrace dwelling
      located in a predominantly residential area. The appeal scheme proposes the
      change of use of the dwelling to a specialist care home for a single child.
8.    The spatial strategy in the Newham Local Plan (2018) (NLP) supports the
      stabilisation of communities and protection of family housing. Policy S1 of the NLP
      states that mixed and balanced communities should be achieved where homes are
      not created at the expense of the provision and protection of family housing, which
      is defined as houses or flats that contain three or more bedrooms.
9.    Policy H4 of the NLP states that the Council will specifically protect three and four
      or more bedroomed family housing. In adopting this approach, the Council
      recognises that the greatest housing need within the Borough is for family-sized
      dwellings. These policies align with Policy HO1 of the Framework which requires
      that planning policies reflect the housing needs of different groups in the
      community, including families with children.
10. Notwithstanding the above, Policy H4 of the NLP sets out that the subdivision or
    conversion of family dwellings may be appropriate subject to meeting various
    exception criteria. I have no information before me as to whether the site is located
    within a town or local centre, or along a section of a Quality Movement Corridor or
    Linear Gateway within 400m of a town or local centre. However, the dwelling has a
    clearly defined front entrance, access to external private amenity space to the rear,
    and is not located above an existing occupied commercial unit. It would therefore
    fail to meet all the criteria set out under part 2.a. of Policy H4.
11. The appellant contends that the appeal scheme would not result in the loss of the
    house, which would be capable of being used as a family home when no longer
    required for the C2 use. However, even though the property would remain in
    residential use, conversion to a C2 use would preclude the dwelling from being
    utilised as family housing, even if the change of use could be reversed in the
    future. This scheme would therefore remove a family-sized dwellinghouse from the
    market, which the development plan specifically seeks to resist.
12. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude that the development would result in
    the loss of a family-sized dwelling and thus would have a detrimental effect on the
    supply of such housing within the Borough, for which there is an identified need.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011432


      This is contrary to Policy H4 of the NLP which specifically seeks to protect family
      housing. However, as the property would still retain a residential use and would
      provide housing, albeit for a different purpose, I find no conflict with Policy H10 of
      the London Plan insofar as it supports the creation of mixed and balanced
      communities.
Specialist accommodation needs
13. Policy H3 of the NLP states that new specialist use class C2 properties will be
    directed towards local need, should be appropriately located in terms of the
    achievement of mixed and balanced communities and the ability to meet the needs
    of its occupants. The policy also states that occupancy from residents from outside
    of Newham should not on average comprise more than 33% of total residents. This
    is reflective of Policy H12 of the London Plan which supports the delivery of
    supported and specialist housing which meets an identified need, including
    accommodation for young people with support needs.
14. In respect of need, the Newham Children in Care Sufficiency Strategy 2022- 2025
    states that there are insufficient local places for children and young people with
    multiple and complex needs, including those at risk of Child Sexual Exploitation,
    Child Criminal Exploitation, young people with disabilities and young people with
    social, emotional and mental health needs. The Council confirms that the key
    areas of shortage are for therapeutic provisions for children with complex needs
    and specialist provisions for children with disabilities and the evidence indicates
    that there is an increasing need for solo homes within the Borough. Because of
    these shortages, the Council explains that the complex needs of Newham children
    are not being met by existing care homes and that developments that do not cater
    for these complex and higher-level need profiles do not support the identified
    needs in the Borough.
15. The appeal scheme proposes a specialist care home for a single child who will
    either have been diagnosed with learning disabilities and/or emotional and/or
    behavioural difficulties. The comments from the Council’s Social Services Children
    and Young Persons Commissioner confirms that the proposed care provision
    within the appellant’s Statement of Purpose (SOP) aligns with Newham’s
    commissioning priorities to commission homes that can support children with
    complex needs including solo homes and highly specialist therapeutic homes.
    Based on the evidence before me, I see no reason to come to a different
    conclusion.
16. To ensure such developments meet specialist housing requirements, Policy H3
    sets out that proposals for housing other than conventional housing should include
    an appropriately detailed and resourced management plan demonstrating the
    residential population mix and other management practices that minimise
    safeguarding risks, maximise opportunities to create and sustain social networks
    and access appropriate support, and ensures that the development is neighbourly.
    Proposals should also demonstrate the achievement of quality standards
    appropriate to the use, which the Council has confirmed is the Ofsted quality
    standards in this case.
17. The appellant’s case is supported by a Management Plan, SOP, Location Risk
    Assessment (LRA) and Good Neighbour Policy. These documents set out the
    proposed level of care provision, provide a management plan of how the facilities


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011432


      would be operated and managed, including details of staffing and how children
      would be clinically supported, consider the risks associated with the location of the
      appeal site and how the facility would operate within the community.
18. The Council has raised concerns about the lack of a detailed care model, provision
    of separate staff and child bathroom facilities, absence of a dedicated therapeutic
    space within the home, and has raised concerns about the experience, skills and
    qualifications of the care home manager and staff and thus whether the facility
    would meet the Ofsted quality standards.
19. I have not been provided with a copy of the Ofsted quality standards and note that
    this is a separate regulatory process. However, the Management Plan and SOP
    detail how therapeutic support would be provided to occupants informed by a
    dedicated care plan which the appellant explains would be developed further
    through the Ofsted registration process. A separate bathroom and wet room are
    also shown on the floor plans, and the garage is proposed to be converted to a
    multi-purpose room which the appellant confirms would provide a dedicated
    therapeutic space within the home.
20. It is unclear why the Council objects to the use of the converted garage as a
    therapeutic space, as this would provide a separate therapy room within the site.
    The SOP and Management Plan also demonstrate how the Ofsted requirements
    are intended to be achieved and I have not been presented with substantive,
    persuasive evidence that indicates why the Council considers this care home
    would be incapable of meeting the relevant Ofsted quality standards.
21. The SOP also explains the training and development commitments of the facility and
    includes details on staff qualifications. While the appellant has not provided a set
    timescale for the Managers completion of the Level 5 Diploma, there is nothing before
    me to suggest that this would not occur within the relevant time limits or that the care
    home would not operate in accordance with the necessary regulations under different
    management arrangements if required. Based on the evidence before me, I see no
    reason why an appropriate care model to meet the needs of children of Newham
    could not be delivered by the appeal scheme or why the home would be incapable of
    achieving the relevant Ofsted criteria.
22. The Council also raises concerns about the LRA, contending it poses questions about
    the suitability of the location of the home for the intended high risk, high needs cohort
    and thus the ability for this scheme to cater for Newham children. However, the LRA
    states that the location of the home does not increase the likelihood of the young
    people becoming involved in anti-social or criminal behaviours or put them at an
    increased at risk of exploitation. Rather, that placements will be carefully managed to
    address and mitigate risks and ensure children are matched appropriately. There is
    no substantive evidence before me that the location of this home mean it would be
    incapable of catering for the identified cohort of children from Newham and I am
    satisfied that the evidence before me sets out how the safety and supervision of
    children would be ensured through management practices to minimise safeguarding
    risks, which meets the requirements of Policy H3.
23. The appeal scheme would increase local capacity and proposes to provide a level of
    care that would meet the high risk and high needs children groups. There is no
    evidence before me that the property and care provision would be incapable of
    meeting the appropriate service model necessary to meet the local need


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6011432


      commissioning gap and nothing before me to suggest that this home would not
      deliver good outcomes for children of Newham. The appellant has suggested that a
      legal agreement could be secured to ensure the home gives priority to children with
      specific needs to satisfy the Council and align with its commissioning priorities.
      However, no such draft mechanism is before me, and the Council has not suggested
      that this would be necessary to make the development acceptable in the event the
      appeal is allowed. Accordingly, I do not consider such an agreement to be
      necessary in this case.
24. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude that the appeal scheme would accord
    with the Council’s strategy for delivering specialist accommodation, having regard
    to relevant development plan policies for specialist accommodation needs. This
    complies with Policy H3 of the NLP and Policy H12 of the London Plan, the
    intentions of which seek to ensure that appropriate forms of accommodation are
    provided in the right locations and meet identified needs. It also aligns with Policy
    HO1 of the Framework which requires that planning policies reflect the
    accommodation needs of different groups in the community, including looked after
    children.
Sustainable transport
25. Policy T1 of the London Plan and Policy INF2 of the NLP support developments
    that encourage sustainable patterns of movement by foot, cycle or public transport.
26. The Council raises concerns that the scheme fails to make appropriate transport
    arrangements for the site and contends it is unclear how sustainable modes of
    transport as an alternative to motor vehicles would be prioritised.
27. The appellant’s evidence sets out that staff would not be permitted to bring their
    own cars to the site as a term of their contract and that the existing off street
    parking space to the front of the site would be reserved for visitors.
    Notwithstanding the appellant’s intentions, there is no enforceable mechanism
    before me that would prevent staff from bringing private vehicles to the site.
    However, the Council has not identified conflict with any policy which specifically
    prohibits the use of private motor vehicles, and I note that parking provision on the
    site is not proposed to be increased as part of this appeal.
28. The site also benefits from a LDC for use as a C3(b) care home which would give
    rise to a level of associated comings and goings from those living at and visiting
    the property and there is no substantive evidence before me that this consent was
    subject to any transport or travel restrictions. Nevertheless, the Council has not
    identified any objection in relation to local parking pressure in the event that staff
    were to access the site via the private car and based on the evidence before me, I
    see no reason to come to an alternative conclusion. Accordingly, in the absence of
    any identified policy conflict, the inability to secure the prevention of staff accessing
    the site by private vehicles does not weigh against the scheme. On this basis, it
    would not be necessary for a condition requiring a travel plan to be submitted
    detailing how staff would utilise public transport either, as suggested by the parties.
29. Policy T5 of the London Plan states that development proposals should help remove
    barriers to cycling and create a healthy environment in which people choose to cycle.
    To achieve this, the policy sets out the minimum cycling standards for developments
    which requires 1 space per 5 full-time equivalent staff members for care homes in C2
    use.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6011432


30. Cycle parking is not shown on the submitted plans. However, the property has
    space to the front which would appear to provide sufficient external space to
    accommodate a secure cycle parking space. I see no reason why this matter could
    not be addressed by imposing a suitably worded condition in the event the appeal
    was to be allowed. On this basis, I am satisfied that the appeal scheme could
    provide sufficient cycle parking.
31. The evidence also indicates the appeal site is within a 10-minute walk from Star
    Lane Docklands Light Railway Station, which offers rail connections to central
    London and surrounding areas and that local bus stops on Manor Road are within
    a 5-minute walk, connecting to Canning Town. The Council has not articulated why
    this level of public transport accessibility would be insufficient to serve the
    proposed use. However, these would provide accessible public transport options
    as an alternative to the use of private vehicles which I consider would constitute
    appropriate transport arrangements for the site.
32. For these reasons, I conclude that the proposal would make adequate provision for
    sustainable travel which complies with Policy INF2 of the NLP and Policies T1, T2,
    T4 and T5 of the London Plan, insofar as they seek to encourage sustainable
    travel and patterns of movement within Newham and ensure that developments
    provide adequate cycle parking facilities. There would also be no conflict with the
    Framework, insofar as it promotes sustainable transport and that developments
    provide secure cycle parking.
33. While the Council has referred to Policy T3 of the London Plan, given this relates to
    the Council’s approach to transport capacity, connectivity and safeguarding
    projects, it is not determinative in my consideration of this main issue. The Council
    also refers to Policy T6 of the London Plan; however, it has not clearly articulated
    how the scheme would conflict with this policy. Nevertheless, given the appeal
    does not propose new residential development or additional parking provision, this
    policy is not determinative in my consideration of this matter either.
Other Matters
34. The site is located within the 6.2km Zone of Influence of the Epping Forest Special
    Area for Conservation (SAC) which is a European Designated Site afforded
    protection under the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as
    amended) (the Habitat Regulations). The appeal scheme would replace a three
    bedroomed dwelling with a children’s care home that would accommodate one
    child and a number of staff. Given the nature and scale of the proposed use, the
    level of occupation of the property is unlikely to significantly exceed that which
    might reasonably be expected to take place at the existing dwelling. On this basis,
    the appeal scheme would not lead to increased recreational pressure upon the
    SAC and thus no likely significant effect on its integrity, either individually or in
    combination with other schemes. Accordingly, it would not be fair, reasonable or
    necessary to require contributions to Strategic Access Management and
    Monitoring measures.
Planning Balance
35. I have found that the appeal scheme would accord with the Council’s strategy for
    delivering specialist accommodation, having regard to relevant development plan
    policies for specialist accommodation needs and would make adequate provision


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6011432


      for sustainable travel in accordance with the aforementioned policies of the NLP
      and London Plan.
36. The appeal scheme would result in the loss of a family-sized dwelling, adversely
    affecting the supply of such housing for which there is an identified need in the
    Borough, contrary to the aforementioned policies of the NLP and London Plan.
    However, the scheme would deliver a specialist care home which would meet an
    identified need for solo homes for children and young people with multiple and
    complex needs. The evidence before me does not indicate whether this scheme
    would contribute towards the area where there is the greatest identified housing need.
    However, the provision of both specialist accommodation and family housing forms
    part of the mix of balanced communities and the policy context before me indicates
    that there is a need for both.
37. As set out above, both main parties have referred to an LDC granted on the site for the
    change of use of the dwellinghouse from C3 to C3(b) as a children’s home. From the
    evidence before me, the LDC scheme could be implemented without any further
    consent from the Council. I have no reason to doubt that there is a greater than
    theoretical prospect of this scheme being implemented in the event this appeal is
    dismissed. It therefore represents a genuine fallback position, which is not disputed by
    the Council.
38. The LDC scheme would result in the use of the property as a dwellinghouse where
    occupants live together as a single household but receive care. This would similarly
39. remove a C3(a) family-sized market dwelling from the Council’s housing stock. The
    appeal scheme would therefore result in no greater harm than the fallback position in
    this respect and this attracts substantial weight in my overall assessment.
40. Additionally, although the appeal scheme would lead to the loss of a family home
    which would result in harm, it would provide specialist accommodation which would
    meet the needs of other residents of the Borough which equally weighs in favour of
    the scheme. This aligns with the development plan where it seeks to provide housing
    of all tenures which support mixed and balanced communities and the Framework
    insofar as it supports planning decisions that reflect the housing needs of different
    groups in the community. No other harm has been identified.
41. For the reasons given above, I therefore find that in the particular circumstances of
    this case, the appeal scheme would accord with the development plan when read as
    a whole, and material considerations do not indicate that a decision should be taken
    other than in accordance with the development plan.
Conditions
42. I have considered the conditions suggested by the Council against the tests in the
    Framework and the Planning Practice Guidance. Where appropriate, I have
    amended the wording of the conditions to improve precision and enforceability.
43. I have imposed conditions specifying the period for commencement and requiring
    the development to be carried out in accordance with the approved plans in the
    interests of planning certainty. I have also imposed a condition requiring the
    submission of details of a secure cycle store, in the interests of promoting
    sustainable transport.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6011432


44. I have not imposed the remainder of the Council’s suggested travel plan condition
    in light of my conclusions above in respect of sustainable transport.
Conclusion
45. For the reasons given above I conclude that the appeal should be allowed.



H Whitfield
INSPECTOR




                                           SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS


     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans and documents:
                   •    Site Location Plan
                   •    Proposed Floor Plans, ref. 554-PROP-02
                   •    Management Plan – Grayling House – Irenic Care LTD
                   •    Grayling House Location Assessment, Irenic Care
                   •    Grayling House Good Neighbour Policy, Irenic Care
                   •    Statement of Purpose Grayling House, Irenic Care
     3)       The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until a scheme
              for secure bicycle storage has been submitted to and approved in writing
              by the local planning authority. The scheme shall be carried out in
              accordance with the approved details before any part of the development
              is first brought into use and kept available for the storage of bicycles
              thereafter.


                                              END OF SCHEDULE




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         8
