Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 August 2026
by C Cooper-Young MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011431
Land Adjacent to Waterloo Court Health & Wellbeing Hub, Waterloo Cross,
Uffculme, Devon EX15 3ES
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•      The appeal is made by Kingsgreen (Tiverton) LLP against the decision of Mid Devon District Council.
•      The application reference is 26/00151/PIP.
•      The development proposed is erection of up to 3 residential dwellings.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       The proposal is for permission in principle. Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
         advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
         housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has two
         stages: the first stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site
         is suitable in-principle and the second (‘technical details consent stage’) is when
         the detailed development proposals are assessed. It is only at the technical details
         consent stage where a planning permission can be granted. This appeal relates to
         the first of these two stages.
3.       The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
         land use and the amount of development permitted1. All other matters are
         considered as part of a subsequent Technical Details Consent application if
         permission in principle is granted. The Council’s reason for refusal relates solely to
         the location of the proposal, I have determined the appeal accordingly.
4.       A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
         published in August 2026. In the interest of natural justice and to ensure neither of
         the main parties were prejudiced by this matter, I consulted both parties on the
         changes to the Framework and any comments which I have received have been
         considered in my determination of the appeal. Any reference to the Framework in
         this decision is to the most recent version.
Main Issue
5. This main issue is whether the site is suitable for residential development, having
   regard to its location, the proposed land use and the amount of development.


1
    PPG Paragraph: 012 Reference ID: 58-012-20180615

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011431


Reasons
6.     The appeal site forms part of an agricultural field, largely enclosed by existing
       hedgerows, located immediately adjacent to a health and wellbeing hub. Policy
       S13 of the Mid Devon Local Plan (2020) (LP) sets out a number of villages suitable
       for development, those nearest the appeal site are Uffculme, Sampford Peverell
       and Willand, these are included based on the provision within those locations of
       educational facilities, convenience stores and transport services. The appeal site is
       outside of and does not adjoin these settlements. Therefore, in the context of the
       Mid Devon Local Plan (2020) (LP), the site is in the countryside.
7.     Policy S14 of the LP sets out a range of development considered acceptable in
       rural areas. Open market homes, as proposed here, are not regarded as being
       appropriate. The supporting text to the policy identifies that any location outside of
       a settlement boundary is to be regarded as being ‘isolated’, and that the provision
       of isolated homes should be avoided unless special circumstances apply.
8.     Nothwithstanding the above, at my site visit I observed that the appeal site is
       immediately adjacent to a health and wellbeing hub, close-by to a public house, a
       residential caravan park, a number of dwellings, farm buildings and a garden
       centre which has a café and local produce retail offer. Accordingly, I find the
       appeal site is not isolated, and I note that the Council found similarly in this regard.
9.     However, these services and facilities are limited and are not sufficient to meet the
       typical needs of the future occupiers. As a consequence, occupiers will likely be
       required to travel further afield to nearby villages or towns to access services and
       facilities to fulfil their day-to-day living requirements.
10. Tiverton Railway Station is not within a reasonable walking distance from the
    proposal. Moreover, I observed that there are no pedestrian footways between
    the appeal site and the station. The proposal is therefore not physically well-
    related to the station.
11. The appellant highlights a close-to 2km alternative walking route to Uffculme
    via the nearby Public Right of Way (PROW). While I observed the PROW on a
    dry, bright and sunny day, it provides more of a recreational pedestrian link
    through unlit and unpaved fields and country lanes, rather than a direct or
    formalised route to access day-to-day service and facilities. Accessing services
    and facilities using this route would be neither attractive nor safe, particularly
    across fields and along country lanes during inclement weather or during the
    hours of darkness.
12. Although there is a footway along the B3181 to Uffculme, much of this is unlit and
    vehicular traffic subject to the national speed limit. As such, I am unconvinced that
    a walk of approximately 2km to access the services and facilities available at
    Uffculme would be a realistic or attractive alternative for future occupiers.
13. Whilst the appellant indicates bus stops close-by to the appeal site and the ability
    to combine multiple modes of travel which can broaden access to a wider range of
    destinations, I have no substantive evidence relating to the timetables, or
    frequency for these journeys or whether these would be sufficient to support
    regular, reliable access to employment, education, healthcare and shopping. In the
    absence of such evidence, I cannot be certain that public transport would be a
    realistic alternative to the private car.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011431


14. Whilst cycling may provide a realistic means of travel for some future occupiers,
    particularly for shorter journeys, the extent to which it would be used as an
    alternative to the private car would depend heavily on personal circumstances,
    fitness, confidence and individual preference. Moreover, the attractiveness of
    cycling as a regular mode of transport would be influenced by external factors
    such as weather conditions, seasonal daylight hours, and the need to travel on
    roads shared with motorised traffic.
15. Consequently, whilst cycling may offer an option for accessing some limited
    services and facilities from the appeal site, I attach only limited weight to its
    potential contribution towards reducing reliance on the private car.
16. Whilst services and facilities may be reached by relatively short car journeys, this
    does not negate the fact that future occupiers would remain heavily dependent on
    the private car to meet their day-to-day needs. The need to rely on motorised
    travel for even routine journeys is indicative of a location that offers limited
    opportunities for genuine travel choice and weighs against the proposal in
    sustainability terms.
17. Moreover, changing lifestyle patterns, increased cycling for health and commuting,
    the use of Electric Vehicles and the growth in home working are not persuasive
    factors in determining whether a development is located sustainably. These
    choices remain optional, weather-dependent and unevenly accessible across
    demographic groups, whilst home working trends are sector specific and
    reversible, offering no certainty that travels demands will be significantly reduces in
    the long term.
18. The appellant has directed me to a number of planning decisions2 and a precis of
    the planning considerations. Whilst I have had regard to those examples, each
    proposal must be considered on its own merits and based on the evidence before
    me. In those cases, the Council was satisfied that the sites benefited from a
    reasonable degree of accessibility to services and facilities and that public
    transport opportunities were available to support travel to larger settlements. By
    contrast, the evidence before me regarding the availability, frequency and
    convenience of sustainable transport options is limited.
19. I therefore conclude that the appeal site is not suitable for residential development
    having regard to its location, use and the amount proposed considered against the
    Council’s spatial strategy and access to services and facilities. As a result, the
    proposal conflicts with LP Policies S1, S2, S3 and S14. Taken together, the
    relevant aspects of these policies seek to ensure that development is directed to
    sustainable locations.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
20. Policy S3 of the Framework sets out that decisions on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development.
21. The Council accepts that it cannot demonstrate a five-year housing land supply.
    The Council’s position is currently at 2.4 years, a shortfall substantially below the
    Government’s objective.


2
    LPA ref: 26/00489/PIP; 25/01580/PIP


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011431


22. The appeal site is outside of any settlement. As a consequence, policy S5 of the
    Framework states that only certain forms of development should be approved
    outside settlements. However, these should be approved, unless the benefits of
    doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
23. The benefit of the proposal includes the provision of up to three residential
    dwellings in contribution to the Council’s under supply of housing. It would also
    lead to a small and time limited economic benefit during the construction phase, as
    well as some limited social and economic benefits resulting from future occupiers.
    Given the small scale of the proposal, and that there is a potential only one
    dwelling may be provided, these matters would at most attract limited weight.
24. In this instance, policy TR3 of the Framework sets out the need to locate
    development where the need to travel, particularly by car, is limited. This is further
    underpinned by Framework policy CC2 which prioritises sustainable patterns of
    movement. In this case future occupiers would be reliant on the private motor
    vehicle to access services and facilities, contrary to Framework policy TR3 and
    CC2 to which I attribute substantial weight. As a result, the adverse effects when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework,
    substantially outweigh the benefits.
25. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations,
    including the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other
    than in accordance with it.
26. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.



C Cooper-Young
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
