Appeal Decision
by H Whitfield BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
Site visit made on 14 September 2026
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011375
38 Hillcrest Road, Walthamstow, Waltham Forest E17 4AP
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) against
     a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Argon Artan Robert Gjergji against the decision of the Council of the London
     Borough of Waltham Forest.
•    The application Ref is 260010.
•    The development proposed is Land to r/o 34-40 Hillcrest Road for construction of single storey building
     to facilitate the provision of a self-contained dwelling (bungalow) including the provision of bicycle / bin
     storage, rear garden and associated landscaping.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     For the avoidance of doubt, I have taken the appellant’s name as it is stated on the
       application form.
3.     Both parties have referred to a recent appeal on the site (APP/U5930/W/25/3365385,
       dated 27 August 2025). Given the almost identical nature of the appeal schemes and the
       similarities between some of the issues involved, the decisions will inevitably appear
       similar. However, each proposal has been assessed on its individual planning merits.
4.     The Council’s fifth reason for refusal refers to the need for a legal agreement to
       secure various planning obligation requirements. The appellant accepts a legal
       agreement is necessary to secure the requirements listed on the decision notice and
       confirms their willingness to enter into such an agreement. However, no finalised legal
       agreement is before me. I shall return to this matter later in this decision.
5.     During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
       (2026) (the Framework) was published. The main parties were provided with an
       opportunity to comment on the implications of the revised Framework, and I have had
       regard to the 2026 version of the Framework in my decision.
Main Issues
6.     The main issues in this appeal are:
       •   the effect of the proposed development on highway safety;
       •   whether the proposed development would make adequate provision for
           Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG); and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011375


       •   the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of the
           area.
Reasons
Highway safety
7.     The appeal site relates to land to the rear of a group of four maisonettes off Hillcrest
       Road. Hillcrest Road is within a controlled parking zone (CPZ) with a public transport
       accessibility level (PTAL) of 1b and 2, which is considered to be poor and at the time
       of my site visit, I observed that parking availability on the street was limited. Whilst my
       site visit only represents a snapshot in time, I have not been presented with any
       evidence such as parking surveys to suggest that what I saw was uncommon.
8.     The appeal site is accessed via an alley between Nos 34 to 40 and the neighbouring
       terrace block, which leads to the rear of the properties. The evidence indicates that
       this alley is wide enough for a car and provides access to a series of
       garages/outbuildings located to the rear of several properties along Hillcrest Road
       and the parallel road that backs onto it. It also provides access to the appeal site.
9.     Hillcrest Road is a densely developed suburban street with designated space for cars to
       park on both sides along much of its length. The remaining area of carriageway is
       relatively narrow with reliance in some locations on dedicated spaces between parking
       areas to enable vehicles to pass each other. Double yellow lines in front of the entrance
       to the alley extend for the length of about one car between marked parking spaces. On
       the other side of the road, cars can park directly opposite the alley entrance.
10. Consequently, in the recent appeal on the site the Inspector noted that when the area
    surrounding the alley entrance is heavily parked, visibility for and of a car entering the
    street from the alley, and the space in which to perform such a manoeuvre, is
    constrained. They go on to explain that if this were to be attempted in reverse gear, it
    would be dangerous for the reversing car, for other vehicles, including cycles,
    progressing along the street, for pedestrians using the footway, and for those walking
    down the alley to reach their homes. Vulnerable road users such as children, the
    elderly and the disabled would be at particular risk of harm.
11. At present, the appeal site is enclosed by a boarded fence, the layout of which
    provides space for cars entering the alley to turn to rejoin the road in forward gear.
    Hence, drivers can avoid the increased risks described above. In contrast to the
    previous appeal on this site, the plans now show that the proposed development
    would not extend further into the alley than the existing fencing. As a result, the
    physical development proposed under this appeal would not impede the existing
    turning arrangements within the alley and, if unobstructed, vehicles would continue to
    be able to manoeuvre within the turning point to exit the alley in a forward gear.
12. The appeal scheme proposes a 2-bedroomed dwelling with no on-site parking
    spaces. The appellant states the development would be car-free, and the Council
    accept that a car free development is expected in this location. Subject to being
    secured, this would prevent occupiers of the dwelling from obtaining a residents
    parking permit to park on the public highway in an area that is already subject to high
    parking stress. However, such a restriction would only apply to the public highway.
13. The evidence indicates that the alley is privately owned with rights of access for some
    nearby residents. Accordingly, even if the development was secured as car-free, this


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011375


       would not apply to the alley and prevent parking within this area. While the vehicle
       movements associated with one dwelling of this size are likely to be low, given the low
       PTAL rating and context of the appeal site, it is likely that future occupiers of the
       appeal scheme would desire access to a private vehicle, even if on site cycle storage
       is provided. Without the option to park on the surrounding highway network, it is likely
       that future occupants, or visitors would try to park in close proximity to the dwelling, in
       the alley. Given the size constraints, parking in this area would impede the existing
       turning arrangements and restrict the ability for vehicles to turn and rejoin Hillcrest
       Road in a forward direction. This would give rise to significant harm to highway safety,
       even if use of the alley by cars is currently infrequent and it is already shared by cars
       and pedestrians.
14. There is no mechanism before me that would prevent future occupiers of this dwelling
    from parking within the alley. The appellant contends that it is speculation to assume
    that future occupants of the dwelling would park in this manner and the car-free
    restriction would deter any future purchasers with a vehicle. But in any event, they
    consider it unlikely to be used for parking given its restricted geometry and
    requirement to be kept clear at all times to maintain rights of access. However, the
    likelihood of parking within the alley would increase with the addition of a dwelling in
    an area subject to high parking stress and restrictions and with poor access to public
    transport. A mechanism to secure the development as car-free would only prevent
    residents from obtaining a parking permit for nearby streets, it would not prohibit car
    ownership, and I consider the proximity of the appeal dwelling to this alley and turning
    head could make it appear as an attractive option for people with private vehicles.
15. I have considered whether a condition could be attached to restrict parking within this
    area; however, this land is outside of the red line of the appeal site and not entirely
    within the control of the appellant. It is also unclear how such a condition would be
    capable of being enforced. While I am told that parking on this land would be prohibited
    as it would impede existing legal rights of access, this would be a civil matter and
    would not overcome the requirement to ensure necessary mitigation is secured as part
    of any planning permission to prevent the harm to highway safety identified.
16. Irrespective of this matter, there is also no completed mechanism before me that
    would secure the development as car-free in any event. While the appellant has
    indicated their intention to enter into a legal agreement to secure various matters,
    including the development as car-free, no such agreement is before me. The
    appellant has indicated more generally that completion of a legal agreement could be
    secured by condition. However, Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) states that a
    negatively worded condition limiting the development that can take place until a
    planning obligation or other agreement has been entered into is unlikely to be
    appropriate in the majority of cases. Whilst it may be appropriate in exceptional
    circumstances for a negatively worded condition requiring a planning obligation to be
    entered into before certain development can commence, it has not been
    demonstrated that an exceptional circumstance exists, such as clear evidence that
    the delivery of the development would otherwise be at serious risk.
17. I therefore have no reasonable mechanism to ensure that the development would be
    car free in practice. In the absence of this, the development could lead to additional
    vehicles seeking to park in a heavily trafficked controlled parking area, adding
    additional pressure to the parking stress within the area. A lack of available parking
    spaces could lead to an increased likelihood of illegal or obstructive parking which
    would have associated detrimental impacts to highway safety through an increased

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011375


       risk of vehicle and pedestrian conflict. Moreover, in the absence of a mechanism to
       prevent parking within or obstruction of the alley, the scheme would also result in
       harm to highway safety due to the uncertain effect of the proposed development on
       the ability for cars to manoeuvre within the alley and avoid reversing into the street.
18. I note that the Highway Authority (HA) has not objected to the appeal scheme.
    However, this was on the premise that the alleyway was maintained in its existing
    condition, free of any obstruction and the development is secured as car-free.
    Nevertheless, an absence of an objection from the HA does not preclude the Council
    from drawing an alternative conclusion and does not overcome my findings above.
19. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude the proposed development would have a
    harmful effect on highway safety. This is contrary to Policies D5, T4 and T5 of the
    London Plan 2021 and Policies 6, 53, 60, 61 and 66 of the Waltham Forest Local Plan
    Part 1 (2024) (the Local Plan), insofar as they require that development proposals do
    not increase road danger, secure appropriate parking management and seek to
    ensure the creation of safe and inclusive environments. It also conflicts with Policy
    TR6 of the Framework which states that developments should be refused if there
    would be an unacceptable impact on highway safety.
20. While the Council has referred to Policy T5 of the London Plan, as this relates to
    cycling it is not determinative in my consideration of this main issue.
Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG)
21. Schedule 7A of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) (the TCPA)
    introduced a statutory framework for BNG in England. The effect of paragraph 13 of
    Schedule 7A is that planning permission granted for the development of land in
    England is deemed to have been granted subject to the condition that development
    may not begin unless:
         (a) a Biodiversity Gain Plan (BGP) has been submitted to the planning authority;
         and
         (b) the planning authority has approved the plan.
22. The objective is for development to deliver at least a 10% BNG relative to the pre-
    development biodiversity value of the onsite habitat. This can be achieved through onsite
    biodiversity gains, registered offsite biodiversity gains or statutory biodiversity credits.
23. There is nothing before me which indicates that the appeal scheme would meet any of
    the relevant BNG exceptions and therefore the scheme would be subject to the
    mandatory BNG condition, which is not disputed by the appellant. In this respect,
    Article 7(1A) of the Town and Country Planning (Development Management
    Procedure) Order 2015 (as amended) (the DMPO) sets out the minimum information
    requirements that should accompany applications that are subject to the BNG
    requirement. This includes the provision of a biodiversity metric for the appeal site
    showing the pre-development biodiversity value of on-site habitats and including a plan
    showing onsite habitat existing on the date of application (or earlier proposed date). As
    these are legislative requirements at the point of application when a development does
    not meet any of the BNG exemptions, it is not possible to secure the information via
    condition, as suggested by the appellant.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6011375


24. The Council has confirmed that the planning application to which this appeal relates
    was accompanied by a BNG Statement and a BNG Report1. While the BNG report
    refers to the statutory Biodiversity Metric Calculation Tool, no biodiversity metric
    calculator spreadsheet was submitted to the Council with the planning application,
    and neither was one submitted with this appeal.
25. Notwithstanding the minor discrepancy with the site plan included within the BNG
    Report, Article 7(1A) of the DMPO is clear that where a development would be
    subject to the statutory biodiversity gain condition, it must be accompanied by the
    completed metric calculation tool. While the BNG Report refers to data from the
    metric calculator tool, in the absence of the tool itself, the appeal scheme does not
    contain the minimum information required by Article 7(1A) of the DMPO for the
    purposes of the statutory BNG condition. I therefore cannot be certain that the
    statutory BNG condition would be capable of being complied with in this instance.
    While issues relating to the quality and extent of the minimum information that has
    been supplied, such as the quantification of the baseline, are matters that can be
    resolved through the discharge of the BGP condition, this does not circumvent the
    need to first comply with the minimum BNG information requirements.
26. I note the appellant has referred to the findings of the previous Inspector in relation to
    a similar matter; however, I cannot be certain what information was before the
    Inspector in their determination of that appeal and whether it included the statutory
    Biodiversity Metric Calculation Tool. In any event, the conclusions of the previous
    Inspector do not override the need to comply with the relevant statutory requirements.
27. I therefore conclude that the proposed development would not make adequate
    provision for Biodiversity Net Gain and fails to satisfy the statutory requirements for
    BNG as set out in the relevant Schedule of the TCPA and the DMPO.
Character and appearance
28. The appeal site relates to land to the rear of 34-40 Hillcrest Road, a two-storey block of
    maisonettes, located in a predominately residential area. In the vicinity of the appeal site
    the area is mainly characterised by two-storey properties of modest proportions and
    traditional appearances, laid out with relatively uniform building lines along parallel
    streets. Properties in the area typically have rectangular rear gardens that back on to
    properties on neighbouring streets. Within the rear gardens, detached outbuildings of
    varying scales and designs are not uncommon; however, due to a combination of their
    siting and scale they are not highly prominent in the street scene. Nevertheless, they
    form an established part of the urban grain and character of the area.
29. In the recent appeal on this site for a dwelling of a very similar scale and design, the
    Inspector found that the new dwelling would differ from the prevailing pattern of
    development in its orientation, back land siting and single storey design. However,
    they considered the proposed plot to be large enough to accommodate a small
    bungalow with a modest garden, as well as adequate external space for the host
    dwellings. They noted that the unimposing height and scale of the new building would
    be clearly subservient to that of the surrounding dwellings and would not dominate
    views from rear windows, even if it were larger than existing outbuildings and that little
    of the new house would be visible in the street scene because of the back land
    positioning. The Inspector raised no concerns with the style and design of the
    proposed dwelling and concluded that, irrespective of whether there was a local
1
    Prepared by Writtle Forest Consultancy, Ref. 250355, Issue Date 24th April 2025


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                   5
Appeal Decision 6011375


         precedent for back land development, the proposal would optimise the capacity of the
         site for a new home, through evolution of the urban grain rather than resulting in a
         discordant change.
30. The Council contend that the Inspector incorrectly conflated matters of character and
    appearance in their assessment of the previous appeal scheme and have referred me to
    a court of appeal decision2. This appeal decision confirms that the impact of a
    development on character and appearance goes beyond visual aspects. However, by
    identifying the scheme as back land development that would differ from the prevailing
    pattern of development in its orientation, back land siting and single storey design it is
    implicit that the Inspector found that a dwelling in this location would be uncharacteristic.
31. However, the Inspector went on to explain that in this particular location the
    development would be relatively discrete in terms of its effect on the appearance of
    the area as it was unlikely to be highly prominent in the street scene or from
    surrounding properties. As such, when taking a balanced judgement, they concluded
    that the proposal would have an acceptable effect on the character and appearance
    of the area. The Inspectors decision is well reasoned, logical and considers matters of
    character and appearance in the round. This is neither unusual nor inappropriate.
32. The appeal scheme before me is almost identical to the previous appeal scheme. With
    consistency at the forefront of my mind, in terms of its effect on the character and
    appearance of the area, there is no persuasive evidence before me that would lead me
    to an alternative conclusion than that drawn by the previous Inspector. The siting of a
    dwelling in this back land positioning would be out of character with the predominately
    linear pattern of surrounding housing. However, it would be located close to other
    examples of detached outbuildings in rear gardens which form part of the established
    pattern of development. Although the dwelling would not be incidental in scale or
    function, it would be relatively discrete given its height, scale and limited visibility in the
    street scene. Therefore, in this particular case, it would have an acceptable effect on
    the character and appearance of the area when considered as a whole. While the
    Council has referred to a lack of other examples of back land development in the area,
    an absence of similar development does not automatically equate to harm and does
    not override the above conclusions.
33. When considering the waste collection point, the Inspector noted there to be a variety of
    front garden bin storage arrangements on Hillcrest Road and concluded that the
    storage/collection point proposed at the front of No 40 would not look out of place in this
    context. They concluded the proposed enclosure would be in proportion with the existing
    wall, could be softened by planting over time and could improve the appearance of the
    current less formal arrangement. I similarly observed examples of timber fencing within
    front gardens along the street and other prominent bin storage enclosures and
    arrangements. No alterations are proposed to the existing front boundary wall, and the
    majority of the front garden area would remain unaffected by the development. On this
    basis, the waste collection point would not be uncharacteristic or harmful in the street
    scene, even if additional planting was not installed.
34. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude the proposed development would have
    an acceptable effect on the character and appearance of the area. This complies with
    Policy D4 of the London Plan and Policies 6, 8 and 53 of the Local Plan insofar as


2
    Kazalbash v SSLUHC & London Borough of Hillingdon [2023] EWCA Civ 904


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              6
Appeal Decision 6011375


         they support good design that takes into account urban form and grain and responds
         appropriately to its context.
Other Matters
35. I note the appeal follows applications previously refused by the Council and a recent
    appeal and that the appellant has made amendments to overcome the concerns
    previously raised. Nevertheless, I have determined the appeal on its individual
    planning merits and the amendments made do not overcome my above findings.
36. The appellant has also referred to a previously approved scheme for garages on the
    appeal site3. However, I do not have the full details relating to this case and note the
    evidence indicates that this permission was not implemented. As such, it has not
    been determinative in my consideration of the appeal scheme.
Epping Forest Special Area of Conservation
37. The appeal site falls within the Zone of Influence for the Epping Forest Special Area
    of Conservation (SAC), which is a European Site as defined by the Conservation of
    Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended). The qualifying features of the
    SAC are its value in respect of beech trees, wet and dry heaths and population of
    stag beetle. The conservation objectives are to ensure that the integrity of the site is
    maintained or restored as appropriate and ensure that the site contributes to
    achieving the Favourable Conservation Status of its Qualifying Features and Species.
    One of the pathways of impact currently affecting the SAC is noted to be recreational
    pressure from people visiting the forest. Therefore, for new residential development a
    financial contribution per dwelling is required towards Strategic Access Management
    and Monitoring (SAMM) mitigation.
38. It is common ground between the parties that a SAMM contribution would be required
    to mitigate any likely significant effect of the development on the integrity of the SAC.
    The appellant has indicated their willingness to enter into a legal agreement to secure
    this contribution. However, there is no such mechanism before me in this appeal.
    Nevertheless, as I have found that the scheme would be unacceptable for other
    reasons, it is not necessary for me to consider whether there would be a Likely
    Significant Effect on the integrity of the European Site or undertake an Appropriate
    Assessment.
S106 Agreement
39. In addition to matters addressed above, the Council’s fifth reason for refusal refers to
    the requirement for a legal agreement to secure contributions towards the monitoring
    of a Construction Logistics Plan and Condition Survey, a S278 agreement for highway
    related works, the SAC SAMM contribution, BNG monitoring and a financial
    contribution towards a carbon levy as energy mitigation in the event that carbon
    reduction targets are not met. The Council states these contributions are necessary to
    mitigate the effects of the development.
40. The appellant’s S106 statement confirms the appellant’s agreement to the
    requirements listed by the Council. The appellant acknowledges the need for a legal
    agreement to secure the above requirements and confirms their willingness to enter
    into such an agreement. However, no finalised legal agreement is before me. While
    the appellant refers to a lack of engagement by the Council in this respect, it was
3
    Council Ref. 190651


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6011375


       open to the appellant to submit a completed Unilateral Undertaking (UU) with this
       appeal to secure the above requirements. As no such agreement is before me, there
       is no mechanism to secure the provisions requested by the Council.
41. The appellant suggests that completion of a UU could be secured by a suitably
    worded planning condition; however, as set out previously, exceptional circumstances
    for the imposition of such a condition have not been put to me, nor has clear evidence
    that the delivery of the development would otherwise be at serious risk been provided.
    Due to its limited scale and general lack of complexity, the appeal scheme does not
    meet the exceptional circumstances which would justify the imposition of a condition
    seeking a planning obligation. Accordingly, a condition would not be appropriate in
    this case. Had the proposal been acceptable in all other respects, this is a matter
    I would have raised with the main parties.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
42. I have found that the proposal would not have an adverse effect on the character and
    appearance of the surrounding area. However, the absence of harm in this respect is a
    neutral factor and does not outweigh the harm, and subsequent policy conflict, that
    I have found with regards to the overall effects of the development on highway safety
    and insufficient information provided relating to BNG, to which I attach significant weight.
43. Set against this, the development would make an effective use of underutilised land
    to provide one dwelling in an existing residential area. The development would
    therefore make a small but beneficial contribution to the choice of homes in the area
    and the supply of housing land; as well as providing social and economic benefits
    during construction and after occupation. As a small-site, it could also be built-out
    reasonably quickly.
44. Housing delivery is supported by the Framework and, therefore, this benefit weighs in
    favour of the proposal. Policy S4 of the Framework also states that development
    proposals within settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so
    would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against
    the national decision-making policies in this Framework. In this case, given the scale
    of the development, the benefits associated with the delivery of one dwelling would be
    limited, even taking account of the objective of significantly boosting the supply of
    housing in the Framework, and would be substantially outweighed by the adverse
    effects I have identified, when assessed against the national decision-making policies
    in this Framework.
45. Therefore, for the reasons given above, I conclude that the proposal conflicts with the
    development plan as a whole and material considerations do not indicate that a
    decision should be made other than in accordance with the development plan.
    Accordingly, the appeal should be dismissed.

H Whitfield
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
