Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 22 September 2026
by Alison Fish BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 October 2026.


Appeal Ref: 6011939
Pole Barn, Hollywood Farm, Uttoxeter Road, Hollywood, Stone, ST15 8RB
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the
    Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•   The appeal is made by Harrowby Estates against the decision of Stafford Borough Council.
•   The application Ref is 25/41644/PAR.
•   The development proposed is conversion of the redundant agricultural building to one dwelling,

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Background and Main Issue
2. The appeal relates to proposals advanced under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part
   3, Class Q of the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development)
   (England) Order 2015 (as amended) (“the GPDO”). Class Q permits the change of
   use of a building that is or was part of an established agricultural unit and any land
   within that building’s curtilage, to a use falling within Class C3 (dwellinghouses) of
   Schedule 1 to the Use Classes Order.
3. The Council’s case is that the building does not have suitable existing access to a
   public highway and therefore does not constitute permitted development by virtue
   of Paragraph Q1(p) of the GPDO.
4. Consequently, the main issue is whether the building has suitable existing access
   to a public highway and therefore, whether the proposed development qualifies as
   permitted development under Class Q of the GPDO.
Reasons
5. Hollywood Farm consists of a farmhouse and complex of former agricultural
   buildings located to the southern side of Uttoxeter Road. The appeal site is located
   adjacent to the existing farmhouse and at the southern edge of the existing
   complex. The proposal relates to the conversion of a pole barn to a single dwelling
   and the change of use of the land immediately to the north of the building for use as
   its associated parking and garden.
6. Drawing number: YBD09235-P-102 Revision H accompanying the application,
   indicates that access would be provided to the proposed dwelling via a new access
   from the classified B5027 Uttoxeter Road. This access benefits from a separate
   grant of planning permission and is shown on drawing number: YBD09235-P-302
   Revision F (‘the drawing’).


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011939


7. There appears to be no dispute that the access to the east would not provide a
   suitably located safe access for the residential use of the buildings at Hollywood
   Farm and that it would be necessary to carry out the access works shown on the
   drawing in order to provide a suitable access for the site.
8. I saw that whilst construction works were clearly taking place on the wider site at
   the time of my visit and works to convert other buildings were underway, the access
   as shown on the drawing had not been provided. The hedge along the site frontage
   had been removed but there was no access connecting the site to the road in the
   position shown on the drawing. The access to the east, shown on the drawing to be
   reinstated as verge, was being used for construction deliveries to the site.
9. I accept that in all likelihood, the access shown on the drawing would be in place
   before the dwelling proposed in this appeal was occupied and that there are
   practical reasons for completing access works in the latter stages of construction. I
   also note that there would be benefits arising from the additional dwelling which
   would be created, were I to allow the appeal. However, I must only consider the
   matter of whether the proposal complies or not with the GPDO. Other
   considerations advanced by the appellant are not relevant in this instance.
10. Paragraph Q1(p) of the GPDO states that development is not permitted if the
    building does not have suitable existing access to a public highway. The word
    ‘existing’ means something that is already present and I saw that the suitable
    access shown on the drawing is not. I conclude that the building does not have
    suitable existing access to a public highway. Consequently, the proposal does not
    constitute permitted development under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class
    Q of the GPDO.
Conclusion
11. As the proposal does not constitute permitted development, the appeal fails.

Alison Fish
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
