 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 11 September 2026
 by Jonathan Price BA(Hons) DipTP DMS MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 16 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011384
 34 Aldham Road, Hadleigh, Suffolk IP7 6BP
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Ms Jesse Gilbey against the decision of Babergh District Council.
 •    The application Ref is DC/26/00772.
 •    The development proposed is described in the application as a rear two-storey extension, ground
      floor to have kitchen, utility, w/c and dining room, while first floor has new bedrooms and an ensuite.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2. On 17 August 2026 the Government published the revised National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework). This does not alter the requirement in planning law
   that appeals be determined in accordance with the development plan, unless
   material considerations indicate otherwise. Because the relevant development plan
   policies in this case are not materially inconsistent with those of the new
   Framework, I have not deemed it necessary to seek the further views of the parties.
Main Issue
3. The main issue in this appeal is the effects of the proposal on the living conditions
   at 32 Aldham Road, with particular regard to outlook.
Reasons
4. The house at No 34 is one of a semi-detached pair, each with long back gardens.
   The proposal would extend the house substantially at the rear, at the same eaves
   height and to its full width with a twin gable roof arrangement. The two storey
   extension and hipped roof would run directly along the boundary with the neighbour
   at No 32. The height, extent and proximity of this very large rear addition would
   detract from this neighbour’s living conditions to a notably harmful degree. Although
   this neighbour would still retain a clear outlook towards the rear and to one side,
   the significant mass of this extension would have an unacceptably overwhelming
   and oppressive impact at the side of the neighbour’s garden it would abut. This
   impact would be most acute within the nearest and more regularly used parts of the
   adjacent back garden at No 32. The large extension would also have an
   overbearing and confining impact on the view from this neighbour’s master
   bedroom, judging from the plans submitted as part of the appellant’s statement.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6011384


5. Although this proposal would not harm the character and appearance of this area,
   being to the rear and not visible in the street scene, this would not offset the
   harmful impacts found on the present living conditions at No 32. Nor does the fact
   that the long plot can comfortably accommodate such a large extension assist in
   this case, as this has no bearing on the unacceptably confining effects caused to
   the next door neighbour. This neighbour might be afforded greater privacy as a
   consequence of this extension, which would also avoid blocking any direct sunlight,
   but this would be scant compensation for the harmful confinement of outlook that it
   would cause.
Conclusion
6. The development proposed would cause substantial harm to the living conditions at
   32 Aldham Road, with particular regard to the confining impact on outlook at the
   rear. This would be specifically contrary to policies LP03 (1-c) and LP24 (2-i) of the
   Babergh and Mid Suffolk Joint Local Plan (2023) and brings the proposal into
   conflict with the development plan as a whole. The proposal would also run counter
   to the objectives of the Framework over achieving well-designed places. As a
   consequence, I conclude the appeal does not succeed.

Jonathan Price
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
