 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 17 August 2026
 by A Hartley, LLB (Hons), Solicitor, MBA
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 7 September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6011125
Land at Park Road, Gateshead NE8 3EJ
 •    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning Act (Control of
      Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 against a refusal to grant express consent.
 •    The appeal is made by Wildstone Estates Limited against the decision of Gateshead Metropolitan
      Borough Council.
 •    The application Ref DC/26/00199/ADV.
 •    The advertisement proposal is for the installation of a digital advertisement display.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. The Council changed the address of the site with the consent of the appellant
   during the course of the application. Accordingly, I have used the address given on
   the Council’s Notice of Decision.
3. The National Planning Policy Framework has been revised since the submissions
   were made. However, as the revisions do not directly concern the issues in this
   appeal further comments were not considered necessary. I do not consider that this
   has prejudiced any of the parties and I have proceeded with the appeal on this
   basis.
Main Issue
4. The Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements) (England) Regulations
   2007 (the Regulations) require that decisions for express consent for the display of
   advertisements are made only in the interest of amenity and public safety.
5. It is agreed between the main parties that there would be no unacceptable impact
   on amenity subject to conditions. I have no reason to disagree. The main issue is
   therefore the effect of the proposal on public safety.
Reasons
6. The proposed advertisement would be situated in a primarily commercial area. It
   would face oncoming traffic on a busy main road adjacent to junctions with
   deceleration and acceleration lanes; which serve multiple businesses. It would also
   be close to traffic lights at the intersection of Park Road (the A184), Shearlegs
   Road and St James Road. A shared pedestrian and cycle route also runs in front of
   the appeal site, adjacent to the carriageway. There is an existing advertisement at
   the appeal site that faces westbound traffic.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
    Appeal Decision 6011125


7. A very recent appeal decision1 (Recent Appeal) concerning an identical proposal
   on the same site concluded that the advertisement would be acceptable in terms of
   amenity. However, the Inspector concluded that it would be highly likely to distract
   users of a busy highway at a point where there are conflicting vehicular, cyclist and
   pedestrian movements, which would result in harm to public safety.
8. At the time of my site visit, roadworks were taking place. Park Lane beyond the
   traffic lights at the junction with Albany Road was closed. A diversion sign directed
   traffic travelling westbound along Park Road to turn right down Albany Road.
   Despite this, I observed traffic using the Park Road eastbound carriageway, its
   junctions, deceleration lane, pedestrian and cycle routes/paths. The highway
   hazards identified in the Recent Appeal appeared to be unchanged. I therefore
   attach significant weight to that decision.
9. I have had regard to the Highway Safety Report2 (HSR) submitted in support of this
   appeal, together with the comments provided by the Council.
10. The HSR states that it has been prepared having regard to the Transport for
    London Guidance for Digital Roadside Advertising and Proposed Best Practice
    (2013) (TfL Guidance). It takes into consideration the proximity of traffic signal
    junctions, the diverge/deceleration lane junction, pedestrian and cycle facilities,
    sightlines and traffic signs. It also considers the existing advertisement, accident
    rates and the highway layout in the vicinity of the proposed site.
11. Some of these key considerations when analysed separately might comply with the
    TfL Guidance. However, when the hazards are taken cumulatively, and within the
    context of the appeal site, I am not persuaded that the proposed advertisement
    would not increase the risk of harm to public safety in this specific location.
12. In reaching this view, I have had regard to the prevailing hazards, including the
    proximity to a busy junction; the speed limit of 40 mph; that there is no restriction on
    lane changing manoeuvres in the vicinty of the proposed advertisement; the
    potential conflict between 40 mph traffic and the shared cycle and pedestrian route
    at uncontrolled junctions; the impact of queuing traffic on late lane changes and the
    distraction to road users passing the petrol station exit.
13. I have also taken into consideration the accident data provided and note that there
    has been a further accident involving a pedestrian since the Recent Appeal.
14. I consider that the extent of hazards that require careful consideration and attention
    from drivers in the vicinity of the proposed advertisement are such that the proposal
    would cause a level of distraction that would be highly likely to cause an accident
    and thus increase the risk to public safety.
15. In reaching this conclusion I have considered the conditions set out by the
    appellant to mitigate the risk through controlling the illumination, frequency and
    method of display changes. Nevertheless, the position of the proposal would be
    likely to distract road users at a point at which utmost due care and attention is
    required to negotiate their environment. The suggested conditions would not
    overcome the harm identified.



1
    APP/H4505/Z/25/3371395 11/2/26
2
    Appellant Grounds of Appeal Appendix 2 Astute Highway Safety Report August 2025


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                   2
 Appeal Decision 6011125


16. I note that there is an existing advertisement on the appeal site, however this faces
    westbound traffic. The circumstances are substantially different in terms of the
    number of hazards faced by drivers. I do not therefore consider this existing
    advertisement to be a factor that weighs in favour of the application.
17. Overall, I conclude that the position and nature of the display would be likely to
    result in distraction to users of the busy highway at a point where there are
    conflicting vehicular, cyclist and pedestrian movements, to the extent that it would
    have a harmful effect on public safety.
Other Matters
18. My attention is drawn to various examples of existing advertisements within the
    surrounding area. Whilst I agree that the surrounding commercial area is capable of
    accommodating advertisements, their presence does not justify allowing the
    proposed advertisement in its particular location, where I have found it would cause
    harm to public safety.
19. My attention is also drawn to the environmental, social and economic benefits of
    digital advertisements as outlined by the appellant. Whilst these could be
    considered factors in favour of the proposal, they do not outweigh the harm that I
    have identified. In any event, the Regulations require that I exercise my powers
    only with regard to amenity and public safety, albeit these benefits may be
    considered as other relevant factors.
Conclusion
20. For the reasons given above I conclude that the display of the advertisement would
    be detrimental to the interests of public safety, therefore the appeal should be
    dismissed.



A Hartley
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
