Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 September 2026
by C Cooper-Young MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011852
Chase Lodge Hospital, Page Street, Mill Hill, Barnet, London NW7 2ED
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Dr Ibrahim Yahli of Chase Lodge Hospital, against the decision of the Council
       of the London Borough of Barnet.
•      The application reference is 26/1249/RCU.
•      The development is described as, temporary planning permission for retention of pergola at front of
       building for three years.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. As the development relates to a Grade II listed building, I have had special regard
   to section 66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
   1990.
3. For the avoidance of doubt, I observed at my site visit that the development had
   already been carried out.
4. I am also the Inspector appointed to determine another appeal1 at this site, for the
   retention of a pergola to the rear of the building for a temporary period of three
   years, submitted by the same appellant. This is subject to a separate decision.
   Although I have determined each appeal on its own merits, the similarity in the
   evidence presented to me results in some duplication in how I have addressed
   common matters.
5. During the course of the appeal a new National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. Whilst the format has altered, any
   considerations that are material to this decision have not fundamentally changed. I
   am satisfied that this has not prejudiced any party and I have had regard to the
   latest version in reaching my decision.
Main Issue
6. The main issue is the effect of the development on the special architectural and
   historic interest of the Grade II listed building, and its significance as a designated
   heritage asset.



1
    PINS ref: 6011855

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011852


Reasons
7. The appeal property, listed in 1983, is an early 19th century suburban villa, which
   has been in use as a private healthcare facility for approximately 20 years. It has a
   largely unaltered symmetrical principal elevation fronting into the site, overlooking a
   parking area and playing fields beyond the appeal site. The building is comprised of
   a two-storey central section with two-storey recessed wings to each side. The List
   Entry and planning history document alterations to the listed building and an
   additional detached building to the north of the host building.
8. Despite these later additions, I find the significance of this listed building largely
   arises from, insofar as it relates to this appeal, its architectural and historic value,
   as a noteworthy example of a former 19th century villa, including its architecturally
   balanced, symmetrical principal elevation. Whilst I observed a number of buildings
   and structures within the grounds, the remaining space around the host building,
   although changed over time, nevertheless makes a positive contribution to its
   setting which contributes to its understanding and special interest.
9. Approaching the reception area, located to the front of the building's right-hand
   wing, the pergola appears as an overtly modern and visually intrusive addition. Its
   contemporary design, materials and detailing sit uncomfortably alongside the
   historic fabric of the listed building, creating a discordant relationship that detracts
   from its architectural quality.
10. This harm is compounded by the pergola's size, scale and prominence, which
    compete with, rather than defer to, the host building. In doing so, it disrupts the
    balanced composition and refined late Georgian proportions that underpin the
    building's special interest. Furthermore, by introducing a conspicuous structure into
    an area of open space that contributes positively to the asset's setting, the pergola
    diminishes the ability to appreciate the building's historic form and significance.
11. The development does not affect the fabric of the listed building. However,
    significance can be harmed through development within an asset's setting as well
    as through physical alteration. In this case, the loss of open space and introduction
    of an additional structure within the grounds would diminish the contribution that the
    setting makes to the significance of the listed building. I therefore find that the
    proposal would result in harm to the significance of the designated heritage asset,
    to which I attach considerable importance and weight. In accordance with Policy
    HE5 of the Framework, I must weigh the harm to the significance of the heritage
    asset with any public benefits resulting from the proposal.
12. The appeal site is a private healthcare facility. The appellant submits that the
    development provides a number of social benefits for users of the facility. The
    claimed benefits relate primarily to the comfort and convenience of those using the
    private facility. Although the provision of sheltered outdoor space may enhance the
    experience of patients and visitors, such advantages are inherently private in
    nature and do not amount to public benefits in the heritage context. As such, the
    identified benefits carry little weight and do not constitute public benefits capable of
    offsetting the harm identified to the significance of the listed building.
13. Consequently, the development harms the special architectural and historic interest
    of the listed building to the detriment of its significance, and little public benefits
    have been identified that outweigh this harm. Whilst I recognise that the permission
    sought would be limited to a three-year period, the harm identified would persist

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011852


     throughout that time. Accordingly, the temporary nature of the development attracts
     only limited weight and does not affect my overall conclusion on the proposal.
14. The development therefore conflicts with Framework Policy HE6; Policies CDH01
    and CDH08 of the Barnet Local Plan (2025) (BLP) which, amongst other matters,
    require proposals to be of high quality design that conserves the historic
    environment; and Policy HC1 of the London Plan (2021) (LP) which requires
    proposals to conserve the historic environment but also seeks to improve the
    interpretation of assets.
15. While the Council have also referred to BLP CDH05 and LP Policy D3, I do not find
    these to be directly relevant to the matters upon which this appeal turns.
Conclusion
16. The proposal would harm the significance of a designated heritage asset and would
    conflict with the development plan taken as a whole. There are no material
    considerations that indicate the decision should be made other than in accordance
    with the development plan.
17. For the reasons given above the appeal is dismissed.



C Cooper-Young
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
