 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 30 August 2026
 by J Somers BSocSci (Planning) MA (HEC) MRTPI IHBC
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State.
 Decision date: 18 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011097
 7 Churchfields Road, Bromsgrove Worcestershire B61 8EB
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a
     refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Elmsvyne Ltd against the decision of Bromsgrove District Council.
 •   The application reference is 25/00803/FUL.
 •   The development proposed is described as on the Application Form as the ‘Proposed
     demolition of existing buildings on site and development of 3 new dwellinghouses.’

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the Proposed
   demolition of existing buildings on site and development of 3 new dwellinghouses,
   at 7 Churchfields Road, Bromsgrove Worcestershire B61 8EB accordance with the
   terms of the application Ref: 25/00803/FUL, subject to the conditions attached as
   an annexe to this letter.
Application for Costs
2. An application for costs was made by Elmsvyne Ltd against Bromsgrove District
   Council. This application is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3. I note that the Council’s Decision Notice in the Reason for Refusal only refers to the
   issue of highway safety for pedestrians. As this is the only reason given, it is
   implied that all other matters are consistent with the policies of the Development
   Plan, including any material considerations and I have no reason to dispute this. As
   such this letter will only focus on the topic that is in dispute regarding pedestrian
   safety.
4. I note that the appeal documents reference the National Planning Policy
   Framework 2025 (the Framework). Since the submission of the appeal, the 2025
   version of the Framework has been superseded by the 2026 version which was
   published on the 17 August 2026. Whilst the structure and format of the Framework
   have changed, the wording of the relevant policies of the new Framework in
   relation to this appeal remain largely unchanged and therefore did not require to be
   reassessed by either party in relation to this appeal. As such I have considered the
   appeal on this basis and refer only to the updated 2026 Framework within my
   decision.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       1
 Appeal Decision: 6011097


Main Issue
5. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development upon highway safety with
   respect to pedestrian movement.
Reasons
6. The appeal site fronts Churchfields Road, a residential road leading from
   Providence Road that ends in a cul-de-sac. Many of the dwellings along
   Churchfields Road are Victorian in date with small front gardens, with some
   sections of infill development with vehicular parking spaces to the front of the
   dwelling. I appreciate that the road conditions I experienced on my site visit was
   only a snapshot of the road at this particular time, however I have also considered
   the evidence submitted by both main parties and interested parties, and in light of
   this, I am satisfied that what I saw represents typical conditions.
7. Churchfields Road is a single lane carriageway in each direction which is wider
   towards Providence Road, but becomes narrower after the Churchfields Close
   junction towards the appeal site which is located towards the end of the road where
   the road turns into a cul-de-sac with only through access to Churchfields via
   pedestrian and cycle movement. The road is reasonably straight with some slight
   bends with unrestricted parking which allows vehicles to park parallel to the road
   which means at sections of the road that vehicles will wait for oncoming vehicles to
   pass before they can travel onwards. Churchfields Road has a low speed limit of 30
   miles per hour but due to the nature of the road, vehicles tended to travel slower
   than this and appeared to be mostly utilised by local residents and visitors. The
   road contains street lighting and between Churchfields Close and Providence Road
   contains relatively narrow pedestrian footpaths adjacent to each side of the road,
   with pedestrians needing to walk on the road from Churchfields Close towards the
   appeal site and to the pedestrian/cycle entrance to Churchfields.
8. Based upon what I saw on my site visit I deduce that Churchfields Road operates
   satisfactorily without any significant safety issues. Whilst I have not been presented
   with any accident data, the absence of formal accident data does not in itself mean
   that accidents have not occurred, near misses, or indeed that a carriageway is
   ‘safe.’ I do however note comments from interested parties that state that there
   have been near misses around the appeal site due to the nature of the cul-de-sac.
9. In undertaking assessments regarding highways safety for pedestrians the
   Bromsgrove District Plan (BDP) Policy BDP16.6 seeks that development should be
   designed for safe access to pedestrians and cyclists as an integral feature.
   Developments that worsen current walking and cycle access and exacerbate motor
   dependence should not be permitted. Additionally, BDP Policy BDP19 is a design-
   led policy that contains a number of considerations around design with relevant
   details around transport regarding considerations of permeable and navigable
   street layouts and developments which are easily accessed and used by all. The
   Framework Policies TR3, TR4, and TR6 are relevant considerations to this appeal
   where there is a need to support sustainable patterns of movement ensuring good
   accessibility is available to all modes of transport. The policies also seek that
   priority is given to walking, wheeling and cycling movements, and to minimise
   conflicts between pedestrians, vehicles, and cyclists. When assessing transport
   impacts, sufficient evidence needs to be provided, and that development proposals
   be refused if after mitigation that there are severe adverse impacts.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
 Appeal Decision: 6011097


10. The proposal has 6 vehicular parking spaces located to the front of the property,
    which are each 5.2m x 2.4m with a total frontage of 14.4 metres with an overall site
    frontage of 16.5 metres. This level of provision is suitable for the proposed
    dwellings, with Council’s Transport Team considering that the proposal, subject to
    conditions would meet the policies of the Development Plan which would have
    suitable visibility on entry and egress and would not cause adverse impacts
    towards the safety of all road users. This was mainly down to the very slow speed
    of vehicles in this section of the road which was predominantly limited to local
    traffic.
11. The third party responses from residents and a Councillor who lives near the
    appeal site states that the road is utilised as an access route for school children
    who are travelling from the surrounding area towards the nearby schools, and that
    there are issues around motorbikes using the cul-de-sac as a through route, and
    that the drive of 1 Rose Cottage is damaged from use from vehicles needing to turn
    around as they realise the road is a cul-de-sac. Additional concerns are regarding
    construction traffic and the need for emergency vehicles to access the road, and
    that evidence provided with the application in terms of visibility splays is incorrect,
    and with there being a need for the spaces at the edges to make more movements
    to exit/enter the spaces and that land in front of the appeal site is one of the only
    spaces to turn and park vehicles.
12. No additional transport related evidence in the form of transport statements or
    studies have been submitted, with evidence predominantly based upon
    experiences and anecdotal evidence from neighbouring residents, including a plan
    showing visibility splays, all of which I will consider as a material consideration to
    this scheme. Whilst I have comments around children and residents using
    Churchfields Road which is in the opinion of surrounding residents as ‘highly
    trafficked’ I have no evidence to understand what this actually means. The speed of
    vehicles along this road is infrequent and very slow with the nature of the road
    meaning that users would be quite careful in their exit and ingress into the road as
    well as for the proposed residents of the proposed scheme. The visibility splay
    diagrams presented do not change this view which whilst I appreciate that there is
    street furniture to the edge of the appeal site, it would not provide the restriction as
    shown in this diagram. I also give substantial weight to the qualified transport
    officers who have assessed the scheme and have come to the conclusion that the
    scheme would not give rise to adverse transport impacts which would justify the
    refusal of the scheme. Whilst I agree with Interested parties that the addition of 3
    dwellings would make some impact to the existing transport network for road users,
    I do not agree that it would be to the level of policies of the Framework where there
    would be ‘severe adverse impacts’ to users of the road network.
13. Matters around motorbikes utilising the road for access, and damage to driveway at
    the end of the cul-de-sac, and parking stress would not be related to this proposal
    which provides adequate parking facilities for the users of the site. A construction
    management plan would also enable free flow of traffic and prevent construction
    causing issues to residents and emergency vehicles from accessing the road.
14. Consequently, and in conclusion of this matter, the proposal would not cause
    severe adverse impacts to highway safety for pedestrians and with compliance to
    conditions, would allow adequate safety for pedestrians. That said, the proposal



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
 Appeal Decision: 6011097


     would be compliant with Policies BDP16.6 and BDP19 as well as Framework
     Policies TR3, TR4, and TR6 as defined previously.
Other Matters
15. I note representations made with respect to elements of the determination that go
    beyond the scope of the reason for refusal which concerns highway safety for
    pedestrians. As discussed previously, these elements around the principle of the
    development, design and living conditions, amongst others have been found to be
    appropriate and in accordance with the Development Plan and was not disputed in
    the reason for refusal.
Conclusion and conditions
16. Taking the above into account, I conclude that the appeal be allowed in accordance
    with the conditions as specified within the Annexe to this letter. I refer to the
    suggested conditions provided by the Council and I have assessed these against
    the test of conditions in accordance with the Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
    along with submitted comments from the Appellant. Suggested Conditions 1 and 2
    are standard conditions which set the standard time limit and approved plans which
    are necessary for the avoidance of doubt and in the interests of proper planning.
    Suggested Conditions 3 is an occupancy condition that seeks that visibility splays
    are provided and maintained unobstructed in perpetuity. This is considered relevant
    and necessary in order to ensure safe ingress and access to the parking spaces.
    Suggested Condition 4 relates to the surfacing of the first 5 metres of vehicle
    spaces in a bound material. Whilst this is appropriate to prevent materials like loose
    stone and gravel etc entering the roadway, the vehicle spaces are 5.2 metres long
    so it would make logical sense to request the vehicular parking spaces to be bound
    which could be incorporated into Suggested Condition 6 which concerns the
    installation of parking spaces prior to first occupation. As such, Condition 4 has
    been amended to reflect this and Suggested Condition 6 deleted.
17. Suggested Condition 5 seeks that cycle provision be provided prior to occupation.
    This is considered necessary and appropriate and meets the tests of conditions.
    Suggested Condition 7 repeats condition No.3 around visibility splays and is
    deleted. Suggested Condition 8 concerns a Welcome Travel Pack which seeks to
    provide information for new residents as to available sustainable transport modes. I
    am unclear of the need for this document, which typically are part of larger
    development sites. The Welcome Pack did not form part of the benefits in the
    determination, and the need for such in a highly sustainable location has not shown
    to be necessary. As such, based on the evidence before me, this does not meet
    the test for conditions and is deleted. Suggested Condition 9 (now 6) seeks that the
    development be carried out in accordance with a Construction Management Plan.
    This is necessary and meets the tests of conditions with regards to highways safety
    and residential amenity. Suggested Condition 10 (now 7) seeks approval of
    drainage details to manage runoff of the site and is a prior to the placement of
    drainage. This is considered relevant and necessary and would meet the tests of
    conditions around reducing flood risk. Suggested Condition 11 (now 8) concerns
    the submission and approval of soft landscaping prior to occupation. This is
    considered to meet the test for conditions to contribute to the character and
    appearance of the area. Suggested Conditions 12 and 13 (now 9 and 10) relate to
    net gains in biodiversity and recommend the placement of bat boxes and the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       4
 Appeal Decision: 6011097


     operation of the site during development. This is considered necessary and meets
     the tests of conditions.

J Somers
INSPECTOR




ANNEXE: SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS Page 1 of 2
1) The development must be begun no later than 3 years beginning with the date of
   this permission.
2) The development hereby approved shall be carried out in accordance with the
   following plans and drawings:
    •   ‘Location Map,’ Drawing number: 25-10-00, dated July 2025;
    •   ‘Scheme Block Plan,’ Drawing number: 25-10-01, Rev B, dated July 2025;
    •   ‘Scheme Elevations (1),’ Drawing number: 25-10-12A, dated March 2025;
    •   ‘Scheme Elevations (2),’ Drawing number: 25-10-13A, dated March 2025;
    •   ‘Scheme First Floor Plan,’ Drawing number: 25-10-11A, dated March 2025;
    •   ‘Scheme Ground Floor Plan,’ Drawing number: 25-10-10A, dated March 2025.
3) The development hereby approved shall not be occupied until pedestrian visibility
   splays of 2m x 2m measured perpendicularly back from the edge of carriageway
   shall be provided on both sides of the access. The splays shall thereafter be
   maintained free of obstruction exceeding a height of 0.6m above the adjacent
   ground level.
4) The development hereby approved shall not occupied until the vehicular parking
   facilities (vehicular parking spaces and associated access to the edge of the
   roadway) have been provided as shown on drawing 25-10-01 and has been
   demarcated and surfaced in a bound material.
5) The development hereby approved shall not be first occupied until sheltered, safe,
   secure and accessible cycle parking to comply with the Council’s adopted highway
   design guide has been provided in accordance with details which shall first be
   submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority and thereafter
   the approved cycle parking shall be kept available for the parking of bicycles only.
6) The development hereby approved shall be carried out in accordance with the
   document Construction Environment Management Plan,
   WE/Churchfields/2025//V1.0, dated November 2025. The measures set out in the
   document shall be carried out and complied with in full during the construction of
   the development hereby approved.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      5
 Appeal Decision: 6011097


ANNEXE: SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS Continued Page 2 of 2
7) No works in connection with site drainage shall commence until a scheme for
   surface water drainage has been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
   Planning Authority. This scheme shall be indicated on a drainage plan. Infiltration
   techniques are to be used, and the plan shall include the details and results of field
   percolation tests. If infiltration drainage is not possible on this site, an alternative
   method of surface water disposal should be submitted for approval. There shall be
   no increase in runoff from the site compared to the pre-development situation up to
   the 1 in 100 year event plus an allowance for climate change. The drainage
   scheme shall be implemented prior to the first use of the development and
   thereafter maintained.
8) Prior to first occupation a detailed scheme of soft landscaping shall be submitted to
   and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The landscaping shall be
   completed within the first available planting season from the date of occupation or
   completion of the development, whichever is the earlier. For a period of five years
   after the completion of the approved landscaping scheme, the trees, hedges and
   shrubs shall be protected and maintained in a healthy condition. Any trees, hedges
   or shrubs that cease to grow or are felled, removed, uprooted, destroyed or die, or
   become in the opinion of the Local Planning Authority seriously damaged,
   diseased, or defective, shall be replaced by trees, hedges, or shrubs as may be
   approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. This replacement planting shall
   be undertaken before the end of the first available planting season (October to
   March inclusive for bare root plants), following the removal, uprooting, destruction
   or death of the original trees or plants.
9) The recommendations and actions required stated on pages 1 – 2 of the document
   titled 7 Churchfields Road, Daytime Bat Assessment, dated October 2025 shall be
   carried out in full.
10) Prior to first occupation, in order to provide a net gain in biodiversity for protected
    species, two schwegler bat and/or bird boxes or equivalent per dwelling shall be
    placed on site in suitable locations at least 3 metres above ground level facing to
    the south or east and kept thereafter in perpetuity.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         6
