Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by S McIntyre BSc (Hons), CEng, MICE, MCIHT
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 11th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011088
12 Sladefield Road, Ward End, Birmingham B8 3NX
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Mohammed Usman Anwar of USM Housing, against the decision of
     Birmingham City Council.
•    The application Ref is 2026/00761/PA.
•    The development proposed is the change of use of an existing dwellinghouse (Use Class C3) to a
     small House in Multiple Occupation (Use Class C4).

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     For clarity and certainty, in the banner heading above I have used the description
       of development given on the Council’s decision notice.
3.     On the application form the description of proposed development stated that it
       would be occupied by between 3 and 6 people. The Council has considered a
       maximum occupation of 6 people, but the appellant has indicated that it would be
       occupied by a maximum of 5 people. I have considered the implications of limiting
       occupation to 5.
4.     A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
       17 August 2026, and the appellant and Council were invited to consider whether
       the revised Framework had relevance to their case. I have considered
       submissions received on this matter.
5.     The living conditions of future occupiers was not specifically referred to in the
       reasons for refusal. However, it is clear from the officer’s report that the Council
       considered that the proposal would conflict with the requirements of the
       development plan in this respect. The appellant has also addressed this matter in
       their evidence. I shall therefore consider living conditions of future occupiers as a
       main issue.
Main Issues
6.     The main issues of the appeal are:
     •     the effect of the proposal on the supply of family housing in the area;
     •     whether the proposed development would provide acceptable living conditions
           for future occupants, with particular regard to internal communal space; and,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011088


     •     the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of occupants of neighbouring
           properties and the residential character of the street with regard to noise and
           disturbance.
Reasons
Loss of family housing
7.     The appeal property is a house with 4 habitable rooms upstairs, one being very
       small. Policy DM11 of the Development Management in Birmingham Development
       Plan Document 2021 (the DPD) requires development for HMO’s to “not result in
       the loss of an existing use that makes an important contribution to other Council
       objectives, strategies and policies”.
8.     The Council’s Housing Needs Assessment indicates a need for accommodation of
       all sizes but shows a higher demand for 2, 3 and 3+ bed dwellings. The proportion
       of households with dependent children in Birmingham is higher than the regional
       and national average and there is a continued demand for 2, 3 and 3+ bedroom
       homes from family households. Consequently, for the proposal to comply with
       policy DM11 of the DPD it is necessary to demonstrate that there is lack of
       demand for family housing in the area.
9.     The Birmingham City Council Houses in Multiple Occupation Supplementary
       Planning Document (2022) (HMO SPD) advises that such evidence should
       establish that the property has been openly marketed at a city-wide level at a
       reasonable purchase or rental price for a period of at least six months, verified by
       a suitable person in a relevant profession, such as an estate agent.
10. Notwithstanding that increasing the supply of all housing, affordability and making
    efficient use of land are important, no marketing evidence has been provided with
    the appeal, and I cannot therefore reasonably conclude that in this case there is a
    lack of demand for family housing in the area.
11. Consequently it has not been demonstrated that the proposal would not have an
    adverse effect on the supply of family housing, whether rented or owner-occupied,
    and it therefore conflicts with policies DM11 of the DPD and policies TP30 and
    TP35 of the Birmingham Development Plan (2017) (BDP). Taken together, and
    amongst other things, these policies require development of HMO’s not to result in
    loss of an existing use that makes an important contribution to other Council
    objectives, and to make best use of the existing dwelling stock. As set out above,
    the proposal would also be contrary to guidance set out in the HMO SPD.
Living conditions of future occupants
12. The applicant has advised that there would be a maximum of 5 occupants, rather
    than 6 as indicated on the planning application form. While this maximum
    occupancy could potentially be conditioned to 5, the proposed communal area
    shown on the plans is not of sufficient size to accommodate appropriate seating
    and other amenities such as a television to accommodate even 5 occupants. The
    appellant considers that the communal area combined with the kitchen provides an
    appropriate overall communal space, but the rooms are remote from each other
    and the spaces cannot be considered in combination to provide a social space for
    the 5 occupants. Policy DM11 of the DPD requires that communal living space
    comprising lounge, kitchen and dining space is provided either as distinct rooms or


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011088


       in open plan format. The kitchen/diner is small and not of sufficient size to also
       provide a lounge area for 5 people. There is no single internal communal space
       sufficient to accommodate all occupants. An insufficient communal area would
       increase time occupants spend in individual bedrooms and hinder social cohesion
       as noted in the HMO SPD.
13. Consequently, the proposal would not provide acceptable living conditions for
    future occupants and would therefore be in conflict with Policy DM11 of the DPD
    which requires HMO’s to provide high-quality accommodation with adequate living
    space including communal space. It would also not comply with guidance in the
    HMO SPD on achieving good standards of living accommodation.
Living conditions of occupants of neighbouring properties and residential character
14. The appeal site is a semi-detached house on Sladefield Road, near to the junction
    with Alum Rock Road on which there are many commercial uses. The site is next
    door to a builder’s store and opposite the store is a restaurant/takeaway on the
    corner of Sladefield Road and Alum Rock Road. The character of the road in the
    immediate vicinity of the appeal site is mixed and not wholly residential in nature.
    Activity here is higher than would typically be observed in a wholly residential area.
15. The use of the site as a family dwelling could result in a similar number of
    residents as the proposed HMO. While HMO occupants would live more
    independently and likely generate more activity than a family, who may share
    some routines and activities, I consider that the likely modest increase in activity
    would not result in a harmful increase in noise and disturbance at this location
    having regard to background activity. Consequently, it would not be harmful to the
    living conditions of occupants of neighbouring properties or to the residential
    character of the street with regard to noise and disturbance.
16. Therefore, the proposal would comply with policies PG3 and TP30 of the BDP and
    Policies DM2 and DM11 of the DPD which require development to reinforce the
    sense of place, is a suitable type and size for the site and its context and not result
    in unacceptable impacts on the amenity of neighbours or the character of the area.
Other Matters
17. The appellant notes that significant time and financial investment has been
    required to restore the property to a habitable standard and the proposal would
    ensure that the property continues to provide residential accommodation.
    However, there is no substantive evidence that this would not be possible if the
    property was used as family housing and I afford this matter limited weight in
    support of the appeal and not sufficient to outweigh the harm identified.
18. I note the property has been issued with an HMO licence pursuant to the Housing
    Act 2004, which is a different legislative regime. I have necessarily assessed the
    appeal against the development plan and have found conflict as set out above.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
19. Policy S3 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development and for development within settlements Policy S4 of the Framework
    should be applied. Policy S4 of the Framework states that development proposals
    within settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011088


       substantially outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against the
       national decision- making policies in the Framework.
20. Set against the harm identified, the proposal would provide a form of affordable
    housing for 5 people, and it would be an efficient use of land. However, there is
    little evidence before me that this would contribute towards the evidenced needs of
    the community, and I afford this benefit limited weight.
21. Policy HO7 of the Framework states that substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community, as identified through needs assessments
    prepared for the local planning area and other relevant evidence. This includes,
    but is not limited to, homes needed for different groups assessed under policy
    HO1 which includes families with children. The Council has produced a housing
    needs assessment that indicates a need for family housing and in the absence of
    any other evidence regarding need I afford the loss of family housing substantial
    weight.
22. Policy DP3 2(a) of the Framework states that development proposals should
    employ features which promote social interaction and Policy DP3 3 states that
    substantial weight should be given to compliance with relevant development plan
    policies when assessing the design quality of proposals. As noted above, the
    proposal is contrary to Policy DM11 of the DPD, and I afford this adverse effect
    substantial weight.
23. Overall, I conclude that the benefits of the proposal are substantially outweighed
    by the adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-making
    policies of the Framework.
24. The proposal conflicts with the development plan as a whole and material
    considerations do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in
    accordance with it. Therefore, the appeal should be dismissed.




S McIntyre
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
