Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by N Armstrong BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011290
115 North Road, Darlington, Durham DL1 2PS
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Mohamed Hussain of Pizza Palace against the decision of Darlington
     Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01388/FUL.
•    The development was described as “retrospective planning permission to retain 3 no. roller shutters
     (one shutter was existing but replaced to match new shutters)”.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the installation of
       external roller shutters to 2 No. windows and replacement external roller shutter to
       entrance door at 115 North Road, Darlington, Durham DL1 2PS in accordance
       with the terms of the application, Ref 25/01388/FUL and the plans numbered
       25.146 01, 25.146 02 and 25.146 03.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The description of the development used in the banner heading above is taken
       from the application form. This differs from the description used in the Council’s
       decision notice, which refers to the “Installation of external roller shutters to 2 No.
       windows and replacement external roller shutter to entrance door (Retrospective
       Application) at 115 North Road, Darlington, DL1 2PS”. I have used the description
       in the Council’s decision notice for my formal decision as this more accurately
       describes the development. The appellant has also relied on this in the appeal
       form, confirming that is what planning permission is sought for. I have omitted
       wording not relating to acts of development in my decision.
3.     I observed at my site visit that external roller shutters have already been installed
       to the door and windows at the appeal site. It appears from the plans and evidence
       that this is the development referenced in the planning application. I have therefore
       dealt with the appeal on the basis that planning permission is being sought
       retrospectively for the installation of the external roller shutters.
4.     The Government issued the revised version of the National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework) on 17 August 2026. The main parties were provided
       with an opportunity to comment on this, and I have had regard to the revised
       Framework in my decision.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011290


Main Issue
5.     The main issue is the effect of the development on the character and appearance
       of the host property and the area.
Reasons
6.     The appeal site comprises a two-storey property situated to the western side of
       North Road, a main route to and from Darlington town centre, and on a corner
       position with Wales Street. It forms one end of a terrace of two-storey properties
       fronting North Road, which are predominantly residential, with a pharmacy to the
       other end. This layout is characteristic of the immediately surrounding area with a
       mix of commercial development located adjacent to residential properties, whilst
       there are also commercial units grouped together nearby.
7.     Part of the ground floor of the host property features a modern shopfront to the hot
       food takeaway that wraps around the corner, with windows to both North Road and
       Wales Street and a central door. The fascia signage and stallrisers of the
       shopfront project from the host property and are coloured blue with black detailing
       above and below. The remainder of the host property’s elevations comprise a grey
       render finish. The roller shutter housing sits below the fascia signage and projects
       from the property beyond the fascia and its signage, with the runners to the sides
       also evident. The solid black roller shutters were closed at the time of my visit.
8.     External shutters to the shopfronts of commercial properties are a common feature
       within the surrounding area of the appeal site, and many of these were also closed
       at the time of my visit. There are variations in the design and colour of the
       shopfronts and existing roller shutters, as well as the extent to which they cover
       their openings and shopfronts. These include similar solid shutters, external
       housing and runners to the development, as well as others integrated with their
       shopfronts and featuring shutters with a less solid finish. Whilst other external
       roller shutters may not have been granted planning permission, nonetheless, they
       are prevalent and form part of the established character of the area.
9.     The roller shutters, their housing and runners are a muted colour, which along with
       their scale, do not appear unduly bulky or visually intrusive in the context of the
       existing modern shopfront design and the grey render of the surrounding
       elevations. In addition, the roller shutters cover the door and window openings,
       rather than the full width and height of the shopfront, therefore occupying a
       relatively modest proportion of the overall host property and its corner position,
       which reduces their visual impact.
10. I acknowledge the prominence of the site and the periods when the premises and
    roller shutters would be closed. Alternative roller shutter designs, including those
    that are less solid or integrated into the shopfront, may also appear less visually
    intrusive. However, due to the scale of the development in relation to the host
    property, and when seen in the context of the terrace of predominantly residential
    properties rather than a larger group of commercial units, it does not appear as a
    visually discordant addition or result in an unacceptable dead frontage in this
    position. Whilst the Council raises concern regarding the security justification, for
    the reasons set out, and given the presence of other similar external shutters in
    the vicinity, the development does not unduly harm the visual appearance of the
    host property or the surrounding area.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011290


11. I conclude that the development does not unacceptably harm the character and
    appearance of the host property or the area. Therefore, it does not conflict with
    Policy DC1 of the Darlington Local Plan 2016-2036 (February 2022), which
    amongst other things, aims for development to reflect the local environment and
    respond to local context. In addition, the development does not conflict with the
    Framework and its aims for development proposals to respond to their context.
Conditions
12. I have considered the imposition of appropriate planning conditions having regard
    to the tests set out in the Framework. The Council has not suggested the
    imposition of any conditions, and as the development has already taken place, I do
    not consider that any conditions would be necessary in this instance.
Conclusion
13. For the above reasons, the development complies with the development plan
    taken as a whole and material considerations do not indicate a decision should be
    made other than in accordance with the development plan. I therefore conclude
    that the appeal should be allowed.

N Armstrong
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
