Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by P Eggleton BSc(Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011827
2 Rookwood Avenue, Leeds LS9 0NW
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr M Miotk against the decision of Leeds City Council.
•   The application reference is 26/01070/FU.
•   The development proposed is a change of use from dwelling house (Use Class C3) to short-term
    accommodation (Sui Generis).


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issue
2. The main issue is the effect on the living conditions of neighbouring residents with
   regard to noise, disturbance and inconvenience.
Reasons
3. The dwelling is already in use for short term lets. One objector suggests that the
   use has carried on for more than three years but this has not been confirmed by the
   appellant. The appellant has provided a table of occupancy, which dates from
   March 2025. A management plan has been provided which relates to restricting
   occupancy to no more than six residents at any one time. It also sets out measures
   with regard to vetting of guests, information to be provided to guests, house rules
   and management information and response times to incidents, alongside other
   reporting and monitoring provisions.
4. The comings and goings of up to six guests to the house, the need for regular
   cleaning and maintenance and the potential for the use of delivery and taxi
   services, would be likely to result in a level and pattern of activity outside the
   property that would differ from a three bedroom family home. The garden also
   offers a sitting out area that could be attractive to guests, particularly during
   summer evenings. Furthermore, there is the potential for activity, by all of the
   guests together, at more unsociable hours, early in the morning or late at night.
5. Whilst a family use could also have high levels of activity, including at unsociable
   hours, the nature and intensity of this use, particularly with short turn overs and use
   by six guests, is likely to be more disruptive and less predictable. Guests are more
   likely to be less sensitive to the impacts on neighbours. Although relating to
   parking, this is the experience reported by an objector. Concerns about noise and
   disturbance are potentially more likely to be able to be resolved with longer term

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision: 6011827


     neighbours than with short term guests. Whilst the appellant has advised that the
     council has not provided any empirical evidence with regard to the above, I am
     mindful also that no noise report has been provided by the appellant, to support the
     proposal.
6. As this is a terraced dwelling with only a short front forecourt, residents of nearby
   properties, would inevitably experience the comings and goings and activity outside
   the property. I consider it likely that the level of activity would result in unacceptable
   harm to the residents of neighbouring properties when the property is busy,
   particularly on occasions when occupied by six guests, with frequent turnovers. It
   would therefore conflict with the amenity requirements of Policy GP5 of the Leeds
   Unitary Development Plan (Review 2006).
7. Policy P10 of the Core Strategy (as amended by the Core Strategy Selective
   Review 2019) does not appear to be directly relevant. There would however be
   conflict with Policy P3 of the National Planning Policy Framework 2026 which
   requires that development is appropriate to its location, taking into account the
   likely effects on living conditions.
8. Notwithstanding the above, I am mindful that the appellant also owns the
   neighbouring property and manages the appeal property. This offers the potential
   for increased supervision of guests and more effective response to concerns that
   may arise. However, any permission would be associated with the property itself,
   rather than ownership. It is not possible to condition that the two properties remain
   in the same ownership or that the neighbouring owner manages the use. This is a
   matter however that weighs in favour of the proposal in the short term.
9. A list of residents that support the use has been provided and includes the other
   neighbour. Although not writing separately to support the use, this does offer weight
   in favour of accepting its continuation. The lack of any formal complaints to the
   council is also a matter that weighs in favour of the proposal, although I also note
   the comments of a nearby resident with regard to noise from the property.
10. The management plan submitted, includes measures to ensure guests are suitable,
    know what is expected of them and measures to address any anti-social behaviour.
    It is unclear whether a management plan has been in place whilst the use has been
    in operation with regard to providing neighbouring residents with contact details. In
    any event, whilst a positive consideration, such a management plan provides only
    limited assurance; and with regard to issues that arise, would be retrospective and
    reactive.
11. Concerns have been raised with regard to parking. The property offers a single
    parking space and there is unrestricted parking on the highway. The use may result
    in greater numbers of vehicles seeking to park and result in some inconvenience to
    current residents, as suggested by an objector. However, I am not persuaded,
    given the nature of the immediate area and the information provided by the
    appellant, that this would result in unacceptable harm.
12. Whilst I note that the council have a positive figure with regard to the supply of
    housing sites, no evidence has been provided with regard to the need for short
    term accommodation such as this. Whilst the economic benefits of the business
    use of this single dwelling can be afforded substantial weight with regard to the
    support for business activity, this has to be balanced against the negative weight


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         2
Appeal Decision: 6011827


     associated with the loss of a dwelling to the housing supply. I afford similarly weight
     to each. I have had regard to the potential reversibility of this change of use.
13. References to appeal decisions have been provided by both parties. These
    decisions offer differing conclusions. However, when considering the potential
    impacts on neighbouring residents, it is necessary to consider the particular
    circumstances of each case. These do not therefore provide weight either for or
    against this use.
14. Overall, whilst there are matters that offer support for the proposal; and the
    provisions put forward for managing the use offer some assurances, I am not
    persuaded that these matters overcome my concerns with regard to the amenities
    of neighbouring residents with regard to the potential for noise and disturbance.
    Furthermore, I am not satisfied that these concerns would be fully addressed by the
    imposition of conditions. I therefore dismiss the appeal.

Peter Eggleton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
