Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by P Hatch BA (Hons) Ad. Dip MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011377
65 Scarisbrick New Road, Sefton, Southport PR8 6LF
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
    to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Rahmatullah Javed against the decision of Sefton Council.
•   The application Ref is DC/2026/00405.
•   The development is a timber fence and gates to front and side boundary of property.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. Retrospective consent is sought for the development, and I saw at my site visit that
   the fence and gates had been constructed based on the submitted plans.
   Accordingly, I have determined the appeal on that basis.
Main Issues
3. The main issues in this appeal are the effect of the development on:
       • the character and appearance of the surrounding area; and
       • highway safety, with particular reference to pedestrian visibility.
Reasons
     Character and Appearance
4. The appeal property is a detached house set on a large plot on the corner of
   Scarisbrick New Road and Curzon Road. The broad character of boundary
   treatments within the wider area consists of low-level brick walls with stone coping
   blocks and more substantial brick or stone gate posts. These treatments, through
   their scale and use of materials creates a strong degree of uniformity and rhythm
   within the street scene and generate a wider sense of openness to the frontage of
   properties.
5. The development consists of timber fencing which has sought to extend the height
   of the boundary treatment above the original brick wall. The treatment also includes
   the creation of vehicular and pedestrian access, making use of solid panel sliding
   gates, taken from Curzon Road. The Council’s ‘Boundary Treatment’
   Supplementary Planning Document (2024) (SPD) sets out guidance on new or
   replacement boundary treatment, including that ‘the height, design and materials
   used should relate to the character of the local area’ before setting out further

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011377


     designs which could make appropriate boundary treatments. The extended height
     of the boundary treatment has resulted in a greater sense of enclosure and a
     disruption to the rhythm and uniformity previously described. The impact on the
     wider street scene is exacerbated by its prominent positioning and is not reflective
     of the ambitions set out in the SPD.
6. I observed during my site visit that a large number of properties along both
   Scarisbrick New Road and Curzon Road include natural planting, extending the
   height of the boundary treatment above that which is provided by the low-level brick
   wall. However, the impacts of this additional planting and soft landscaping are more
   sympathetic to its surroundings and, dependent on species, can alter through the
   course of the year compared to the solid and unchanging impact created through
   the installation of timber fencing.
7. The appellant has provided examples of other development which they feel set a
   precedent in regard to their appeal. This includes the use of timber fencing to raise
   the boundary treatment of properties on both Scarisbrick New Road and Curzon
   Road. I was able to observe all of the examples provided by the appellant during
   my site visit, particularly those to the junctions of both Curzon Road, Balfour Road
   and Forest Road. These examples though are too few in number to have changed
   the character and appearance of the area to the extent that the development would
   fit in. I note the appellant has also made reference to a number of Council decisions
   which they feel are comparable to the works which have taken place at the appeal
   property. However, I have limited details of the schemes before me and I cannot be
   certain under what circumstances they were permitted. Therefore, I have
   considered the scheme before me on its own planning merits.
8. I have also noted that the appellant is willing to consider amendments to the
   scheme in regard to the introduction of additional brick pillars with coping stones.
   However, in the procedure that applies to this appeal the case is determined on the
   basis of the same plans that the Council considered when they refused planning
   permission. There is no scope for amendments to be considered at the appeal
   stage.
9. As a result, the development of both the fencing and the gates, by virtue of its scale
   and height, would be out of keeping and would be unduly prominent within the
   street scene, thus causing harm to the character of the wider area. It is therefore
   contrary to Policy EQ2 of the Sefton Local Plan (SLP) which states, amongst other
   things, that proposals should respond positively to the character, local
   distinctiveness and form of its surroundings.
       Highway Safety
10. The appeal property includes a single driveway and vehicular access point which is
    taken from Curzon Road. The curtilage of the property includes a large parking
    area and I noted a number of vehicles parked at the property at the time of my site
    visit. Both Scarisbrick New Road and Curzon Road are busy routes within the local
    neighbourhood, with the medical centre opposite generating a notable amount of
    both vehicular traffic and pedestrian footfall within the vicinity of the appeal site.
11. The development includes the installation of both a vehicular and pedestrian
    access point which are gated by solid timber panel fencing. I have noted that in
    regard to the main issue, the Council’s SPD indicates that boundary treatments
    should ‘be safe and not harm highway safety.’

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011377


12. The introduction of sliding gates of a solid panel design, coupled with their height,
    act as a significant visual barrier for drivers and pedestrian passers-by. From the
    perspective of an exiting driver, any views from the public highway, including the
    pavement, are restricted until such a point where the vehicle is projecting
    significantly into the public footpath. From a pedestrian’s perspective, any passers-
    by may not be aware of the presence of manoeuvring vehicles exiting the appeal
    property. Consequently, this lack of visibility has the potential to bring pedestrians
    into conflict with vehicle movements and therefore poses a risk to highway safety.
    These risks are further exacerbated due to the high number of vehicles parking
    within the curtilage of the appeal property and the close proximity of the medical
    centre, which notably increases the pedestrian footfall along Curzon Road.
13. I have noted the Council’s view that insufficient information has been provided to
    demonstrate how sufficient vehicular and pedestrian intervisibility can be achieved
    and the development, in its current form, is not supportive of the SPD. However,
    there appears to be no dispute in principle that such works could be carried out
    subject to further matters of detail being provided. The appellant has indicated that
    they would be prepared to modify the fencing at the access point to reduce its
    height in order to comply with the requests of the Council. Whilst I recognise that
    amendments could have been requested by the Council and submitted by the
    appellant as part of the application process, this has not occurred and,
    consequently, I am obliged to determine the appeal based on the plans before me.
14. The appellant has suggested that such amendments to the height of the fencing
    could be addressed through the imposition of a planning condition which requests
    the submission and implementation of visibility improvements. Whilst I have
    considered the merits of this approach, without being presented with the necessary
    evidence in the first instance, through the form of amended plans, it is not clear
    whether such conditions would meet the tests set out in paragraph 57 of the
    National Planning Policy Framework.
15. As a result, the proposal would be contrary to Policy EQ3 of the SLP which states
    that new development should ensure that the safety of pedestrians, cyclists and all
    other road users are not adversely affected.
Other Matters
16. I have noted the benefits which have been suggested by the appellant, including
    increased levels of privacy, security and amenity for the appeal property,
    particularly given its prominent position on the junction of Scarisbrick New Road
    and Curzon Road. These are noted but even in combination these matters do not
    outweigh the harm I have found above.
Conclusion
17. For the above reasons, and having regard to all other matters raised, I therefore
    conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.



P Hatch
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
