Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 September 2026
by M J Francis BA (Hons) MA MSc MClfA
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6011008
8 Shepherd House, Shepherd House Farm, Halifax Lane, Luddenden, Halifax,
Calderdale HX2 6DB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs A. Bateman against the decision of Calderdale Metropolitan
     Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00038/HSE.
•    The development proposed is demolition of conservatory, construction of two-storey side extension,
     and associated works.

Appeal B Ref: 6011013
8 Shepherd House, Shepherd House Farm, Halifax Lane, Luddenden, Halifax,
Calderdale HX2 6DB
•    The appeal is made under section 20 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•    The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs A. Bateman against the decision of Calderdale Metropolitan
     Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00039/LBC.
     The development proposed is demolition of conservatory, construction of two-storey side extension,
     removal of paint/render, repointing with lime-based mortar, application of lime-based harling to west
     elevation, removal of soil pipe and internal alterations.


Decision
1.     Appeal A is dismissed.
2.     Appeal B is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
3.     On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published, and the main parties have been consulted on the
       implications of the revised Framework on the appeal.
4.     As set out above, there are two appeals on this site, one for planning permission
       and the other for listed building consent. Planning permission and listed building
       consent are under different legislation; however, I have dealt with both appeals
       together in my reasoning.
5.     Therefore, as required by sections 16(2) and 66(1) of the Planning (Listed
       Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act), I have had special regard to
       the desirability of preserving the building or its setting or any features of special
       architectural or historic interest which it possesses.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011008


Main Issues
6.       The main issues are:
              •    with regards to appeal A and appeal B: whether the proposal would
                   preserve the Grade II listed building 1 or its setting or any features of special
                   architectural interest which it possesses; and
              •    with regards to appeal A only: the effect of the proposal on the Luddenden
                   Dean Special Landscape Area (SLA).
Reasons
Special interest and significance
7.       The appeal site is a farmhouse dated to 1745, with late 18th century and early 19th
         century rebuilding. It is two storeys in height and built of coursed squared stone
         with a stone slate roof. On a steeply sloping site, the house is reached by a single
         lane which passes above it. In front of the house there is a steep track comprising
         of historic stone setts.
8.       The special interest and significance of the site, insofar as it relates to this appeal,
         derives from its historic and architectural interest. Built in local materials, the house
         is sited in a small group of other historic buildings overlooking the surrounding
         countryside. As such, it demonstrates the characteristics of a vernacular
         farmhouse, with its surviving stone mullion windows, and the patterns of settlement
         of that period. Its association with a named owner through a dated lintel, inscribed
         to Thomas and Hanna Lister 1746, and its connection to clockmaking, gives it
         greater historical interest. Two blue plaques to Thomas Lister and his son, which
         are attached to the outhouse, commemorate the occupants.
Effect on the listed building
9.       The proposal would demolish the existing modern conservatory and replace it with
         a two-storey stone extension. The white paint, which covers the walls of the house,
         would be removed as part of the works, in addition to the removal of cement-based
         pointing and rendering and the removal of the soil pipe from the front elevation.
10. The house was not originally painted and so removing the modern paint finish,
    which is flaking in parts, would benefit both the appearance of the building and the
    stonework. Likewise, replacing a cement-based mortar and hard render with lime
    mortar and a lime-based harling, would allow the building to breathe and regulate
    moisture and prevent the deterioration of the face of the stonework. Furthermore,
    the removal of the soil pipe on the centre of the building, would enhance the
    appearance of the front of the house.
11. The condition of the existing conservatory is deteriorating and as a glazed
    structure on an exposed site, it is thermally inefficient and does not positively
    contribute to the appearance of the house. By removing this and the paint on the
    walls of the house, which are unsympathetic additions to a traditional building, the
    farmhouse would be less visible in distant views than at present, enabling it to
    harmoniously nestle within its surroundings.


1
    List entry number: 1134535


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
Appeal Decision 6011008


12. With a frontage of 3.9m, the footprint of the proposed extension is not overly large.
    However, because of its height, and width, it would encompass most of the side
    elevation of the building. In some circumstances, the degree of set-back and the
    design principles applied in this case would be appropriate, as referenced by the
    appellant in the Council’s guidance2. However, the farmhouse is built into the
    hillside on a sloping site and is a listed building. Even though the garden where the
    extension would be built is flat, the contours of the land dictate that any extension
    requires a greater level of subservience.
13. The submitted photograph and historic maps show that previously there was a
    stone built extension on this elevation, although there is no evidence of its overall
    size, apart from what can be seen on the OS map extracts. I acknowledge that the
    proposal has been developed following Building in Context principles and
    assessment3, and the extension would be built in traditional materials and
    constructed with square sectioned mullion windows, set back within their openings.
    Notwithstanding this, the massing of the two-storey extension would result in it
    being too high and unduly prominent. This would have a detrimental effect on the
    character and appearance of the existing house and would harm its significance.
14. Although the proposed extension would conceal the small attic window on the side
    elevation, the evidence suggests that because it is different to others in the house,
    that it is later in date. However, my assessment of the proposed extension
    indicates that it would be retained within the building.
15. The interior of the house has been modernised, with few features of note. The
    proposed alterations on the 1st floor would remove modern partitions and an en-
    suite bathroom, and level the floor in one of the bedrooms. These alterations
    would not harm any historic features. However, to access the proposed extension
    from the house, a new opening would be created through the existing gable wall
    which would result in the loss of some historic fabric.
16. Given the above, I find that the proposed works would fail to preserve the listed
    building and its setting and any features of special or architectural interest which it
    possesses. This would harm the significance of the heritage asset. Consequently, I
    give this harm considerable importance and weight in the planning balance of
    these appeals.
Effect on the SLA
17. The site is located within the SLA. This is a secluded, densely wooded area of
    birch, beech and oak along the valley of the River Calder that is associated with
    Luddenden Brook. The land use is one of pasture for sheep grazing, occasional
    arable fields and some smallholdings where horses and pigs are kept. Roads are
    often narrow and winding and the settlement pattern is one of mainly isolated
    farms and dwellings.
18. The appeal site is one of a group of buildings and houses on the side of the valley
    slope with extensive views of the surrounding countryside. Whilst the proposed
    extension would be visible when viewed from across the valley, it would be on the
    site of both a previous extension and the current conservatory. Moreover, it would


2
    Calderdale Placemaking and Design Guide, Supplementary Planning Document, July 2024
3
    Design in the Historic Environment, Historic England, Updated 19 June 2026


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               3
Appeal Decision 6011008


       be built in matching and traditional materials and would therefore not adversely
       affect the scenic quality of the SLA or fail to protect remoteness and tranquillity.
19. Therefore, I conclude that the proposal would not harm the SLA. It would accord
    with Policy GN4 of the Calderdale Local Plan 2018/19-2032/33, 2023, (CLP) which
    in part only supports proposals within the SLA that do not adversely affect the
    scenic quality of the SLA.
Public Benefits and Heritage Balance
20. Policy HE4 of the Framework advises that heritage assets are an irreplaceable
    resource and should be conserved in a manner appropriate to their significance.
    Furthermore, harm to the significance of heritage assets should be avoided and
    any harm should have a clear and convincing justification.
21. Policy HE6 of the Framework states that substantial weight should be given to the
    asset’s conservation, irrespective of whether any potential effect amounts to a
    positive effect, harm, substantial harm, or total loss of its significance. I find in this
    instance that the proposed extension would cause a medium level of harm to the
    listed building, whilst the proposed works to the fabric of the building, subject to
    suitably worded conditions, would have a positive effect. However, any harm to a
    designated heritage asset is a matter of considerable importance and weight.
    Where a development proposal would harm the significance of a designated
    heritage asset, Policy HE6 states that the effect on the asset and its significance
    should be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the proposal.
22. The appellant has set out the benefits of the proposal including the removal of an
    inappropriately designed conservatory, removing the white paint on a building that
    was not historically painted, and replacing the cement mortar and a hard render.
    These would benefit the building, enhance its appearance and sustain its long-
    term conservation. However, without further investigations, it is not clear whether it
    is possible to remove the cement mortar and render, which in any case would be
    done over a longer period. Whilst the extension and the internal works would
    rationalise and provide additional accommodation for the appellants, overall, this
    would be a private benefit.
23. Given the above and in the absence of any defined public benefit that would
    outweigh the harm that would be caused, I conclude that, on balance, the proposal
    would fail to preserve the special historic interest of the Grade II listed building.
    This would fail to satisfy the requirements of the Act and would conflict with Policy
    HE6 of the Framework.
24. In addition, it would conflict with CLP Policy HE1. This requires development
    proposals to conserve heritage assets in a manner appropriate to their
    significance, and that any harm will only be permitted where this is outweighed by
    public benefits.
Other Matters
25. The site is in the Green Belt. The revised Framework states that development in
    the Green Belt is inappropriate unless it falls within one of the categories in Policy
    GB7. Policy GB7 includes at point 1) a. the extension of an existing building,
    provided that the existing building is of permanent and substantial construction, is



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6011008


       lawful in planning terms, and any extension or alteration will not result in a
       disproportionate increase in size compared to the original building.
26. The Council has stated that once the existing conservatory is removed, the
    proposal would result in an increase of around 25% of the volume and footprint of
    the building. They considered that in spatial or visual terms it would not be
    disproportionate over the size of the original building and therefore would not be
    inappropriate development in the Green Belt.
27. The appellant has neither provided any figures nor disputed the views of the
    Council. However, evidence in the form of extracts of Ordnance Survey maps
    dated to 1933 and 1949 show that the building was originally larger. An undated
    historic photograph also shows part of an extension on the site of the proposal.
    Therefore, based on the evidence before me, I consider that the proposal would
    accord with Policy GB7 1) a. of the Framework and is therefore development
    which is not inappropriate in the Green Belt.
28. There is no dispute that the proposal would result in any harm to the living
    conditions of the occupiers of Woodhay Barn. Furthermore, I note the proposed
    ecological enhancement comprising proposed bird and bat boxes and a crevice for
    bats within the roof extension. This provides some limited weight in favour of the
    appeal.
29. A neighbouring property has provided a letter of support; however, this does not
    alter my assessment of the proposal.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
30. Policy S3 of the Framework states that decisions on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. In this case the
    proposal would be located outside a settlement, where Policy S5 indicates that
    only certain forms of development should be approved.
31. Policy S5 5) does state that this policy does not apply to development proposals in
    the Green Belt, which should be determined in accordance with the relevant policy,
    in this case Policy GB7. However, where development would not be inappropriate,
    proposals should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework, and applying paragraph 2.
32. Paragraph 2 affirms that in applying this policy, the circumstances in which the
    benefits of approving development proposals are likely to be substantially
    outweighed by adverse effects include, but are not restricted to, situations where a
    proposal would fail to comply with one of the decision-making policies which state
    that development proposals should be refused in specific circumstances.
33. In this case, whilst I have found that the proposal would not harm the SLA, and is
    not inappropriate development in the Green Belt, I have found that the proposed
    works would result in harm to the significance of a designated heritage asset. This
    harm is of considerable importance and weight and is not outweighed by any
    public benefits. Therefore, the benefits of granting permission would be
    substantially outweighed by adverse effects, when assessed against the
    Framework’s decision-making policies.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6011008


34. Consequently, the development conflicts with the Framework and there are no
    material considerations of sufficient weight to indicate otherwise. Therefore, I
    conclude that the appeals should be dismissed.

M J Francis
INSPECTOR
.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
