Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 09 September 2026
by A O'Neill BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011889
Maisie Cottage, Bottrells Lane, Chalfont St Giles, HP8 4EQ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Sid Balaam against the decision of Buckinghamshire Council.
•    The application Ref is PL/25/4593/FA.
•    The development proposed is the conversion and single storey side extension of existing stable
     building to create a one bedroom dwelling served by the existing vehicular access.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issues
2.    The main issues are:
      •    whether the proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt for
           the purposes of the development plan and the Framework including the effect
           upon the openness of the Green Belt;
      •    the effect of the proposal on the Chilterns National Landscape; and,
      •    if inappropriate, whether any harm by reason of inappropriateness, and any
           other harm, would be clearly outweighed by other considerations, so as to
           amount to the very special circumstances required to justify the proposal.
Reasons
Whether the development would be inappropriate
3.    The appeal site is within the Green Belt where the Framework seeks to prevent
      urban sprawl by keeping land permanently open. Framework Policy GB6 states
      that development in the Green Belt is inappropriate unless it falls within one of the
      exceptions in Framework Policy GB7. Relevant to this appeal is the exception at
      Framework Policy GB7(1)(b) which allows for “The reuse, extension, alteration or
      replacement of an existing building, provided that the existing building is of
      permanent and substantial construction, is lawful in planning terms, and any
      extension or alteration will not result in a disproportionate increase in size
      compared to the original building…”.
4.    Policy GB2 of the Chiltern District Local Plan 1997 (the LP) similarly sets a
      presumption against inappropriate development in the Green Belt, subject
      specified exceptions. This includes the change of use of existing permanent and
      substantial buildings, where it accords with other LP Policies, including GB11. LP

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011889


         Policy GB11 regards LP Policy GB11 regards the re-use of an existing non-
         residential building in the Green Belt as residential accommodation as not
         inappropriate development, subject to a number of criteria. However, LP Policy
         GB11 is more restrictive than the Framework and so, in line with Annex A,
         paragraph 2 of the Framework, this policy is given very limited weight.
5.       There is no dispute between the main parties that the conversion and extension of
         the existing stable on the site would fall within the exception set out in Framework
         Policy GB7(1)(b). Based on the evidence before me, I see no reason to reach a
         different conclusion.
6.       However, the proposal also includes the creation of a curtilage area including a
         gravel driveway and a garden area which would be enclosed by new boundary
         hedging. This would effectively result in the change of use of the existing
         undeveloped grassland surrounding the stable to residential use.
7.       Reference is made to the exception in Framework policy GB7(f)(iii) which concerns
         material changes in the use of land. However, case law1 has confirmed that
         residential uses do not fall within this this exception. I have not been directed to
         any other exception in the Framework or the LP which would apply to this element
         of the proposal. As such, it would be inappropriate development.
8.       The use of the proposed garden area is likely to include the storage of domestic
         paraphernalia including items such as tables, chairs, washing lines and play
         equipment. Whilst there is an existing vehicular access to the site, the proposed
         driveway would also facilitate the parking of vehicles. The resultant domestication
         of the land and the introduction of visual clutter would fail to preserve the
         openness of the Green Belt in spatial and visual terms.
9.       The proposed driveway would be readily visible from public viewpoints on Bottrells
         Lane. The existing and proposed hedgerows along boundaries of the site would, to
         some extent, limit the visual impact of the proposed garden area from Bottrells
         Lane and from public footpaths located to the east and north of the site. However,
         this would not mitigate the spatial impact of the proposal or the encroachment of
         development into the Green Belt.
10. This issue was considered in two previous appeal decisions2 relating to similar
    proposals at the appeal site. In both cases, the Inspectors concluded that the
    creation of a residential curtilage would result in the domestication of the land,
    resulting in harm to the openness of the Green Belt. While the current proposal
    has a smaller curtilage than that considered in the 2025 appeal, and the appellant
    contends that the garden area currently proposed is the smallest extent possible
    for the proposed dwelling, this does not alter my conclusion that it would constitute
    inappropriate development and harm the openness of the Green Belt.
11. The Council suggests that the currently proposed curtilage area is similar to that
    considered in the 2024 appeal, and this is not disputed by the appellant. In that
    case, the Inspector found that, although the garden area would be small and its
    impact on openness limited, it would, nonetheless, be harmful. Having regard to
    the evidence before me, including my observations on site, I find no reason to
    reach a different conclusion.

1
    RB of Kingston upon Thames v SSLUHC [2023] EWHC 2055 (Admin).
2
    Appeal Refs: APP/X0415/W/25/3363913 dated 02 September 2025 and APP/X0415/W/24/3336436 dated 09 August 2024.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             2
Appeal Decision 6011889


12. The proposal would, therefore, be inappropriate development in the Green Belt
    and would cause harm to openness. As such, it would conflict with LP Policies
    GB2 and GB11, as set out above.
Chilterns National Landscape
13. The site is located within the Chilterns National Landscape, formerly known as the
    Chilterns Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty. Section 85 of the Countryside and
    Rights of Way Act 2000 places a statutory duty on relevant authorities to seek to
    further the purpose of conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of National
    Landscapes. This is reflected in LP Policy LSQ1 and Policy CS22 of the Core
    Strategy for Chiltern District 2011 (the CS), which have similar aims for the
    Chilterns National Landscape. Additionally, Framework Policy N4 requires
    substantial weight be placed on the importance of conserving and enhancing the
    natural beauty of such areas.
14. The Chilterns National Landscape encompasses a variety of character areas. The
    appeal site lies within the ‘Penn Rolling Farmland’ landscape character area, as
    defined in the Buckinghamshire Landscape Character Assessment 2011. This
    character area is described as a large-scale landscape with a rolling landform. It is
    largely a mosaic of farmland and woodland, dominated by large arable fields, and
    substantial amounts of ancient woodland with low settlement density. Collectively,
    these features represent the beauty and special qualities of this part of the
    Chilterns National Landscape.
15. The appeal site comprises the existing stable and an area of undeveloped open
    grassland. It is in an area where there is sparse development. To the north of the
    site are large agricultural fields and to the south, on the opposite side of Bottrells
    Lane, is an area of woodland. The appeal site and its surroundings therefore have
    a traditional open, rural character and appearance, representative of the Penn
    Rolling Farmland landscape character.
16. The proposed conversion and extension to the existing structure would result in
    modest changes to its appearance. As such, this element of the proposal would
    not have an adverse impact on the National Landscape.
17. However, as I have set out above, the creation of the garden and driveway would
    change the use of the land to residential. The resultant domestication of this land
    by virtue of the introduction of domestic paraphernalia and the creation of a
    vehicular parking area, would detract from the area’s rural character and
    appearance and the natural beauty of the National Landscape.
18. The proposed boundary hedging would, to some extent, soften the appearance of
    the proposal. Nevertheless, this would not fully overcome the harms resulting from
    the domestication of the land and the resulting erosion of rural character. However,
    the site is relatively small in the wider landscape, so the overall magnitude of harm
    would be limited.
19. Nevertheless, the proposal would fail to conserve or enhance the natural beauty
    and special qualities of the Chilterns National Landscape and, as such, it would
    conflict with Framework Policy N4, LP Policy LSQ1 and CS Policy CS22, as set
    out above.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011889


Other Considerations
20. The contribution of one dwelling to the housing supply, although positive, would be
    limited. There would be some economic uplift in the local economy during the
    construction process and from the future spending of occupiers, however these
    benefits would also be limited given the scale of the proposal. Nevertheless, in
    light of the Council’s housing land supply position, I attribute these benefits
    substantial weight.
21. I appreciate that the current proposal makes appropriate provision for Biodiversity
    Net Gain, thus overcoming one of the reasons the 2025 appeal was dismissed.
    Given the modest scale of the Biodiversity Net Gain which would be achieved, this
    benefit attracts moderate weight in favour of the proposal.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
22. I have found the proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt.
    As set out in Framework policy GB6(2), inappropriate development is, by
    definition, harmful to the Green Belt and should not be approved except in very
    special circumstances (VSC). VSC will not exist unless the harm to the Green Belt
    and any other harm is clearly outweighed by other considerations.
23. The proposal would constitute inappropriate development in the Green Belt, and it
    would harm openness, to which the Framework requires me to attach substantial
    weight. Furthermore, I have found the proposal would fail to conserve or enhance
    the Chilterns National Landscape to which the Framework also attributes
    substantial weight. The Council acknowledges that it cannot demonstrate an
    adequate supply of housing land. Framework Policy S5 allows for certain forms of
    development outside settlements, including that which would address an
    evidenced unmet need (S5(1)(j)). However, S5(5) states that this policy does not
    apply to development proposals in the Green Belt. Nevertheless, in line with
    Framework Policy HO7, I attribute substantial weight to the benefits of providing a
    home which could contribute towards meeting evidenced housing needs.
    However, the limited benefits that would accrue from the provision of one dwelling
    and the modest benefits from Biodiversity Net Gain are consequently not
    considerations that clearly outweigh the harm arising from inappropriateness and
    other harm. The VSCs required to justify the proposal do not, therefore, exist.
24. The proposal would conflict with the development plan and the material
    considerations, including the Framework and the VSC test therein, do not indicate
    that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it. Therefore, the
    appeal is dismissed.



A O'Neill
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
