 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 17 August 2026
 by Chris Couper BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 24 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011573
 2 Lincoln Crescent, Biggleswade, Bedfordshire SG18 8HW
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Mathew Monte-Colombo against the decision of Central Bedfordshire
      Council.
 •    The application Ref is CB/26/00249/FULL.
 •    The development is described as ‘proposed new boundary 1.95m high fence adjacent to an existing
      highway’.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. Notwithstanding the description of the development in my banner, the fence is
   already in place, and I have dealt with the appeal on the basis of its retention.
3. The revised National Planning Policy Framework was published in August 2026
   (‘the Framework’). Having regard to the submitted evidence, and the main issue in
   this case, I am satisfied that its relevant policies are not substantially different from
   those now superseded policies that were in place at the time of the Council’s
   decision. It is that new version of the Framework that I refer to in my decision.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the development on the character and appearance
   of the area.
Reasons
5. The host property is situated on a prominent corner plot where Lincoln Crescent
   meets Dells Lane. The house sits perpendicular to Dells Lane, with its rear garden
   parallel to it and at a lower level. The fence the subject of the appeal is set back
   very slightly from the pavement on Dells Lane behind a narrow verge. It encloses a
   parcel of land which I understand was previously open to the highway, and which is
   the subject of an adverse possession claim to HM Land Registry.
6. I observed that the houses along this stretch of Dells Lane are varied in form and
   style, but are set back from the highway behind gardens or parking forecourts. The
   plot frontages are typically either open to the highway, or are delineated by
   hedgerows, dwarf walls or low picket fences. This gives this part of the streetscene
   a locally distinctive, open-plan character.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision: 6011573


7. Given its 1.95 metre height and approximately 18 metre length, and its siting very
   close to the edge of the pavement, the fence has resulted in a significant feeling of
   enclosure along this part of Dells Lane. Its front face and its side returns step well
   forward of structures on nearby plots along this side of the road to the north and to
   the south. It therefore appears as a visually incongruous and stark feature, which
   is significantly at odds with the generally much more open character in this part of
   the streetscene.
8. At Appendix 1 of his appeal statement, the appellant has drawn my attention to
   other fences adjacent to the highway in Dells Lane. However, they are some
   distance from this site, and given the cluster of fences in the section around the
   junctions with Coppice Mead and Broadmead, the character of that part of Dells
   Lane is rather different from here.
9. Thus, irrespective of the outcome of the adverse possession claim, and that this
   land is not designated as protected open space in the development plan, I find that
   the fence is significantly at odds with the prevailing characteristics in this part of the
   streetscene, and that it has significantly harmed the character and appearance of
   the local area. Given the fence’s height and length, and the limited space between
   it and the pavement, a landscaping condition would not overcome the harm that I
   have found.
10. Whilst the appellant states that a 1 metre high fence could be erected without the
    need for planning permission, this scheme is almost twice that height, and its
    harmful visual impact is therefore significantly greater compared to that fallback.
11. The scheme therefore conflicts with Policies HQ1 and HQ10 of the Central
    Bedfordshire Local Plan 2015-2035 (2021), and with Policy BDP1 of the
    Biggleswade Neighbourhood Plan (2022). Amongst other things, and in broad
    terms, these seek to ensure that development is of the highest quality, which
    creates locally distinctive places, responds positively to local context and
    townscape character, and protects verges and landscape strips of visual amenity
    value from encroachment.
12. For similar reasons, it conflicts with the Framework’s similar requirement in Section
    14 for proposals to respond to their context, and to create visually attractive,
    distinctive and characterful development which maintains a strong sense of place.
13. It also fails to accord with the advice at Section 11.8 of the Central Bedfordshire
    Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document (2023) which notes that
    boundary treatment can be a major influence on the character of a street, and
    which says that lengths of standard close boarded timber fencing next to the public
    realm are unacceptable as they undermine its quality.
14. The appellant states that the fence is required for privacy and security, given land
    levels and the layout of his rear elevation and rear garden relative to the highway.
    However, whilst the fence provides greater screening from Dells Lane than the side
    boundary wall which is at a lower level and further from it, that private benefit to the
    living conditions in the host property does not outweigh the significant harm that the
    fence has caused.
15. I note that there were no objections to the scheme from local residents, the
    Council’s highways and landscape officers, or from Biggleswade Town Council.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         2
 Appeal Decision: 6011573


     However, having considered it on its planning merits, for the above reasons, and
     having regard to all other matters raised, the appeal is dismissed.

Chris Couper
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      3
