Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 September 2026
by C Walker BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21st September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011694
Honeysuckle Bottom Sawmill Site, Honeysuckle Bottom, East Horsley, Surrey,
KT24 5TD
   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
    planning permission.
   The appeal is made by Stuart Dale of Honeysuckle Bottom Sawmill Ltd against Guildford Borough
    Council.
   The application Ref is 25/P/00759.
   The development proposed is described in the application form as ‘demolition of buildings, change of
    use of barn to a dwellinghouse with associated works and erection of two dwellinghouses,
    associated parking and landscaping’.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the demolition of
   buildings, change of use of barn to a dwellinghouse with associated works and
   erection of two dwellinghouses, associated parking and landscaping at
   Honeysuckle Bottom Sawmill Site, Honeysuckle Bottom, East Horsley, Surrey,
   KT24 5TD in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 25/P/00759, and the
   plans submitted with it, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2. This appeal arises from the Council's failure to determine the application within the
   statutory time limit. However, the Council has confirmed that, had it determined the
   application, planning permission would have been refused for the reasons set out in
   the Officer's Report. In these circumstances, I have framed the main issues having
   regard to those putative reasons for refusal.
3. The site is located within the Surrey Hills National Landscape, designated for its
   landscape and scenic beauty. There is no dispute between the parties regarding
   the effect of the proposal on the National Landscape and therefore it does not form
   a main issue. Nevertheless, in determining this appeal, I have had regard to the
   statutory duty that requires that in exercising or performing any functions in relation
   to, or so as to affect, land in National Landscapes, relevant authorities ‘must seek
   to further’ the purposes for which these areas are designated.
4. Both parties have been given the opportunity of making representations on the
   revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) that was published in
   August 2026, during the appeal process.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011694


Main Issues
5. The main issues are:
               whether the site is a suitable location for housing, having regard to its
                access to local services and facilities; and
               the effect of the proposal on adjacent ancient woodland and a site of nature
                conservation importance.
Reasons
Suitable location and accessibility
6.    The appeal site represents a clearing in a wooded area occupied by a working,
      commercial sawmill. It is located in a rural area, outside of any defined settlement
      in the countryside. Development in the area is sparse, with small pockets of
      residential development dotted through the predominantly rural and wooded
      landscape.
7.    Access to the site is gained via Honeysuckle Bottom, a long and narrow rural lane
      connecting to a wider network of rural roads, none of which are lit or provided with
      footways. No substantive evidence has been provided regarding the proximity of
      settlements containing the services and facilities necessary to meet the day-to-day
      needs of future occupiers. Nevertheless, it is accepted that the nearest villages of
      East Horsley and Effingham, are located some distance from the site.
8.    Public bridleways pass through and adjacent to the site and provide links to the
      wider rights-of-way network. However, the evidence before me indicates that these
      routes would not provide safe or practical access to local services and facilities.
      Based on the information available, the distances involved would present a
      significant barrier to walking and cycling. In addition, no convenient public
      transport options have been identified.
9.    Consequently, future occupiers would be likely to rely heavily, if not entirely, on the
      private car to access everyday services and facilities. Policy ID3 of the Guildford
      Local Plan: Strategy and Sites 2015-2034 (2019) (GLPSS) requires new
      development, insofar as their size, characteristics and location allow, to maximise
      the use of sustainable modes of transport. The site's remote location affords very
      limited scope to encourage travel by modes other than the private car, as expected
      by the Framework.
10. In my view, the principal concern is not simply the limited availability of sustainable
    transport options, but that residential development in this location would conflict
    with the Council's spatial strategy, which seeks to direct growth to settlements with
    the infrastructure, services and facilities necessary to support future residents.
11. Taking these matters together, I conclude that the site is not in a suitable location
    having regard to access to local services and facilities and the development plan's
    objectives for sustainable transport and patterns of growth. The proposal therefore
    conflicts with Policy ID3 of the GLPSS.
Ancient woodland and site of nature conservation importance
12. The evidence before me indicates that the site is surrounded by both ancient
    woodland and a site of nature conservation importance (SNCI). There is conflicting

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6011694


       information before me from the Council on the precise name of the SNCI.
       However, it has been accepted by both parties that the ancient woodland and the
       SNCI share the same boundary. Consequently, the matters are closely related and
       the principal issue in each case concerns the adequacy of protection afforded to
       the adjoining woodland habitat. On that basis, I am satisfied that, if the ancient
       woodland can be appropriately safeguarded from the effects of the development,
       the interests of the SNCI would likewise be protected. I have therefore considered
       the matter on that basis.
13. Policy P6 of the Guildford Local Plan: Development Management Policies (2023)
    (GLPDMP) seeks to protect irreplaceable habitat. Where ancient woodland falls
    within or adjacent to a development site, it lists four required measures. This
    includes an appropriate buffer between new development and the ancient
    woodland of a minimum of 15 metres or a greater distance if specified by national
    policy, and a clear separation, delineated by a physical feature such as a wildlife
    permeable barrier, a cycle lane, path or lightly trafficked road.
14. This policy reflects Natural England’s Standing Advice relating to ancient
    woodland. This indicates that development must be kept as far as possible from
    ancient woodland with an appropriate semi-natural buffer area maintained
    between it and the development boundary which should be at least 15 metres. It
    also advises that larger buffers may be required, and that permanent retention of
    the buffer zones must be secured as part of a planning permission.
15. It is not advanced that the development would result in the direct loss of ancient
    woodland. Rather, the concern is that there is insufficient information to ensure
    that it and the SNCI can be protected from the effects of the development. In this
    regard, the application was accompanied by a suite of supporting documents
    including tree surveys, constraints and tree protection plans, together with
    arboricultural and ecological assessments. These have been produced by
    appropriately qualified and experienced specialists.
16. The appellant contends that the extent of the ancient woodland shown on the
    MAGIC mapping system is inaccurate and that the woodland to the west of the site
    is, in reality, approximately 12 metres (m) further from the site boundary than
    depicted. In addition, there is agreement between the parties' ecological advisors
    that the southern boundary of the ancient woodland has been incorrectly plotted
    on the proposed site plan. The plan indicates a separation distance of
    approximately 10m between the proposed development and the ancient woodland,
    assuming the ancient woodland is correctly mapped. Taking this as the worst-case
    scenario, the proposed 10m buffer depth falls below the 15m requirement set out
    by both Policy P6 and the Standing Advice, bringing it into conflict with the
    development plan in this regard.
17. However, the appeal site comprises previously developed land, a matter not in
    dispute, and is occupied by a range of existing buildings. Moreover, the associated
    land is actively used in connection with the sawmill and is routinely subject to
    disturbance arising from staff activity, vehicle movements, including forklifts, pallet
    trucks and heavy goods vehicles, and the outdoor storage of timber and
    operational equipment within its grounds. These activities are an established and
    ongoing feature of the site. Given that this represents a realistic and genuine
    fallback position, it is an important material consideration. The baseline against
    which the effects of the proposed development must be assessed is therefore not

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011694


       one of an undeveloped or undisturbed site, but of a functioning commercial
       operation that already generates a degree of activity and disturbance. This is a
       matter to which I attach significant weight.
18. Plot 1 would be formed by the conversion of an existing building outside of the
    15m buffer. Notwithstanding that Plot 2 appears to encroach slightly into raised
    ruderal vegetation, the Tree Survey Reference Plan does not appear to show that
    it would encroach into the 15m buffer. The southernmost plot would be wholly
    within the footprint of an existing building to be demolished albeit on a
    considerably reduced footprint. Whilst this is partly within the 15m buffer, in my
    view it would represent a betterment than the existing situation when taking into
    account the reduced level of activity that would arise from the cessation of the
    commercial activities compared to the domestic activities of one family garden
    falling within the buffer.
19. It is notable that the Council’s ecological advisors recommended consultation with
    a specialist tree officer. There is no evidence to indicate this was undertaken and
    consequently I must rely on the information before me from the appellant. Given
    the range of mitigation measures suggested, including tree protection measures
    during the construction period, I am satisfied that subject to planning conditions,
    the deterioration of the ancient woodland and SNCI could be avoided.
20. The evidence before me indicates that proposed hedgerow planting and fencing
    around each residential curtilage would provide a clear and defensible separation
    between the development and the adjacent woodland. In addition, along the
    western boundary, the proposed formalised driveway would create a readily
    identifiable physical feature between the development and the ancient woodland,
    consistent with the approach advocated by GLPDMP Policy P6.
21. The Council's concerns relate principally to the potential operational effects of the
    development. In particular, it is argued that the long-term retention of the
    hedgerows along the southern boundary would not be adequately secured and
    that domestic gardens and sections of the access drive would extend within the
    15m buffer. Nevertheless, I am not persuaded that the likely effects arising from
    the proposed residential use would be comparable to those associated with the
    existing lawful use of the site.
22. By comparison to the established commercial yard, I find that the use of part of the
    site as domestic gardens and accessways would be likely to result in a markedly
    lower level of activity and disturbance in proximity to the ancient woodland.
    Furthermore, the retention and management of the proposed hedgerows could be
    secured by condition. Given the sensitivity of the site, it would also be reasonable
    and necessary to impose additional safeguards, including the removal of permitted
    development rights for outbuildings, boundary treatments and the laying of hard
    surfacing within the curtilages. Such measures would provide appropriate control
    over future changes and help to ensure that the ecological value of the adjacent
    ancient woodland and surrounding habitats would be protected.
23. Whilst I find there would be conflict with GLPDMP Policy P6 and the Standing
    Advice, insofar as the buffer between ancient woodland and the development
    would be less than the specified 15m, it would nevertheless represent an
    improvement over the existing situation, which is an important material
    consideration.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6011694


24. Therefore, taking into account all of the above, I find that the effect of the
    development on the adjacent ancient woodland and SNCI would be acceptable
    subject to conditions. In this circumstance I give less weight to the requirements of
    GLPDMP Policy P6 and the Standing Advice given that it would not result in the
    loss or deterioration of an irreplaceable habitat, including ancient woodland which
    is a key objective of Policy N6 of the Framework.
Other Matters
25. The Framework, at Policy S3, sets out that decisions on proposals should apply
    the presumption in favour of sustainable development. As the site lies outside of a
    settlement, in this case it means the application of its Policy S5. This provides that
    only certain forms of listed development should be approved outside of
    settlements. These exceptions include (c) the reuse of an existing lawful building
    of permanent and substantial construction, and (d) the redevelopment of
    previously developed land (including a material change of use to residential or
    mixed use including residential). As the development falls into these two
    categories, the proposal meets the initial qualifying criteria of Policy S5(1). It goes
    on to state that these developments should be approved, unless the benefits of
    doing so would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects, when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
26. I have identified no specific circumstances within the national decision-making
    policies that indicate the development should be refused as directed by Policy
    S3(2). Nevertheless, Policy S3(3) makes clear that isolated homes, which lie
    outside of settlements or groups of houses, should not be approved other than in
    accordance with Policy HO11. This policy supports isolated homes in the
    countryside only where they meet one or more of a list of certain circumstances.
    This includes where (c) the development would reuse a redundant or disused
    building and would enhance its immediate setting.
27. Whilst one of the dwellings would meet the provisions of this exception, two of the
    dwellings are new builds and therefore do not gain the support of policies HO11(c)
    nor S3(3).
28. Part 4 of the Framework Policy S3 sets out that development proposals which do
    not fall within one of the categories set out within it should only be approved in
    exceptional circumstances, where the benefits of the proposal would substantially
    outweigh the adverse effects, including to the character of the countryside and in
    relation to promoting sustainable patterns of movement.
29. The proposal would deliver three dwellings and, whilst modest in numerical terms,
    this would nonetheless represent a meaningful positive contribution to housing
    supply in a borough where there is an urgent and pressing shortfall. Given the
    scale of the development and the absence of substantial infrastructure
    requirements, there is a reasonable prospect that the dwellings could be delivered
    relatively quickly. In the context of the Council's housing land supply position, I
    attach significant weight to this benefit.
30. The development would also generate economic benefits through construction
    activity, associated employment and expenditure, together with the spending of
    future occupants within the local economy. Whilst these benefits would be
    moderate in scale, they nevertheless weigh in favour of the proposal.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6011694


31. In addition, the scheme would result in the redevelopment of previously developed
    land currently occupied by buildings and associated commercial activity. It would
    make effective use of land and existing resources, including through the
    conversion of an existing building to residential use. Noting the Framework’s
    expectation that this be given particular regard, I attach considerable weight to
    this. The proposal would also reduce the level of activity associated with the extant
    commercial use of the site, leading to reductions in noise, dust and general
    disturbance. This would benefit nearby residents and would enhance the character
    of the area.
32. Furthermore, the replacement of the existing commercial use with a low-density
    residential scheme would improve the openness of the Green Belt, an undisputed
    matter, and would enhance the tranquillity and scenic qualities of the National
    Landscape. The proposal would also secure a biodiversity net gain of 20%,
    thereby exceeding the statutory minimum requirement and complying with Policy
    P7 of the GLPDMP. These are important environmental benefits to which I attach
    substantial weight.
33. Collectively, these benefits attract substantial weight in favour of the development
34. It is acknowledged that the appeal site is not situated in a location that would be
    regarded as sustainable in transport terms, nor does it accord with the Council’s
    spatial strategy. Future occupiers would be likely to rely heavily on the private car
    to meet their day-to-day needs, and this weighs against the proposal. I have
    therefore found conflict with Policy ID3 of the GLPSS and have had particular
    regard to the Framework's emphasis on directing development towards
    sustainable locations.
35. Nevertheless, the assessment must be undertaken having regard to the
    circumstances of the site as a whole, including the realistic fallback position. By
    comparison to the existing commercial use, the proposed residential development
    would not be expected to increase overall trip generation and is likely, to reduce
    traffic levels. In particular, it would remove the need for regular commercial vehicle
    activity associated with the sawmill operation, including the use of large vehicles
    on the surrounding network of narrow rural lanes.
36. Consequently, whilst the site's unsustainable location is an important adverse
    consideration, the transport impacts of the proposal are tempered by the fallback
    position and the likelihood of a reduction in overall traffic and associated
    disturbance.
37. Weighing all matters in the balance, including the Council's inability to demonstrate
    a five-year supply of deliverable housing sites, I find that the housing, economic
    and environmental benefits of the proposal carry substantial weight. The harm
    from the site’s unsustainable location, would not significantly and demonstrably
    outweigh the collective substantial benefits of the scheme. Rather the benefits
    weigh decisively in favour of granting planning permission. In my judgement, these
    matters constitute exceptional circumstances, where the benefits substantially
    outweigh the harm as required by Policy S5(4) of the Framework.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6011694


Conditions
38. The Council have suggested conditions which I have considered in relation to the
    necessary tests. I have made changes to some, included additional conditions and
    not imposed all those suggested for the reasons set out below.
39. In addition to the standard time condition (No.1), I have imposed a condition
    requiring that the development is carried out in accordance with the approved plans
    (No. 2) for the avoidance of doubt and in the interests of certainty.
40. To minimise risks from land contamination, conditions (No’s 3 and 4) are required.
    To protect against harm to ecological assets, condition No’s 5 to 7 are necessary,
    whilst condition No. 8 seeks to achieve enhancements. Although the Council have
    recommended a landscape and ecological management plan condition, this
    duplicates the requirements of the ecological management plan and therefore I
    have imposed a simplified condition (No. 9) to require more detail that builds on the
    details indicated on the landscape strategy drawing, which I find are broadly
    acceptable but lack certain details, including the management of landscaped
    boundaries. For the avoidance of doubt, I have imposed a condition (No. 10)
    requiring a biodiversity net gain of at least 20% provision in accordance with the
    development plan.
41. To protect trees during the construction period, condition No.11 imposes a
    requirement for the developer to provide an arboricultural method statement and an
    updated tree protection plan. Whilst the Council’s version requires an additional
    survey and impact assessment, I find this to be unnecessary, and I have modified
    the condition accordingly. Similarly, I find the Council’s suggested condition relating
    to the protection of the SNCI and ancient woodland to be unnecessary as it would
    be protected by virtue of the conditions already imposed.
42. In the interests of sustainable development, a waste management plan, an energy
    modelling document, water management and solar panel details are necessary and
    imposed by conditions No’s 12, 13, 15 and 21.
43. To ensure the proposed dwellings are finished in materials appropriate for its
    context, condition No. 14 is required.
44. In the interests of highway safety, visibility splays at the access are to be provided
    and maintained and parking provision made available, secured by conditions No’s
    16 and 17. There is no evidence before me that the parking and turning shown on
    plan is not fit for purpose and therefore, I have amended the Council’s suggested
    condition accordingly. Condition No.18 seeks to promote sustainable travel which is
    important and necessary given the site’s location, so I have imposed it.
45. Whilst not suggested in the Council’s list of conditions, its officer report noted a
    condition was required to minimise light spill from the windows to the National
    Landscape. As the scheme would include more glazing than the existing use, it is
    reasonable and a condition is therefore imposed at No. 19. To protect nocturnal
    wildlife, a condition (No. 20) to control external lighting is also necessary.
46. The Council suggest the removal of permitted development rights in respect of
    extensions, roof additions and outbuildings to protect the openness of the Green
    Belt. I do not find the Green Belt reason provides the clear justification required by
    Policy DM6(2)(c) of the Framework. However, in this case I find that to protect the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6011694


     adjacent ancient woodland and the SNCI together with the surrounding ecology,
     there would be clear justification to remove permitted development rights in respect
     of extensions, outbuildings, boundary treatments and the laying of hard surfaces, a
     matter I note the appellant agrees on and is satisfied is reasonable. As such I have
     amended the suggested condition to reflect this.
Conclusion
47. For these reasons, the appeal should be allowed.

C Walker
INSPECTOR
                                           Schedule of Conditions

    1. The development hereby permitted shall be begun before the expiration of three
       years from the date of this permission.

    2. The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
       following approved plans:

         PL01B (Location Plan as Existing)
         PL02C (Block Plan as Proposed)
         PL03C (Site Plan as Proposed)
         038-B (Proposed Site Plan)
         039-F (Plot 1 Proposed New House Plans & Section A-A)
         040-C (Plot 1 Proposed New House Elevations)
         041-F (Plot 2 Proposed New House Plans & Section A-A)
         042-C (Plot 2 Proposed New House Elevations)
         043-F (Plot 3 Proposed New House Plans & Section A-A)
         044-C (Plot 3 Proposed New House Elevations)
         045 (Proposed Garages Plans & Elevations)

    3. No development shall be commenced on site until the following has been
       submitted to and been approved in witing by the Local Planning Authority (LPA):

              a) A detailed Phase One desktop survey report should be completed to
                 identify and evaluate possible onsite and offsite sources, pathways and
                 receptors of contamination, and presentation of all plausible pollutant
                 linkages in a preliminary conceptual site model.
              b) If the LPA consider that further investigation of the site is necessary, a
                 contaminated land onsite investigation proposal, detailing the extent and
                 methodologies of sampling, analyses and proposed assessment criteria
                 required to enable the characterisation of the plausible pollutant linkages
                 identified in the preliminary conceptual model (a), shall be submitted to
                 the Local Planning Authority for approval.
              c) A detailed on-site investigation must be carried out by a suitably qualified
                 and accredited consultant/contractor in accordance with the approved site
                 investigation proposal as per (b) to determine the nature and extent of
                 contamination on site. This shall include an intrusive investigation,
                 chemical testing, ground gas monitoring, a quantitative risk assessment,


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         8
Appeal Decision 6011694


                 refining and updating the Conceptual Site model and evaluating the
                 potentially unacceptable contamination risks requiring remediation. All
                 investigation will be undertaken in accordance with DEFRA's Land
                 Contamination: Technical Guidance and BS10175: 2011+A2:2017,
                 Investigation of potentially contaminated sites. The ground gas monitoring
                 and risk assessments shall be completed in accordance with CIRIA C665
                 guidance.
              d) If the need for remediation is identified, a detailed remediation strategy to
                 restore the site to a standard suitable for use, including works to address
                 any unsuspected contamination.

    4. Any remediation scheme submitted in accordance with Condition 03 shall be
       carried out as detailed in the submission. Documentary proof shall be provided
       to the Local Planning Authority together with a quality assurance certificate to
       show that the works have been carried out in full accordance with the approved
       remediation strategy. Details of any post remediation sampling and analysis to
       show the site has reached the required clean-up criteria shall be included in the
       closure report together with the necessary documentation detailing what waste
       material has been removed from the site before the development hereby
       permitted is occupied by any person not directly involved in constructing the
       development.

    5. Prior to commencement of development (including prior to the commencement
       of any demolition works) a Construction Environmental Management Plan
       (CEMP) shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
       Authority. The CEMP should include, but not be limited to:
           a) A map showing the location of all of the ecological features and Ancient
               Woodland buffer zones;
           b) A risk assessment of the potentially damaging construction activities
               (including demolition works);
           c) Practical measures to avoid and reduce impacts during construction
               including pollution protection measures;
           d) The location and timing of works to avoid harm to biodiversity features
               including Ancient Woodland;
           e) The responsible persons and lines of communication; and
           f) The use of protected fences, exclusion barriers and warning signs.
       The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details.

    6. Prior to the commencement of development, an amphibian and reptile
       precautionary method statement of working shall be submitted to and be
       approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. Should Great Crested Newts
       be recorded during works, all work should cease immediately, and advice should
       be sought from Natural England or a suitability experienced ecologist to agree
       on the appropriate actions. The development shall be carried out in accordance
       with the agreed details.

    7. Prior to commencement of development, a site walkover shall be undertaken by
       a suitably experienced ecologist to check for badger setts within the application
       site boundary, and a 30m buffer, where accessible. If any badger activity is
       detected, an appropriate method of working, including details of any licences
       that are required, shall be submitted to, and be approved in writing by the Local


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6011694


         Planning Authority. The development shall then be carried out in accordance
         with the agreed details.

      8. No development shall take place until an Ecological Enhancement Plan (EEP)
         has been submitted to and been approved in writing by the Local Planning
         Authority. The EEP should include, but not be limited to the following:
              a) Full details of ecological enhancement measures; and
              b) A location plan of all ecological enhancement features being provided.
         The scheme shall be implemented in full prior to the first occupation of the
         development hereby approved and shall thereafter be retained on site for the
         lifetime of the development.

      9. Prior to the commencement of development, a detailed hard and soft landscape
         scheme shall be submitted to and be approved in writing by the Local Planning
         Authority. The details shall build upon the indicative Landscape Strategy
         Proposals Plan drawing no. P1 Rev D and include:

             a statement setting out the design objectives and how these will be delivered;
             earthworks showing existing and proposed finished levels or contours;
             a full specification of all proposed planting which shall include the quantity,
              size, species, and positions or density of all trees, hedges and shrubs to be
              planted, how they will be planted and protected and the proposed time of
              planting.
             means of enclosure/boundary treatments and any retaining structures;
             hard surfacing materials;
             a management and maintenance schedule; and
             an implementation programme, including phasing of work where relevant.

         The landscaping works shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
         specifications and in accordance with the agreed implementation programme.
         The completed scheme shall be managed and maintained in accordance with an
         approved scheme of management and maintenance.

10.      No development shall commence until the following details have been submitted
         to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority:
            a. the statutory biodiversity metric tool for the application site showing
               baseline and post development habitats;
            b. a Biodiversity Gain Plan (BGP) setting out all Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG)
               measures to be undertaken;
            c. for BNG units delivered on the application site (on-site):
                    details of how the scheme shall be managed and maintained for a
                      period of 30 years (to include a Habitat Management and
                      Monitoring Plan for 'significant' on-site habitat enhancements); and
                    planting and any other BNG measure being introduced;
            d. for BNG units delivered off the application site (off-site):
                    details of the location of the off-site BNG habitats;
                    evidence that BNG site is operating as a lawful registered habitat
                      bank; and
                    evidence that the offsite habitat bank has been secured for a period
                      of 30years.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
Appeal Decision 6011694


         The submitted details shall show that the scheme would achieve a BNG of at
         least 20% for each relevant BNG unit category (habitat, hedgerow and
         watercourse). Once, agreed in writing by the Local Planning Authority the
         scheme shall be implemented, in accordance with the approved details, prior to
         the first occupation of the development approved and shall be managed and
         maintained in accordance with the details for the full 30-year period.

 11.     No development shall take place until an Arboricultural Method Statement
         (detailing all aspects of construction and staging of works) and an updated Tree
         Protection Plan in accordance with British Standard 5837:2005 (or any later
         revised standard) have been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
         Planning Authority. The development shall be carried out in accordance with the
         agreed method statement and no equipment, machinery or materials shall be
         brought onto the site for the purposes of the development until fencing has been
         erected in accordance with the Tree Protection Plan. Within any area fenced in
         accordance with this condition, nothing shall be stored, placed or disposed of
         above or below ground, the ground level shall not be altered, no excavations
         shall be made, nor shall any fires be lit, without the prior written consent of the
         Local Planning Authority. The fencing shall be maintained in accordance with the
         approved details, until all equipment, machinery and surplus materials have
         been moved from the site.

 12.     No development hereby permitted (including demolition, groundworks and
         construction of the vehicular accesses) shall commence until a Site Waste
         Management Plan (SWMP) has been submitted to and been approved in writing
         by the Local Planning Authority. The SWMP must accord with DEFRA Non-
         statutory guidance for site waste management plans (2008). The details shall
         include:
             a) any waste generated by construction, demolition and excavation activities
                is limited to the minimum quantity necessary;
             b) opportunities for first, re-use and secondly, recycling of construction,
                demolition and excavation waste on the application site are maximised;
                and
             c) sufficient on-site facilities to manage waste (storage, reuse and recycling)
                arising during the operation of the development of an appropriate type
                and scale will be provided and maintained for the duration of the
                development.
         The Site Waste Management Plan will subsequently be kept up-to-date
         throughout the development process in accordance with established
         methodology. The SWMP measures shall be implemented and maintained for
         the course of the development works.

13.      Prior to the commencement of any development above slab level works, an
         energy modelling document (SAP output document or BREL Compliance
         Report) shall be submitted to and be approved in writing by the Local Planning
         Authority. This shall demonstrate the Dwelling Fabric Energy Efficiency (DFEE)
         value is at least 10% lower than the Target Fabric Energy Efficiency value set by
         Building Regulations. Heating and hot water for the dwelling will be provided by
         an air or ground source heat pump. The development shall be implemented in
         accordance with the approved details.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   11
Appeal Decision 6011694


14.      Prior to the commencement of any development above slab level works, a
         written schedule with details of the source/ manufacturer, colour and finish, or
         samples on request of all external facing (including for all retaining walls /
         structures) and roof materials and hard surfacing materials shall be submitted to
         and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. This must include
         details of reasonable efforts for all external materials to be locally sourced. The
         development shall be carried out using only those external materials approved.

15.      Prior to first occupation, a water efficiency calculation (Part G2 of the Approved
         Documents 2015), or similar shall be submitted to and be approved in writing by
         the Local Planning Authority. This shall include details of water management
         measures that achieve a maximum water usage of 110 litres per person per day
         (regulation 36 paragraph 2(b) of the Building Regulations 2010 (as amended))
         and prioritises demand reduction measures over supply measures for each
         dwelling. The development shall be built in accordance with the approved details
         and thereafter maintained.

16.      The development hereby approved shall not be first occupied unless and until
         both site accesses have been constructed and provided with visibility splays in
         accordance with a scheme to be submitted to and approved in writing by the
         Local Planning Authority. The visibility splays shall thereafter be provided in
         accordance with the approved details and shall be permanently maintained with
         no obstruction above 0.6m in height within the splays.

17.      The development hereby approved shall not be first occupied unless and until
         the parking and turning provisions shown on the approved drawings have been
         provided on site. These parking and turning areas shall thereafter be retained
         and maintained for their designated purpose for the lifetime of the development.

18.      The development hereby approved shall not be first occupied unless and until
         facilities for high quality, secure, lit and covered parking of bicycles and the
         provision of a charging point with a timer for e-bikes by the facilities have been
         provided within the development site in accordance with a scheme to be first
         submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. Thereafter
         the approved facilities shall be provided, retained and maintained to the
         satisfaction of the Local Planning Authority.

19.      Prior to first occupation of the dwellings hereby approved, details of measures to
         minimise light spill from the installation of the windows that face towards the
         National Landscape shall be submitted to and be approved in writing by the
         Local Planning Authority. The approved measures shall be installed as approved
         and shall thereafter be maintained for the lifetime of the development.

20.      No external lighting shall be installed at the development site unless it is in
         accordance with a Sensitive Lighting Plan which has been submitted to and
         approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. Any Sensitive Lighting Plan
         should ensure that the proposed development will result in no net increase in
         external artificial lighting at primary bat foraging and commuting routes across
         the development site, in accordance with the recommendations in Bat
         Conservation Trust & ILP (2023) Guidance Note 08/23 or as it may be updated.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   12
Appeal Decision 6011694


21.      Prior to their installation, details of the solar panels for the development shall be
         submitted to and be approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
         details shall set out for each dwelling:
         a) the total solar PV capacity (kilowatts peak);
         b) number of panels;
         c) orientation of panels;
         d) demonstrate that the capacity has been reasonably maximised;
         e) and provide a roof plan and elevations showing the panels.

         The development shall be implemented in accordance with the approved details
         and maintained as operational thereafter.

 22.     Notwithstanding the provisions of the Town and Country Planning (General
         Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) (or any Order
         revoking and re-enacting that Order, with or without modification), no
         development permitted by Schedule 2, Part 1, Classes A (enlargement,
         improvement or other alteration of a dwellinghouse), or E (buildings etc.
         incidental to the enjoyment of a dwellinghouse) or F (hard surfaces incidental to
         the enjoyment of a dwellinghouse) or Schedule 2, Part 2, Class A (gates, fences,
         walls etc) shall be carried out on the dwellinghouses hereby permitted or within
         their curtilage.
                                           End of Schedule




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     13
