 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 18 August 2026

 by Megan Thomas KC
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 1 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011801
 Esso Petrol Filling Station, Hook Road, North Warnborough RG29 1EU
 •   The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against conditions imposed when
     granting express consent.
 •   The appeal is made by Wildstone Estates Limited against the decision of Hart District Council.
 •   The application ref is 26/00192/ADV.
 •   The advertisement sought is the erection of an illuminated small format advertising display.


Decision

1.   The appeal is allowed and express consent is granted for the erection of an illuminated small
     format advertising display at Esso Petrol Filling Station, Hook Road, North Warnborough RG29
     1EU in accordance with the terms of the application ref. 26/00192/ADV. The consent is for
     five years from the date of this decision and is subject to the five standard conditions set out
     in Schedule 2 of the 2007 Regulations and the following additional conditions:

     1) There shall be no moving images, animation, video or full motion images displayed unless
        otherwise permitted by this consent.

     2) In the hours of darkness, the advertisement display luminance shall be no greater than
        300cd/m2 in accordance with the recommended maximum night time luminance value
        set out by “The Institution of Lighting Professionals – ‘Professional Lighting Guide (PLG
        05)’ 'Brightness of Illuminated Advertisements including Digital Displays' (or its equivalent
        in a replacement guide) in cd/m2.

     3) In daylight hours, the advertisement display luminance shall be controlled in order to
        reflect ambient light conditions (to ensure it is neither too bright or too dull), and shall at
        all times be no greater than the recommended maximum daytime luminance values set
        out in Table 10.5 by “The Institution of Lighting Professionals – ‘Professional Lighting
        Guide (PLG 05)’ 'Brightness of Illuminated Advertisements including Digital Displays' (or
        its equivalent in a replacement guide) in cd/m2.

     4) Unless otherwise permitted, the minimum display time for each advertisement shall be 10
        seconds and the advertisement shall not include any features which would result in
        interactive messages or advertisements being displayed.

     5) The interval between successive advertisements shall be no greater than 1 second and
        the complete display shall change without effect (including swiping or other animated

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6011801


         transition methods). The display to include a mechanism to default to a blank or black
         screen in the event of malfunction, or if the advertisement is not in use.

     6) No content on the digital display screen shall resemble traffic signs.

Main Issue

2. The appeal site is located within two conservation areas. The main issue in the appeal is the
   effect of the advertisement hoarding on amenity and in particular on the Basingstoke Canal
   Conservation Area, the North Warnborough Conservation Area and the former Swan Inn Grade
   II listed building.

Reasons

3. The 2007 Regulations require that decisions be made only in the interests of amenity and,
   where applicable, public safety. The development plan policies referred to by the Council are
   not determinative, but I have taken these into account as a material consideration. On 17th
   August 2026 the Government published a revised version of the National Planning Policy
   Framework (2026). I have borne the contents of the new NPPF in mind in coming to my
   decision.

4. There are in particular two statutory duties in play when considering the impacts of heritage
   proposals, which are s.66 and s.72 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas)
   Act 1990. The former seeks to ensure that special regard is given to preserving or enhancing
   the settings of listed buildings and the latter that special attention is paid to preserving or
   enhancing the character or appearance of conservation areas.

5. The significance of the North Warnborough CA is its strong rural quality where the Basingstoke
   Canal and River Whitewater permeate and meander through the historic settlement, enabling
   the natural landscape to mix with the built environment. The canal, as part of the Basingstoke
   Canal CA, has unique architectural and historic interest as a focus for historic buildings which
   have a character and architectural and engineering features which reflect the historic and
   continuing use along the canal. The Swan Inn building is an example of an historic building
   along the canal. Of particular significance to the Basingstoke Canal CA, in my view, is the
   canal’s re-use as a stop line during the Second World War which is marked by numerous
   pillboxes, tank obstacles and other features along parts of its length. It is also a well-used
   route for connecting people to shops, schools and services. Both CAs have appraisals and the
   appeal site is in character zone 2 of each CA. I have borne in mind the descriptions and key
   views of these character zones and, amongst other things, policies 7 and 8 of the Odiham and
   North Warnborough Neighbourhood Plan.

6. The Odiham and North Warnborough CA Appraisal describes the Esso garage as being first
   developed in the early twentieth century and the present garage was built in the late twentieth
   or early twenty first century. The garage comprises a single-storey shop, built of red brick with a
   grey-brown tiled roof, and a large forecourt with a double height roof covering supported on
   metal columns. The forecourt and car park are paved in tarmac and red brick. “Due to its form
   and materials, the garage does not contribute to the character of the conservation area”. The
   garage has a car wash building too.

7. The proposal is for an advertisement hoarding about 2.4m high and about 1.23m wide and
   about 0.22m deep. It would be made of lightweight digital LED panels and be multi-coloured.
   Its brightness would be 300cd/sqm from dusk until dawn and up to 5000 cd/sqm at all other


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             2
 Appeal Decision 6011801


    times dependent on the time of day and time of the year and the ambient conditions. It would
    be internally illuminated and the illumination would be static. The display panel would be on
    one side only and would be about 928mm wide and about 1650mm high.

8. The proposed siting of the advertisement would be close to the southern boundary of the site
   but would step back from the vehicular exit so that it was approximately in line with the
   western flank wall of the retail building and the car wash exit. At this location, whilst it would
   be seen by pedestrians and drivers/passengers heading south on Hook Road, it would be seen
   in the context of a commercial petrol filling station which is characterised by commercial
   signage, permanent and temporary banner signs, a totem display, canopy floodlighting and 24
   hour activity. There may be glimpses of it from buildings such as the former Swan Inn (which is
   being converted to two residential units), however, given its proposed siting and its
   commercial context, those would not be harmful views.

9. In particular I have taken into account that it would be visible to pedestrians if they were
   accessing the tow path down to the canal or crossing the bridge heading south down Hook
   Road but it would have a well-vegetated backdrop and would be viewed in the context of a
   commercial petrol filling station. Thus, even though illuminated it would not detract from the
   experience of passing through the two CAs or diminish their significant features or views. The
   setting of the listed former Swan Inn would substantially stay the same – that of a handsome
   building which is opposite a commercial 24 hour petrol filling station with some illuminated
   areas. Views out of the building may include sight of the advertisement but they would be well
   within the context of a commercial petrol filling station.

10. I have taken into account policies NBE8 and NBE9 which are in the Hart District Local Plan
    2018-2031 (adopted 2020) and policies 7 and 8 of the Odiham and North Warnborough
    Neighbourhood Plan (2017 & 2025 Review) but do not find any conflict with them and they are
    not determinative of the appeal in any event. Similarly, I have noted the contents of National
    Planning Policy Framework 2026 and in particular HE6 and DP3 and do not find any conflict
    with the NPPF.

11. Consequently, I conclude that the advertisement would not harm the visual amenity of the
    area and would preserve the character and appearance of both CAs and the listed builidng.

Conditions

12. I have considered the imposition of conditions on the consent. The Highway Authority do not
    have a concern related to safety or distraction of drivers provided that illumination is
    controlled by condition on the consent. In the interests of amenity and public safety, I have
    imposed the conditions controlling the level of illumination, moving images, minimum display
    time for each image and transition between images. I have also included a condition
    preventing advertisements resembling traffic signs to ensure drivers are not unduly distracted
    as I consider that to be necessary.

Conclusion

13. Having taken into account all representations made, for the reasons given above, I allow the
    appeal and grant consent with conditions.

    Megan Thomas K.C.
    INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             3
