Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 September 2026
by S Poole BA(Hons) DipArch MPhil MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011958
Plot to the rear of 4 Wickham Road, Wickham Mews, London SE4 1PS
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Kenneth Martin against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
    Lewisham.
•   The application Ref is DC/26/142811.
•   The development proposed is the construction of a single storey residential unit on the site of three
    demolished garages.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. I have used the description of development adopted by the Council in the banner
   heading above as this more concisely describes the form of development proposed
   than the description given on the planning application form.
3. The National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was revised on
   17 August 2026. Those parts of the Framework most relevant to this appeal have
   not materially changed. As such, I have not sought submissions on the revised
   Framework, and I am satisfied that no party’s interests have been prejudiced by
   taking this approach.
Main Issues
4. The Biodiversity Gain Requirements (Exemptions) Regulations 2024 were
   amended on 6 August 2026. The proposal would be carried out on a site with an
   area that is no larger than 0.2 hectares and would not impact an onsite priority
   habitat. Therefore, the proposed development would be exempt from the
   Biodiversity Net Gain requirements and the fourth reason for refusal falls away.
5. The main issues are therefore whether the proposal would:
     i) preserve or enhance the character of the Brockley Conservation Area;
     ii) provide acceptable living conditions for future occupiers, with particular regard to
     its internal arrangement; and
     iii) have adequate means of access, with particular regard to pedestrian safety and
     service and emergency vehicles.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011958


Reasons
Character
6. The application site is a plot of vacant land that is situated to the rear of 4 Wickham
   Road and was previously occupied by 3 garages. It fronts onto, and is accessed
   from, Wickham Mews, a gravel surfaced lane that provides access to rows of
   garages, a dwelling at 19 Wickham Mews and Ray Bell Court, a residential
   development comprising of three 2-storey houses. The latter bounds the appeal
   site and No.19 is on the opposite side of the lane.
7. The site is located within a part of the Brockley Conservation Area (BCA) that is
   notable for its handsome Victorian villas and terraces, wide roads and mature trees.
   Wickham Mews forms one of a number of service lanes to the rears of houses in
   the area. It appears to have remained undeveloped until the middle of the 20th
   century when the rows of garages were added. These single-storey buildings allow
   views of the surrounding houses, mature trees and gardens. This, together with
   the informal gravel surfacing, gives some parts of the Mews a notably verdant
   appearance.
8. Planning permission was granted in February 2023 (the 2023 scheme) for the
   construction of a single storey office/studio within the appeal site1. There is no
   evidence before me to indicate that this development was commenced before the
   permission expired and therefore it does not represent a fall-back position.
   However, given this is a relatively recent planning permission I attribute significant
   weight to it.
9. The appeal proposal would replicate the 2023 scheme in terms of its siting, height,
   bulk, massing, design and appearance. The Council has stated that the appeal
   proposal would form a high quality, contextual and sympathetic addition to the
   mews in terms of its scale, massing, detail design and materials. I concur with this
   and am therefore of the view that the proposal would preserve the appearance of
   the BCA.
10. In respect of the character of the BCA, namely the non-visual aspects, the appeal
    proposal differs from the 2023 scheme as it would introduce a residential as
    opposed to a commercial use into Wickham Mews and therefore have a different
    effect in this regard. Wickham Mews is a relatively tranquil environment compared
    to the hustle and bustle of surrounding streets, particularly along the portion
    between the appeal site and Ashby Road. This, together with the verdant semi-
    rural feel, are the key aspects of the Mews’s character. Whilst the proposal would,
    like the 2023 scheme, result in an increase in activity within the Mews I am satisfied
    that the key aspects of the character of the site’s immediate surroundings would be
    maintained.
11. For these reasons I conclude that the proposal would preserve the character of the
    BCA. It therefore accords with Policies HE1 and HE2 of the Lewisham Local Plan
    (July 2025) (LLP) and Policy HC1 of the London Plan (March 2021) (LP) which,
    amongst other matters, reiterate the requirement to preserve or enhance the
    character or appearance of conservation areas.


1
    Ref: DC/22/128099




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6011958


Living Conditions
12. Whilst the planning application and subsequent appeal have been accompanied by
    a full set of detailed elevational drawings and a roof plan, the same level of detail
    has not been provided in respect of floor plans and sections. Instead, a sketch
    ground floor plan and a sketch section are before me. A plan of the upper floor has
    not been provided despite the fact the sketches indicate that this space would be
    accessed via a staircase and include “ancillary sleep space”.
13. LP Policy D6 states that housing development should be of high-quality design and
    provide adequately-sized rooms with comfortable and functional layouts which are
    fit for purpose and meet the needs of Londoners. The Policy sets out minimum
    sizes for dwellings, which are determined by the number of floors and bedrooms,
    as well as minimum sizes for main rooms and outdoor space, and minimum floor to
    ceilings heights. In respect of the latter the LP states that the minimum floor to
    ceiling height must be 2.5m for at least 75 per cent of the Gross Internal Area of
    each dwelling.
14. According to the sketch section the floor to ceiling height within the ground floor of
    the proposal would be significantly less than 2.5m. As such the proposal would
    create poor quality cramped accommodation that would result in unacceptable
    living conditions for future occupiers. As such the proposal is contrary to LP Policy
    D6 and LLP Policy QD8, which requires compliance with the London Plan
    standards.
15. The Council has raised further concerns regarding the quality of proposed
    accommodation. The absence of sufficiently detailed plans, and in particular the
    lack of an upper floor plan, render it impossible to carry out a fully informed
    assessment of these matters.
16. It is regrettable that the planning application was submitted, validated and
    determined without adequate plans. Section 7 of the Town and Country Planning
    (Development Management Procedure) (England) Order 2015 makes it clear that
    an application for full planning permission should be accompanied by plans,
    drawings and information necessary to describe the development. In addition, the
    Mayor’s Housing Design Standards, London Plan Guidance (2023) (LPG), which
    supports the London Plan, stipulates that fully furnished internal floorplans should
    be submitted for every dwelling type proposed to enable assessment of the layout
    and ensure it is functional and fit for purpose. There is conflict with the Order and
    the LPG in this respect.
Access
17. Wickham Mews is essentially a service lane which for a period of its history would
    have had cars coming and going from the rows of garages that border it. Based on
    my site observations there is now little vehicular activity and low levels of
    pedestrian use. The main users of the Mews are most likely the occupiers of the 4
    existing dwellings and visitors to these properties.
18. The proposal would create a small dwelling. As far as I am able to tell from the
    information before me it would not be a family dwelling. As such any increase in
    vehicular and pedestrian activity within the Mews resulting from the proposal would
    most likely be small, albeit would depend on the particular lifestyles of occupiers
    and would change over time.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
Appeal Decision 6011958


19. Taking into account the physical characteristics of the Mews and my observations
    on site, I am satisfied that the proposal would not materially harm the safety of
    existing and future uses of the Mews. In addition, given the appeal site can be
    accessed from 2 directions, I am satisfied that emergency vehicles would be able to
    reach it should this be necessary. In respect of servicing, the storage and
    collection of refuse and recycling could be adequately secured and controlled by
    the imposition of a planning condition.
20. Wickham Mews lacks street lighting which makes it a less than ideal residential
    environment in respect of sense of safety at night. However, the appeal site is
    within a residential area and directly next to Ray Bell Court which would provide a
    degree of natural surveillance. Whilst not ideal the gravel surfacing does not
    present an unsurmountable impediment to inclusive access.
21. For the reasons set out above I conclude that the proposal would benefit from an
    adequate means of access. It therefore accords with LLP Policies TR1, QD2 and
    QD10 and LP Policies D5, T2, T4 and T7, in so far as they are relevant to the
    matters before me. It also accords with the aims of the Council’s Small Sites
    Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document (2021) in respect of access.
Other Matters
22. The Council has referred to cumulative harm in respect of the first and third main
    issues. There is no information before me to suggest there are similar proposals in
    the pipeline. The fine grain layout of the area and existence of mature trees would
    suggest that development opportunities are constrained. Notwithstanding this,
    each planning application and appeal should be considered on its individual merits
    having regard to a site’s particular characteristics, its history and planning policy at
    the time.
Conclusion
23. For the reasons set out under the second main issue, and having regard to all other
    matters raised, I conclude that the appeal should fail.



S Poole
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     4
