Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 14 July 2026 by T Morris BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
Decision by H Jones BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011053
3 Maylands Way, Havering, Romford RM3 0BG
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) against a
    refusal to grant prior approval under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A, Paragraph A.4 of the
    Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•   The appeal is made by Sugith Maniyappan against the Council of the London Borough of Havering.
•   The application Ref is Y0075.26.
•   The development proposed is a single storey rear extension.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Background and Main Issue
3. The appeal site comprises a semi-detached dwellinghouse situated in a residential
   area. Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the Town and Country Planning (General
   Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (the GPDO) permits the enlargement,
   improvement or other alteration of a dwellinghouse subject to certain conditions,
   limitations and restrictions.
4. Where an application is made for a determination as to whether prior approval is
   required for development which exceeds the limits in paragraph A.1(f) of Schedule 2,
   Part 1, Class A of the GPDO, but is allowed by paragraph A.1(g), paragraph A.4(3)
   provides that the local planning authority may refuse the application where it
   considers that the proposed development does not comply – or that the developer
   has provided insufficient information to enable the authority to establish whether the
   proposed development complies with the conditions, limitations or restrictions that
   are applicable to such permitted development.
5. In the Council’s view, the proposal would not be permitted development. This is
   because the proposed single-storey rear extension would be attached to an existing
   enlargement in the form of a two-storey rear extension, so the enlarged part of the
   dwellinghouse would have more than one storey and extend beyond the rear wall of
   the original dwellinghouse. The Council are also of the view that the total
   enlargement includes single-storey rear extensions making the total enlargements
   more than 6 metres (m) in depth. For these reasons, the Council consider that the
   proposal would not comply with Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the GPDO.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011053


6. Consequently, the main issue is whether the proposed development would be
   permitted development, having regard to the requirements set out within Schedule 2,
   Part 1 of Class A of the GPDO.
Reasons for the Recommendation
7. Paragraph A.1(g) of Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the GPDO states that for a
   dwellinghouse not on article 2(3) land or on a site of special scientific interest,
   development is not permitted by Class A if the enlarged part of the dwellinghouse
   would have a single storey and would:
        (i) extend beyond the rear wall of the original dwellinghouse by more than 8 metres
        in the case of a detached dwellinghouse, or 6 metres in the case of any other
        dwellinghouse; or,
        (ii) exceed 4 metres in height.
8. Paragraph A.1(i) sets out that development is also not permitted if the enlarged part
   of the dwellinghouse would be within 2m of the boundary of the curtilage of the
   dwellinghouse, and the height of the eaves of the enlarged part would exceed 3m.
9. Paragraph A.1(ja) then states that development is not permitted if any total
   enlargement (being the enlarged part together with any existing enlargement of the
   original dwellinghouse to which it will be joined) exceeds or would exceed the limits
   set out in sub-paragraphs (e) to (j). This includes paragraphs A.1(g) and A.1 (i) as
   set out above.
10. Paragraph (ja) was introduced to the GPDO under a 2017 amendment1. The
    accompanying Explanatory Memorandum outlines that the amendments to Class A
    remove from permitted development rights, for example, the ability to allow a single-
    storey extension to be joined to an existing two-storey extension (or vice versa)
    creating a total enlargement which would not have been permitted under Class A as
    a single extension.
11. The original dwellinghouse has already been extended with both a first-floor rear
    extension and a ground-floor rear extension added to it. The evidence indicates the
    former to be positioned above the existing kitchen and the latter added at its rear.
    However, the plans of these particular developments are not before me, nor are
    those of the original dwelling before it was extended.
12. Due in large part to the rendered finish of some sections of the dwelling, the precise
    locations where these property extensions meet the original elements of the dwelling
    could not be determined at my site visit. Overall, and factoring in the absence of the
    aforementioned plans, the evidence before me does not enable the precise extent of
    the original rear projections to be distinguished from the subsequent extensions.
13. However, given the proposed extension’s position relative to the first-floor extension,
    and its height, I find there is the very clear potential that the proposed extension
    would physically join the implemented first-floor extension. Consequently, although
    the proposed single-storey rear extension itself would only have a maximum height
    of approximately 2.93m, any adjoinment of it to the first-floor extension means that
    the totality of the enlargements would be significantly taller. As depicted by the
    proposed side and rear elevations (drawing no: 26/042/003 Rev A), the existing first-

1
    The Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) (Amendment) Order 2017/391


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              2
Appeal Decision 6011053


     floor rear extension would have a total height more than twice that of the proposed
     single-storey rear extension. Consequently, it would inevitably be in excess of the 4m
     height limit and would fail to comply with paragraph A.1(g).
14. The plans before me, and my own observations on site, also lead me to conclude
    that the existing first-floor rear extension is within 2m of the boundary of the curtilage
    of the dwellinghouse and the height of its eaves clearly exceeds 3m. Therefore, by
    reason of this eaves height and boundary proximity, the total enlargement would fail
    to comply with paragraph A.1 (i) as well.
15. Paragraph A.4(3) provides that an application made for a determination as to
    whether prior approval is required for the development proposed may be refused
    where the proposed development does not comply – or the developer has provided
    insufficient information to enable it to be established whether the proposed
    development complies with the conditions, limitations or restrictions that are
    applicable to such permitted development.
16. For the reasons given above, and even if I were to agree with the appellant that the
    proposal would not result in a total enlargement beyond the rear wall of the original
    dwellinghouse by more than 6m, the joining of the proposed extension to the existing
    first-floor extension, which I consider to be a likely outcome, means that the proposal
    would exceed the limits set out at both paragraphs A.1(g) and A.1 (i). In turn, it would
    fail to comply with A.1(ja). Crucially, and in any event, there is insufficient information
    to enable it to be established that the proposed development would comply with
    those same limitations.
17. For these reasons, I cannot conclude that the proposed development would be
    permitted development, having regard to the requirements set out within Schedule 2,
    Part 1 of Class A of the GPDO.
Other Matters
18. The absence of objections from neighbouring properties is not a relevant factor in
    terms of the main issue in this appeal.
Conclusion and Recommendation
19. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I
    recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

T Morris
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
20. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

H Jones
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
