Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by Richard Gilbert BA (Hons) MSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22nd September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011344
2 Tensing Road, Scunthorpe DN16 3DY
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mrs D Kilner against the decision of North Lincolnshire Council.
•    The application reference is PA/2026/10.
•    The development proposed is a stand alone single story building in rear garden to provide annex.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.    During the course of the appeal a new National Planning Policy Framework was
      published on the 17 August 2026. Whilst the format has altered, any
      considerations that are material to this decision have not fundamentally changed. I
      am satisfied that this has not prejudiced any party and I have had regard to the
      latest version in reaching my decision.
Main Issues
3.    The main issues are the effect of the proposed development on:
           • the living conditions of the occupiers of 76 Everest Road, with particular
             regard to outlook; and
           • the character and appearance of the appeal property and the surrounding
             area.
Reasons
Living Conditions
4.    The appeal property is an end-terrace dwelling. An existing single garage is
      situated in its rear garden. The garage is set at an angle along part of the shared
      boundary with the neighbouring property 76 Everest Road (No.76). The boundary
      features a fence, with a wooden shed present in the rear garden of No.76. A
      building forming a block of garages backs onto and forms a part of the side
      boundary to both the appeal property and No.76.
5.    The proposed development includes demolition of the existing garage and erection
      of a pitched roof annexe. The proposal would abut the full length of the shared
      boundary with No.76, with a broad pitched roof rising substantially above the
      existing fence line, shed and garage block. Consequently, the length and height of
      the annexe, in close proximity to the shared boundary, would introduce excessive

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011344


      built mass that would dominate the entirety of that boundary. This would result in
      an overbearing impact on the rear garden of No.76, harming the outlook of the
      occupiers of that property.
6.    Although the existing garage would be removed to facilitate the proposal, it has a
      similar height to the adjacent shed and garage block, is angled away from the
      boundary and is less than half the length of the proposed annexe. Together, these
      characteristics demonstrate that the built mass of the existing garage is notably
      smaller and not comparable to the harm that would be generated by the proposal.
      The existing fence does provide screening between the rear gardens. However, at
      approximately 1.8m in height, it would sit at just over half the height of the
      proposed annexe and is therefore insufficient to offset the overbearing effect on
      the neighbouring garden.
7.    The dwelling at No.76 is two storeys in height and is substantially larger in scale
      than the proposed annexe. However, the Council’s reason for refusal relates to an
      overbearing effect on the neighbouring property, which includes the garden. Whilst
      the size of the neighbouring garden is proportionate to the host dwelling, I am not
      persuaded that it is large enough to satisfactorily diminish the harm identified.
8.    For the reasons set out above, the proposed development would have a harmful
      effect on the living conditions of the occupiers of No.76, with particular regard to
      outlook. Conflict therefore arises with Policy DS5 of the North Lincolnshire Local
      Plan (2003) (NLLP). This policy supports development of outbuildings providing
      that they do not unreasonably reduce sunlight, or daylight, or result in
      overshadowing, overbearing or loss of privacy. Policy DS1 of the NLLP does not
      require an assessment of impacts on living conditions in respect of outlook. As
      such, I have not found conflict with this policy in respect of this main issue.
Character and appearance
9.    The appeal proposal would be situated within the rear garden of the appeal
      property. The adjacent garage block is situated at the corner between Tensing
      Road and Everest Road, screening the garden from the street scene. The area is
      relatively flat and is predominantly comprised of residential dwellings. It therefore
      has a domestic character and appearance which, amongst other things, is defined
      by the variation in the size, roof layout and materials to the outbuildings situated
      adjacent to these dwellings.
10. As previously established, the proposal would be significantly taller than the fences
    and outbuildings which surround it. Its roof ridge would therefore be visible from
    vantage points on Tensing Road and Everest Road. However, the setback location
    of the proposal in a rear garden, combined with the screening afforded by the
    garage block and flat topography of the area, would lessen the prominence of the
    proposal in the street scene, ensuring it would remain visually subordinate to the
    main dwelling. It would also be viewed contextually in an area with a wide variety
    of outbuildings, further limiting the potential for visual harm.
11. In considering the above, the proposed development would not have a harmful
    effect on the character and appearance of the appeal property and the surrounding
    area. As such, the proposal accords with Policies DS1 and DS5 of the NLLP and
    Policy CS5 of the North Lincolnshire Local Development Framework Core Strategy
    (2011). These policies, amongst other things, seek development that should reflect


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011344


      or enhance the character, appearance and setting of the immediate area, by being
      sympathetic in design, scale and materials whilst also appropriate for its context.
Other Considerations
12. I have had due regard to the Public Sector Equality Duty (PSED) contained in
    Section 149 of the Equality Act 2010, which requires me to consider the need to
    eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and foster
    good relations between people who share a protected characteristic and people
    who do not share it.
13. In this instance, the appeal is made to provide additional ground floor living
    accommodation to allow the appellant to provide care and support for a close
    relative whilst residing as a single family unit. I have no reasons to doubt that the
    additional space of the extension would be advantageous to the appellant and her
    family in addressing their personal circumstances. However, the evidence does
    not indicate that these circumstances are only capable of being addressed by an
    extension of this size and position. Thus, it has not been sufficiently demonstrated
    that the same accommodation and facilities could not be achieved through a less
    harmful scheme. For these reasons, whilst I accept that the proposal would be of
    benefit for the appellant and her family through additional space and improved
    living conditions, these are personal circumstances weighing modestly in favour of
    the appeal.
14. The appellant has indicated that, through a certificate of lawfulness, they may seek
    to provide alternative ancillary accommodation to enable the installation of a
    caravan compliant lodge. However, as there are no specific details relating to such
    a proposal, it is unclear whether it could be found to be lawful under the planning
    acts. Moreover, the intent to produce a certificate of lawfulness does not provide
    the certainty necessary to satisfy me that such a proposal amounts to a realistic
    fallback position. It therefore attracts limited weight for decision-making purposes.
15. I have also been referred by the appellant to a planning permission for an annexe
    at 67 Manor Road, Bottesford, Scunthorpe (reference PA/2026/542). The annexe
    in that instance was proposed to be set in from surrounding boundaries and to be
    situated within a much larger garden. It therefore has a different relationship to
    neighbouring properties and is not comparable to the case before me. As such, it
    does not alter my findings on the appeal scheme, which I have considered on its
    own merits.
Conclusion
16. For the reasons set out, the appeal scheme results in conflict with the
    development plan, taken as a whole. I afford significant weight to this conflict.
17. The proposal would provide additional accommodation for the care needs of an
    individual, albeit it would not be a separate unit and in the absence of substantive
    evidence to demonstrate that it would be necessary to address a specific need, it
    would only partly comply with Policy HO7 of the Framework. I therefore attach
    limited weight to this benefit.
18. Set against this, the scale and position of the proposal would cause harm to a
    neighbour’s living conditions and so fail to respond to its context, in conflict with
    Policy DP3(1) of the Framework. No clear justification has been provided for the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011344


      location and design of the proposal, and thus Policy DP3(3) indicates that
      proposals should be refused in this circumstance.
19. Overall, I find the benefits of the proposal, taken cumulatively, would be
    substantially outweighed by its adverse effects when assessed against the
    National Decision Making Policies of the Framework. Consequently, Policy S4(1)
    does not indicate that permission should be forthcoming.
20. In respect of the PSED, a refusal of planning permission is a proportionate and
    necessary approach to the legitimate aims of ensuring that the living conditions of
    the occupants of the neighbouring property can be reasonably safeguarded.
    Furthermore, the protection of the public interest cannot be achieved by means
    that are less interfering of the human rights of the appellant and her family.
    Therefore, whilst I acknowledge the personal circumstances advanced in this
    case, I conclude that these are not matters which outweigh the harm, which would
    be permanent, caused by the appeal scheme.
21. The proposed development conflicts with the development plan as a whole and
    there are no material considerations which indicate that the appeal should be
    decided other than in accordance with it. The appeal is therefore dismissed.

Richard Gilbert
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
