Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by Jonathan Edwards BSc(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011206
Banbh Farm, Breinton Common, Herefordshire HR4 7PP
• The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
  against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 6, Class A of the
  Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended)
  (hereafter referred to as the GPDO).
• The appeal is made by Mr Gordon Owen against the decision of the County of Herefordshire District
  Council.
• The application Ref is 253587.
• The development proposed is described as “general purpose agricultural building for storage of feeds
  and machinery. The housing of livestock in the event of an emergency”.

Decision
1.   The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. Under Class A of Part 6 of Schedule 2 of the GPDO (class A), the erection of a
   building that is reasonably necessary for agriculture is defined as permitted
   development. The Council considers the proposal would comply with all of the
   clauses under paragraph A.1 of Class A. Interested parties contend the
   development is not reasonably necessary for agriculture and that it would not
   accord with the terms of Class A. However, I find no substantive reason to disagree
   with the Council on this matter.
3. Sub-paragraph A.2(2) of Class A requires an application to be made to the local
   planning authority as to whether prior approval will be required as to the siting,
   design and external appearance of the proposed building. This appeal follows on
   from the Council’s decision to refuse such prior approval.
4. The Council’s refusal reason refers to policies from the Herefordshire Local Plan
   Core Strategy adopted 2015 (the CS) and the Breinton Neighbourhood
   Development Plan (NP). These are only relevant insofar as they set out provisions
   that assist in assessing the siting, design and external appearance of the proposal.
5. The appellant has provided a letter entitled “Planning Obligation Re: Refusal of
   Prior notification for permitted development (Class A of agricultural land greater
   than 5 Hectares) of a general-purpose agricultural barn with appropriate planting”.
   This sets out proposed obligations relating to energy production by means of solar
   panels, the provision of solid wooden gates, planting 30 trees between the barn
   and the roadside and the planting of 300 willow trees in the lower part of the field.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011206


6. This document is not dated nor signed. Also, it does not refer to section 106 of the
   Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) (the Act) and it fails to identify
   the extent of the land affected by the claimed obligations or the local planning
   authority who is responsible for enforcing them. Therefore, the submitted document
   is not a deed that meets the requirements as set out under section 106(9) of the
   Act and so its provisions do not represent a planning obligation under the terms of
   the Act. In any event, I have had regard to the stated intentions in my assessment.
Main Issue
7.   The main issue is the effect of the siting, design and external appearance of the
     development on the character and appearance of the area and the landscape.
Reasons
8. The defined appeal site forms part of a line of 3 connected fields that run alongside
   the adjacent road. Land levels fall down from the road towards the southern parts
   of the fields and then on towards the River Wye. The proposed building would be
   located in the easternmost field set back from the road and near to a wooded area
   that adjoins the east boundary. The land is away from any settlement. Occasional
   houses and a small agricultural building are seen when travelling along the
   adjacent stretch of road. Nonetheless, open fields, trees and hedgerows are the
   predominant features and so the locality has an attractive rural and natural feel.
9. The proposed building would be set below the level of the road and set back from
   the front of the site. Also, it would be partially screened from the highway by
   existing vegetation along the front field boundary. Even so, it would still be visible
   from the road through gaps in the vegetation as well as through the field gate
   access. I saw the roadside vegetation in full leaf and I would envisage the building
   would be more readily apparent from the road during times of leaf-fall.
10. The barn would be of a functional appearance and typical of modern day
    agricultural buildings. Even so, it would stand out starkly against the natural
    landscape given its isolated position within an open field away from any other
    development. The building would be partly constructed within the slope of the field
    but nonetheless its significant size and bulk would emphasise its incongruity and its
    visual dominance. Consequently, the proposed development would detract
    significantly from the intrinsic beauty and qualities of the countryside.
11. The appellant mentions the possibility of providing a solid gates at the field
    entrance that would help obscure views of the building from the road. However, no
    such gates exist and the aforementioned planning obligation document fails to
    secure the provision of such a feature. In any event, I am unconvinced that a new
    gate would entirely obstruct sight of the building from the road as there would still
    be views through gaps in vegetation. It seems likely that gaps would still exist even
    if new trees were planted between the building and the road. Also, planting cannot
    be relied upon to provide screening to the development in the long term.
12. For these reasons, I conclude that the proposed building by reason of its siting,
    design and appearance would have an unacceptable harmful effect on the
    character and the appearance of the area and the landscape. Insofar as they are
    relevant to the determination of this appeal, the proposal would be contrary to
    CS policies SS6, SD1 and LD1 as well as NP policies B6, B7 and B14. Amongst
    other things these policies look to ensure development responds sympathetically to

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011206


     the natural landscape. The Council’s refusal reasons also refer to NP policy B15.
     This sets out landscape design principles but none that are particularly relevant to
     the assessment of the proposal against this main issue.
Other Matters
13. The development would be used to securely store agricultural equipment, hay and
    feed as well as to protect livestock in an emergency. The appellant also indicates
    the building would include solar panels to help generate electricity and that
    extensive tree planting would be carried out as a form of carbon offsetting.
    However, under the provisions of Class A, my assessment of this appeal is limited
    to whether the siting, design and external appearance of the proposed building
    should be approved. Therefore, any benefits of the proposal fail to affect my
    overall conclusion.
Conclusion
14. For the reasons given above, I conclude the appeal should be dismissed.

Jonathan Edwards
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
