Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 5 August 2026
by Hannah Guest BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 14 September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6011319
Hill House Farm, Bosbury, Ledbury, HR8 1JU
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Corlett against the decision of Herefordshire Council.
•      The application Ref is P253604/FH.
•      The development proposed is Internal and external alterations including single storey extension.

Appeal B Ref: 6011314
Hill House Farm, Bosbury, Ledbury, HR8 1JU
•      The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
       1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•      The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Corlett against the decision of Herefordshire Council.
•      The application Ref is P253605/L.
•      The works proposed are Internal and external alterations including single storey extension.

Decisions
1.       Appeal A: The appeal is dismissed.
2.       Appeal B: The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
3.       On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
         Framework) was published. Parts of the Framework relevant to the appeals were
         amended. The Council and the appellants were given an opportunity to comment
         on those amendments during the appeal process. I am therefore satisfied that
         neither party would be prejudiced by my determining the appeals on that basis.
4.       There are two sets of plans before me bearing the same drawing numbers:
         Crit.1.200 B, Crit.1.201 A, Crit.1.202 B and Crit.1.203 A. The principal differences
         between them relate to the design of the single-storey extension and the inclusion
         of a glazed link between the extension and the appeal property. The Council’s
         officer report makes clear that the proposal assessed and refused by the Council
         included the glazed link. This is also consistent with the appellants’ appeals
         statement, which describes the extension as being ‘link detached’. Accordingly, for
         the avoidance of doubt, I have determined the appeals on the basis of the
         proposal incorporating the glazed link.
5.       In addition, as part of the appeals, the appellants submitted amended plans1
         showing additional timber framing to the north, south and west elevations of the

1
    Drawing Nos: Crit.1 200 C, Crit.1 202 C and Crit.1 203 B

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6011314 and 6011319


         proposed single-storey extension, together with a revised layout for the entrance
         hall and proposed snug/playroom. I am satisfied that these amendments do not
         amount to a fundamental change to the proposal. As the Council has had the
         opportunity to comment on the amended plans, no party would be prejudiced by
         my determining the appeals on that basis.
6.       The appeal property is a listed building. The appeals relate to planning permission
         and listed building consent for the same site and proposal. To avoid repetition and
         for the avoidance of doubt, I have considered both appeals together in my
         reasoning. In determining the appeals, I have had special regard to the desirability
         of preserving the building or its setting or any features of special architectural or
         historic interest which it possesses, as required by sections 66(1) and 16(2) of the
         Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (as amended) (the
         Act).
Main Issue
7.       The main issue in both appeals is whether the proposal would preserve the Grade
         II listed building, known as Hillhouse, or any features of special architectural or
         historic interest which it possesses.
Reasons
Special Interest and Significance
8.       The Grade II listed building, Hillhouse2, is a farmhouse dating from around 1600. It
         comprises a timber-framed core at its eastern end, arranged in an L-shaped plan
         with a prominent cross-wing, together with later additions and alterations extending
         westwards.
9.       Constructed principally of timber framing with painted brick and wattle-and-daub
         infill panels, on a sandstone plinth beneath tiled roofs, the farmhouse displays the
         characteristics of a high-quality Herefordshire vernacular building. Its architectural
         interest is evident in the decorative features of the timber framing to the cross-
         wing, including close-studding and ornamental square panels; the substantial
         chimney stacks; and the irregular fenestration, which highlights historic alterations
         to the building.
10. Its significance derives principally from its early core, which reflects the relatively
    high status of the farmhouse at the time of its construction. The decorative
    embellishment of the framing distinguishes it from more modest vernacular
    farmhouses and contributes strongly to its architectural and historic interest.
11. The later additions and alterations are also of heritage interest, illustrating the
    gradual growth and adaptation of the farmhouse from the 17th century onwards in
    response to changing agricultural and domestic needs. These elements are
    generally simpler and more utilitarian in character than the earlier core. In
    particular, the former granary at the western end of the building reflects its
    agricultural origins through its more functional design and construction.
12. The architectural and historic interest of the western additions and their
    contribution to the significance of the listed building as a whole has been
    compromised to some extent by later alterations, including the conversion of the

2
    National Heritage List for England. List Entry Number: 1156810.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                   2
Appeal Decisions 6011314 and 6011319


         granary to domestic accommodation in the 1990s, involving the insertion of
         windows and French doors and the creation of a patio adjoining the west gable
         end. Nevertheless, the granary's historic character remains readily apparent,
         particularly in its comparatively plain north elevation, which is notably less
         domestically influenced than the other façades, and in the survival of the external
         stone steps. As such, these later additions continue to make a meaningful
         contribution to the understanding of the farmhouse's historical development.
13. Overall, the significance of Hillhouse, insofar as it relates to these appeals, lies in
    its preservation of a substantial timber-framed farmhouse of elaborate architectural
    design. While the highest architectural and historic interest of the listed building
    may be concentrated within the original seventeenth-century eastern range and
    cross-wing, the later western additions are also of heritage merit, deriving
    principally from their evidential value in illustrating the building's historic evolution.
Development and effects
14. Policy HE4 (2) of the Framework sets out that any harm to, or loss of, the
    significance of a designated heritage asset should have a clear and convincing
    justification in accordance with the policies in Chapter 20 Conserving and
    enhancing the historic environment. HE6 (1) goes on to state that when
    considering the potential effect of a development proposal on the significance of a
    designated heritage asset, substantial weight should be given to the asset’s
    conservation.
15. The proposal comprises a single-storey extension attached to the west gable end
    of the listed building by way of a glazed link. The extension would provide a dining
    room and utility/boot room. As a result, the existing dining room within the former
    granary would be converted to a kitchen and the existing kitchen would become a
    snug/playroom and circulation space. The proposal also includes a range of
    associated internal and external alterations. At first-floor level, the principal
    bedroom ensuite would be relocated to another bedroom, enabling the existing
    ensuite to be used as a bedroom. These alterations would also involve the
    insertion of additional windows.
16. There are several discrepancies between the amended floor plans3 and elevation
    drawings4 relating to the design of the proposed extension. Although the
    dimensions of the glazed link appear to be consistent on both drawings, the north
    and south elevations are of a greater length than shown on the floor plans. The
    elevations also show a different arrangement of openings and glazing, including
    what appears to be a set of French doors. Whether this element is intended to
    comprise French doors, as shown on earlier drawings, or a section of timber-
    framed walling, its scale and configuration do not correspond with the wall section
    shown on the floor plans.
17. These deficiencies are undesirable in any case, but particularly so given the Grade
    II listed status of the building. Nonetheless, I have assessed the main elements of
    the proposal and their effects as far as possible on the basis of the plans and
    information before me.



3
    Drawing No: Crit.1 200 C
4
    Drawing Nos: Crit.1 202 C and Crit.1 203 B


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
Appeal Decisions 6011314 and 6011319


18. The evidence indicates that the proposed extension would comprise a low stone
    plinth with timber framing and glazing above, beneath a plain clay tiled roof. It
    would have a modest footprint relative to the listed building as a whole and would
    be set back slightly from the north and south elevations. The roof would have a
    lower ridge and eaves height than the listed building, while reflecting its roof pitch.
    To facilitate the connection of the extension by the glazed link, the opening
    currently containing the French doors in the west gable end of the former granary
    would be widened to create a more open relationship between the proposed
    kitchen and the dining area within the extension.
19. There are no details before me regarding the form of the structure that would
    support the glazed link or how it would be attached to the west gable end of the
    listed building. As proposed, it would result in the loss of an appreciable section of
    the stone wall forming that gable. The appellants’ appeals statement asserts that
    this part of the wall was reconstructed as part of the alterations to the granary in
    the mid-1990s. However, no corroborating evidence has been provided. I also note
    the appellants’ contention that a wider opening was approved as part of these
    alterations. Nonetheless, that opening does not form part of the listed building as it
    currently exists and the proposal before me would require the further widening of
    the existing opening. I have therefore assessed the effect of those additional
    interventions on the significance of the listed building as it presently stands.
20. I recognise the appellants’ contention that the proposal has been revised in
    response to concerns raised by the Council during the pre-application process.
    Nevertheless, although the proposed extension would continue the established
    linear form of the listed building, it would project appreciably further beyond it than
    the former brick extension that has been removed and would extend the building to
    a greater degree than the addition created through the conversion of the former
    granary. Consequently, while the extension would remain lower and smaller than
    the listed building as a whole, the extent to which it would lengthen the building
    would be out of keeping with the scale of additions that have historically
    contributed to its evolution, disrupting its historic composition.
21. Furthermore, by virtue of its significant depth and projection, it would compete with
    the former granary as a subordinate element of the building, diminishing its ability
    to be appreciated as a distinct phase in the building's evolution. Although the
    building has previously been extended westwards, the siting of the extension
    beyond the granary would also weaken the granary's identity as a former
    agricultural building and reduce the legibility of the listed building's historical
    development.
22. I have no issue, in principle, with interventions that maintain a clear distinction
    between new and historic fabric. However, in this case, the large expanse of
    glazing proposed for the link, combined with its substantially smaller scale in
    comparison with the two additions it would connect, would appear incongruous.
23. While the proposed extension would use a palette of materials similar to the listed
    building, even with the additional timber framing, the proportions of the proposed
    framing would not fully reflect those of the historic timber frame. The absence of
    horizontal timbers would create larger panels between the framing members,
    giving the elevations an overly vertical emphasis that would appear at odds with
    the historic character of the building. As a result, the extension would be unduly


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decisions 6011314 and 6011319


         prominent as a distinct element and would lack the deference typically expected of
         an addition to a listed building.
24. Given the inconsistencies in the plans, the precise pattern of fenestration and
    extent of glazing remain unclear. Nevertheless, if the amended elevation
    drawings5 are to read as showing a large set of French doors and extensive areas
    of glazing, these features would appear at odds with the modest and irregular
    fenestration of the listed building and would risk competing with it for visual
    attention.
25. The creation of a snug/playroom within the western bay of the entrance hall,
    together with the enlargement of the WC within the eastern bay, both on the
    southern side of the building, would alter the proportions of the hall and relocate
    circulation from its traditional central position to the northern side of the building.
    The evidence indicates that the entrance hall has for some time been subdivided,
    with the two bays becoming increasingly separate, particularly following the
    conversion of the granary, which opened the western bay into the converted
    accommodation. Nonetheless, the central circulation route has continued to
    provide a unifying element. While the amended plans would create a single room
    within the western bay and would no longer impinge on the historic beam spanning
    it, the relocation of circulation to the north would further erode the legibility of the
    entrance hall as a coherent whole. This harm to the legibility of the historic plan
    form would be compounded by the creation of the larder, which would alter the
    historic proportions of the former granary.
26. The reconfiguration of the entrance hall would involve the removal and insertion of
    internal walls. I saw on my visit that much of the fabric proposed for removal
    comprises relatively modern stud partitions installed around the historic timber
    frame. However, it is unclear from the information before me how the removal of
    these partitions would affect the historic fabric. For example, the details do not
    make clear how the proposal would relate to the timber brace adjacent to the
    external doorway on the northern elevation, nor whether alterations to the
    surrounding partitions would affect it.
27. Although I share the Council's view that the reconfiguration of the WC would
    improve the legibility of the historic plan form, there is limited information regarding
    how the proposed stud walls, repositioned sink and associated drainage would be
    installed or integrated with the existing historic fabric. Limited information has also
    been provided regarding the proposed ventilation duct for the larder, including the
    extent of any historic fabric that would be lost or affected and the size, detailing
    and precise position of the external vent within the masonry; and the first-floor
    alterations, including the relocation of the ensuite bathroom. As the Council has
    identified, clearer and more comprehensive information is required to support
    these proposed interventions, including a schedule of works, drainage and
    services drawings, and method statements.
28. While the modest scale and positioning of the additional first-floor windows
    suggest that they would sit comfortably within the existing organic pattern of
    fenestration, there are no detailed elevation or sectional drawings before me
    showing their detailed design, profile or method of installation. Similar
    considerations apply to the replacement of the existing doors with timber-panelled

5
    Drawing Nos: Crit.1 202 C and Crit.1 203 B


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         5
Appeal Decisions 6011314 and 6011319


       doors and the addition of modest gable-end porches. No details have been
       provided regarding these interventions. Consequently, their effect on the listed
       building and its significance cannot be robustly assessed.
29. The same concern applies to a number of other elements of the proposal, where
    there is a significant lack of detail. These include the installation of underfloor
    heating within the former granary and any associated changes to floor levels;
    alterations to the steps leading to the kitchen on the north side of the building and
    the blocking up of the external kitchen door; the enlargement of the ground-floor
    window in the south elevation of the granary; the replacement of the external door
    adjacent to the southern chimney stack with a window; and the renewal of modern
    windows. These elements may be modest individually but, collectively, form part of
    the overall package of proposed alterations to the listed building. In the absence of
    detailed drawings, specifications and method statements, their effect on the listed
    building and its significance cannot be robustly assessed.
30. The onus rests with the appellants to provide sufficiently detailed and accurate
    information to demonstrate that the proposal would preserve the special interest of
    the listed building and not harm its significance. In the absence of that information,
    I cannot be confident that it would do so. Although the appellants have expressed
    a willingness to accept conditions requiring further details, the deficiencies
    identified relate to fundamental aspects of the proposed development and works
    and their effect on significance. They are therefore not matters that could
    reasonably be left to conditions.
31. Taking all of the above into account, I find that the proposal would result in harmful
    interventions and alterations to important aspects and features that contribute to
    the listed building's special interest and significance. In particular, the proposed
    single-storey extension, the interventions to the western gable end required to
    create the glazed link, the reconfiguration of the entrance hall and the creation of
    the snug/playroom would weaken the integrity and legibility of the listed building
    and its historic development.
32. Furthermore, the absence of sufficient information regarding several other
    elements of the proposal means that I cannot be satisfied that those works and
    development would preserve the special interest and not harm the significance of
    the listed building. Consequently, based on the information before me and my
    observations on site, I conclude that the proposal would fail to preserve the Grade
    II listed building, Hillhouse, and features of special architectural or historic interest
    that it possesses. As such, the proposal would harm the significance of this
    designated heritage asset.
Public benefits and heritage balance
33. The proposal would not result in the loss of the principal elements that contribute
    most strongly to the significance of the listed building, including its early timber-
    framed core and decorative framing. Nonetheless, it would affect several important
    aspects of significance, including the legibility of the building's historic
    development, the integrity of the former granary as a distinct phase in that
    development, and the historic plan form of the entrance hall. Consequently, I find
    that it would result in a moderate level of harm to the significance of the
    designated heritage asset. I afford this matter considerable importance and weight.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decisions 6011314 and 6011319


34. Policy HE6 (4) of the Framework requires this harm to be weighed against any
    public benefits resulting from the proposal. Important public benefits can include
    securing the long-term reuse of a vacant or underused listed building, and
    enabling energy efficiency and low carbon heating measures to be employed.
35. The proposal would give rise to economic benefits during the construction phase,
    social benefits through a modest enhancement to the local housing stock, as well
    as limited enhancements arising from the removal of later additions and alterations
    to the listed building. However, given the limited scale of the development and
    works, and the nature of the alterations, I afford these benefits modest weight.
36. Policy CC2 (2) of the Framework affords substantial weight to the benefits of
    improving the energy efficiency of existing buildings. However, while the proposed
    extension may incorporate an energy efficient specification and a design that
    encourages passive solar gain, this would not improve the energy efficiency of the
    existing building. Consequently, I afford this benefit limited weight. Similarly,
    although the proposed renewal of the modern windows has the potential to
    improve the energy efficiency of the building, given the lack of detail regarding this
    intervention, I can only afford any associated heritage or environmental benefits
    limited weight.
37. The appellants assert that the proposed extension and associated internal
    alterations would be reversible and could be removed in the future without lasting
    alteration to the building or disruption to its historic core. I acknowledge that
    reversibility can reduce the permanence of an intervention. However, heritage
    significance is experienced in the present, and the proposal would nonetheless
    affect important aspects of the listed building's significance for as long as it
    remained in place. Moreover, given the absence of detailed information regarding
    several elements of the proposed development and works, I cannot be confident
    that all of the interventions would be undertaken without lasting effects on the
    historic fabric. Consequently, I afford this matter limited weight in favour of the
    proposal.
38. The appellants also contend that the proposed development and works are
    focused within the part of the listed building of least architectural and historic
    significance and would concentrate the main domestic living functions within that
    area. I acknowledge that the western additions, including the former granary, are
    of less architectural and historic interest than the seventeenth-century core of the
    building and that directing change towards less sensitive areas is generally
    preferable to interventions affecting the most significant fabric. Nevertheless, the
    western additions remain an important component of the listed building's
    significance and make a meaningful contribution to an understanding of its historic
    development. For the reasons set out above, the proposal would weaken the
    legibility and integrity of those elements. Accordingly, while I acknowledge the
    merits of directing change towards the less sensitive parts of the building, the
    proposal would nevertheless undermine the contribution that those elements make
    to the building's significance and would therefore be harmful overall.
39. The additional space and reconfiguration of the accommodation would principally
    serve the private interests of the occupiers. I recognise that Hillhouse has evolved
    over time in response to the needs of successive generations and that the
    appellants seek to adapt the building to better meet their domestic requirements.
    However, the desire to secure a more convenient or desirable arrangement of

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decisions 6011314 and 6011319


       accommodation does not, in itself, justify development and works that would fail to
       conserve the listed building in a manner commensurate with its significance.
       Accordingly, I afford this matter very limited weight in favour of the proposal.
40. Furthermore, there is no substantive evidence before me to demonstrate that the
    proposal is the only means of meeting the appellants' accommodation needs or
    securing the benefits that have been identified. Nor is there any evidence that the
    proposed development and works are necessary to secure the contemporary or
    continued residential use of the listed building, or that dismissal of the appeals
    would place the conservation of the designated heritage asset at risk.
    Consequently, I find that clear and convincing justification for the harm to the
    significance of the listed building has not been provided.
41. Taking all matters into account, I conclude that the public benefits of the proposal
    would be insufficient to outweigh the considerable importance and weight I afford
    to the moderate harm I have identified to the significance of the listed building.
42. Accordingly, the proposal would conflict with sections 66(1) and 16(2) of the Act
    and the provisions within the Framework which seek to conserve and enhance the
    historic environment. It would also conflict with Policy LD4 of the Herefordshire
    Local Plan Core Strategy 2011-2031 (2015), which seeks to protect, conserve, and
    where possible enhance heritage assets in a manner appropriate to their
    significance through appropriate management, uses and sympathetic design, in
    particular emphasising the original form and function where possible.
Other Matters
43. I note that the Council's Ecologist advised that further assessment may be
    required in respect of Great Crested Newts and suggested that this could
    potentially be secured by pre-commencement condition. Had I been minded to
    allow the appeal against the refusal of planning permission, I would have sought
    the parties' views on whether such an approach would be acceptable, having
    regard to paragraph 99 of Circular 06/20056. However, as I am dismissing the
    appeals for other reasons, it is unnecessary for me to reach a conclusion on this.
Overall Balance and Conclusions
44. Policy S3(1) of the Framework requires decisions on development proposals to
    apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. In this case, Policy S5
    is relevant and states that only certain forms of development should be approved
    outside settlements, which are set out in a closed list. These should be approved,
    unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse
    effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in this
    Framework.
45. The list includes at criterion (c) the reuse, extension, alteration or replacement of
    an existing building, provided that the existing building is of permanent and
    substantial construction, is lawful in planning terms, and any extension or
    alteration will not result in a disproportionate increase in size compared to the
    existing building. While I have found that the proposed extension would be out of
    keeping with the scale of additions that have historically formed part of its

6
  Circular 06/2005: Biodiversity and Geological Conservation – Statutory Obligations and Their Impact Within the Planning System
(2005)



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                8
Appeal Decisions 6011314 and 6011319


       evolution, it would not result in a disproportionate increase in size compared to the
       existing building as a whole.
46. The proposal would give rise to the benefits identified above. Taken together,
    these weigh modestly in favour of the development.
47. Set against these benefits, I have concluded that the proposed development and
    works would fail to preserve the Grade II listed building, Hillhouse, and any
    features of special architectural or historic interest which it possesses, resulting in
    harm to its significance.
48. The Framework makes clear that substantial weight should be afforded to the
    conservation of designated heritage assets and that any harm to their significance
    is a matter of considerable importance and weight. It also indicates that proposals
    should be refused where, in the absence of clear justification, they fail to respond
    appropriately to their context.
49. Accordingly, I find that the benefits of approving the proposal would be
    substantially outweighed by the identified adverse effects, when assessed against
    the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
50. Appeal A: The proposal would conflict with the development plan and material
    considerations do not indicate that the appeal should be determined other than in
    accordance with it. Therefore, for the reasons given above, Appeal A should be
    dismissed.
51. Appeal B: For the reasons given above, Appeal B should be dismissed and listed
    building consent refused.



Hannah Guest
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
