 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 5 August 2026
 by Lynne Evans BA MA MRTPI MRICS
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 7 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011788
 170 Marvels Lane, London SE12 9PJ
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Bahador Khan against the decision of the Council of the
      London Borough of Lewisham.
 •    The application Ref is DC/26/142837.
 •    The development proposed is construction of a two storey side extension; a first floor rear extension
      and a single storey rear infill and front /porch extension.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. A new National Planning Policy Framework (Framework) was issued on 17 August
   2026, which replaces the previous Framework published in December 2024 and all
   other iterations. I have therefore written to seek the views of the Appellant and the
   Council on the revised Framework as pertinent to this appeal and I have taken the
   further representations received into account in my decision.
Main Issue
3. The main issue in this appeal is the effect of the proposed development on the
   character and appearance of the existing dwelling and on the street scene.
Reasons
4. The appeal property is a vacant detached dwelling on the south-west side of
   Marvels Lane and within a predominantly residential area with a mix of
   development styles, including detached and semi-detached dwellings and small
   blocks of flats. Although the spacing between properties varies, there are generally
   open gaps between properties, particularly in the vicinity of the appeal site which
   contribute to the street scene.
5. At the time of my site visit, the roof works as granted under the application for a
   lawful development certificate (proposed) under the Council’s ref: DC/25/141724
   appeared to be largely complete and the single storey extension as granted under
   an application for prior approval under the Council’s ref: DC/25/140902 was well
   advanced with the external walls and roof complete. The two storey side extension,
   which does not appear to be lawful from the information provided by the Council,


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6011788


     was partly demolished. The whole property was vacant, with works being
     undertaken.
6. The proposed works include the construction of a two storey and part single storey
   side extension, a first floor rear extension, and a front porch.
7. The proposed two storey side extension would be built forwards of the existing front
   building line to incorporate the new enclosed front porch but set back at first floor
   level with the existing front of the house. It would be built up to the common
   boundary with the adjoining property at No 168 which also has a two storey side
   extension, albeit set in with a modest gap from the shared boundary.
8. As a result of the proposed two storey side extension, and given the existence of
   the extension at the neighbouring property there would be only a very modest gap
   between the two properties. When the tree in the front garden of No 168 is in leaf,
   this largely screens the existing boundary between the two properties; however, it
   is not clear that it has or would have the same screening effect during the winter
   months. Furthermore, there can be no certainty that the tree would be retained,
   particularly as it is outside the control of the Appellant, and within the neighbour’s
   garden. I am not therefore satisfied that weight can be placed on the existence of
   the tree to screen the development. As a result of the proposed two storey
   extension, the remaining gap would be unacceptably tight between the two
   properties and would result in a terracing effect that would be out of character with
   the predominant pattern of development in the immediate locality.
9. I have taken into account that permission was granted for a two storey side
   extension under the Council’s ref: DC/09/071045/FT but, based on the information
   before me, not commenced in the required timescales. Moreover, the planning
   policy position has changed since that permission was granted some considerable
   number of years ago, and it does not persuade me that planning permission should
   now be granted for the proposal before me.
10. Although the proposed single storey front extension would be relatively small in
    depth and scale, it would appear as an awkward addition at the front of the
    property, particularly in relation to the existing front bay. It would not appear as an
    integrated part of the property, but, given its siting and projection, an overly
    prominent and ungainly addition.
11. Taken on its own, I consider that a proportionately scaled and well-designed first
    floor rear extension would be appropriate to step up from the extended ground floor
    towards the extended roof form and therefore help to unify the extended building.
    However, the scheme is presented as one proposal and I do not consider that it
    would be possible to seek to disaggregate it into its component elements.
12. Taking all the proposed extensions together, including the extensions already
    undertaken, the resultant development would result in a very bulky form of built
    form which would be visually discordant and overwhelm the scale and massing and
    the proportions of the existing property. It would, taken all together, present a very
    disjointed overall composition which would appear visually intrusive in the street
    scene.
13. I therefore conclude that the proposed development would unacceptably harm the
    character and appearance of the existing dwelling and the street scene. This would
    conflict with Policies QD7 and QD9 of the Lewisham Local Plan (2025), the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
 Appeal Decision 6011788


     Council’s Alterations and Extensions SPD (2019) and the Crofton Park and Honor
     Oak Neighbourhood Plan (2022) and the Framework, and in particular National
     decision-making policy DP3, all of which, amongst other matters, seek for a high
     standard of design which respects the local context.
Other Considerations
14. The Council’s reason for refusal related solely to the impact of the proposal on the
    character and appearance of the existing dwelling and on the local area. In respect
    of the Officer’s report on the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of
    neighbours, the findings are not clear. However, from my site visit and all the
    information before me, given the siting of the proposed extensions in relation to
    neighbouring properties and taking account of the position of their windows, I do
    not consider that the proposed development would materially harm the living
    conditions of the immediate neighbours, with particular regard to light, outlook,
    overlooking and loss of privacy. However, my finding in this regard does not
    outweigh the conclusion I have reached in respect of my main issue.
Conclusion
15. For the reasons given above and having regard to all other matters raised, the
    proposals conflicts with the development plan as a whole and there are no
    considerations that would outweigh that conflict, including the Framework. The
    appeal is therefore dismissed.



L J Evans
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
