Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 2 September 2026 by Ellie Nutman BA (Hons)
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011351
4 Vine Street, York YO23 1BB
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Stephen Demaine against the decision of City of York Council.
•   The application Ref is 26/00366/FUL.
•   The development proposed is the change of use of dwellinghouse (Use Class C3) to a mixed-use of
    dwellinghouse (Use Class C3) and short-term holiday let (Sui Generis).

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the change of use of
   dwellinghouse (Use Class C3) to a mixed-use of dwellinghouse (Use Class C3) and
   short-term holiday let (Sui Generis) at 4 Vine Street, York YO23 1BB.
Appeal Procedure and Preliminary Matter
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
3. Whilst the application form contains a more detailed description of development, I
   have adopted the description used in the Council's decision notice as it accurately
   reflects the appeal proposal in a more concise manner.
Main Issue
4. The effect of the proposal on the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers with
   particular regard to noise and disturbance.
Reasons for the Recommendation
5. The appeal property is situated within an established residential area where
   dwellings are located in close proximity to one another. Whilst the dwelling includes
   three bedrooms, the appellant has indicated that any short-term letting would be
   limited to a single bedroom, with the remaining bedrooms unavailable to guests.
6. On that basis, occupancy levels would be limited and there would likely only be one
   or two guests at any one time. However, even if all three bedrooms were in use, I
   find it unlikely that use of the property, including its garden, would generate levels
   of activity, noise or disturbance beyond those associated with normal residential
   occupation. Similarly, the comings and goings associated with a small number of
   short-term guests would not, in my view, materially exceed those arising from the
   daily movements of permanent residents, given they would in the main arrive and
   depart during sociable hours as the remainder of the house would still be in use.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011351


7. The Council expresses concern that the flexible nature of the proposed use could
   result in the property being occupied as short-term accommodation for a greater
   proportion of the year than currently envisaged, and that such use could not be
   appropriately controlled by condition. Even if I were to consider the proposal on the
   basis that short-term letting could occur for a significant part of the year, there is no
   substantive evidence demonstrating that such occupation would give rise to
   unacceptable noise and disturbance to neighbouring occupiers outside of that
   which could reasonably occur should the property, or a part thereof, be occupied
   conventionally as it is currently.
8. For the reasons given above and having regard to the limited scale of the proposed
   short-term letting use, I am satisfied that the proposal would not result in undue
   levels of noise or disturbance. Accordingly, it would preserve the living conditions of
   neighbouring occupiers and would therefore accord with Policy D1 of the City of
   York Local Plan (2025), which requires that design considers residential amenity so
   that residents living nearby are not unduly affected by noise or disturbance.
Other Matters
9. I have noted anecdotal evidence that other holiday lets in the area have resulted in
   noise and disturbance. However, there is no substantive evidence before me to
   demonstrate that this property, when in use as a holiday let to the extent applied
   for, is inherently noisier than its conventional occupation as a dwellinghouse. Any
   breach of planning control is a separate matter and does not affect my assessment
   of the appeal proposal.
10. No conflict with any development plan policy in regard to a loss of housing stock,
    the cumulative effects of short term lets on the local community or the limited
    economic benefits of the proposals have been identified. Fears that short-term
    occupants may inadequately maintain the garden, resulting in harm to biodiversity,
    are not supported by substantive evidence. The proposal relates to the use of an
    existing dwelling, and no substantive evidence has been provided to demonstrate
    that it would undermine the objectives of the Article 4 Direction or result in
    overdevelopment.
Conditions
11. Whilst the short-term let use would be limited to one bedroom, the proposal would
    be acceptable without such a restriction. Consequently, I do not consider a
    condition necessary. I remain to be convinced that such would be enforceable. A
    planning permission is to be granted for a mixed use. If the property was occupied
    as wholly a holiday let all of the time, this would cease to be the case. Since the
    development has been carried out, I do not deem any further conditions necessary.
Conclusion and Recommendation
12. For the reasons given above, the scheme complies with the development plan.
    There is no compelling reason, taking the above and the evidence into account, to
    not recommend allowing the appeal.

Ellie Nutman
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011351


Inspector’s Decision
13. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
