 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 14 August 2026
 by Jonathan Price BA(Hons) DipTP DMS MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 2 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011137
 17 Jersey Gardens, Wickford, Essex SS11 7AG
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Pastor Robin Lewis against the decision of Basildon Borough Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00207/FULL.
 •    The development proposed is a cabin of 5.5m x 4m at the back of the church property, to be used as
      an additional classroom and children/youth recreational facility.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. I have added to the description of the proposal in the application the proposed use
   as set out in the appeal form.
3. The Council based its refusal on conflict with the National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework). This has since been substantially amended through a
   revised version published on 17 August 2026. Having given the main parties an
   opportunity to comment on the changes introduced, my decision reflects this
   recently revised Framework.
Main Issue
4. The effects of this proposal on the character and appearance of the area and the
   living conditions of surrounding residential occupiers, with particular regard to visual
   amenity and levels of noise and activity.
Reasons
5. The appeal site contains a single storey building with some roof space
   accommodation, used by the local Seventh-day Adventist Church as its place of
   worship. This brick-built structure has traverse gable ends and a pitched roof with
   tiles. At the front is a concreted area for car parking, with an accessible ramp
   leading into a vestibule area on the front elevation. The rectangular building
   occupies most of the plot width and extends beyond the rear extent of the adjacent
   housing, with a conservatory and outside space behind. Development along this
   section of Jersey Road is otherwise mainly frontage housing, closely arranged and
   generally of two storeys.
6. The rear space extends up to the car parking at Beccles Court and adjoins back
   gardens on both its sides. The surroundings generally comprise the back gardens

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6011137


     and elevations of residential development. The space at the rear is already
     occupied by two outbuildings; one a small storage shed and the other a timber
     cabin used as a children’s classroom. The concrete footings of the additional cabin
     proposed are in place, occupying much of the remaining open area. Like the
     existing rear structures, this proposal would be screened by the main church
     building from the street scene along Jersey Gardens. It would be evident mainly
     from vantage points within the surrounding residential back gardens and rear
     windows, where the large cabin would be visually quite intrusive, adding to an
     existing assemblage of timber buildings behind the church.
7. A further building on this rather confined rear space, close to the private back
   gardens and the rear outlooks of surrounding housing, would accommodate further
   activity and thereby exacerbate the potential for noise and disturbance. This would
   risk impinging adversely upon the ambience experienced by nearby occupiers, in
   respect of the peaceful enjoyment of back gardens. This place of worship clearly
   plays an important role within the community. However, meeting the need for
   additional space, and thereby enhancing the social benefits delivered through the
   church, must be weighed against any unreasonable degree of harm to
   neighbouring amenities.
8. The hours of use sought for this new outbuilding would be 10am to 5pm on a
   Saturday and 1pm to 3pm on one Sunday per month. This might be secured by a
   planning condition. The building would be used by approximately ten children,
   although a planning condition to this effect would be less readily enforceable.
   However, there would be means to restrict the active use of the proposed cabin to
   that specified and outside of both weekdays and evenings.
9. To my mind, the congregational activities at this church appear to have outgrown
   the size of the main building, necessitating some spillover into less substantial
   structures adjoining neighbouring back gardens. To allow a second such cabin
   building would increase activity at the expense of residential living conditions, in
   regard to a peaceful and undisturbed enjoyment of adjacent private back gardens.
   Although such activities could be restricted mainly to Saturdays and occasional
   Sunday afternoons, it is at the weekend when many surrounding occupiers would
   be making most active use of their back gardens.
10. The revised Framework establishes itself to be of critical importance for making
    decisions on development proposals. Although this does not supplant the statutory
    plan-led system, Basildon’s Saved Local Plan is not relied upon in this case. The
    Framework now contains procedural and thematic decision-making policies, which
    should be considered in the round. It requires the minimum necessary information
    to enable a decision. In this case there is not much information provided over the
    exact uses to be held in this children/youth recreational facility.
11. Framework Policy S4.1 establishes that development within a settlement should be
     approved unless its benefits are substantially outweighed by any adverse effects,
     when assessed against its national decision-making policies. In Policy S4.2 it
     provides some examples of where such benefits might be substantially outweighed,
     but this is not a closed list. One example is where these policies require refusal in
     specific circumstances.
12. Framework national decision-making policy L2 1.b requires substantial weight be
     given to the benefit of this proposal in making better use of vacant and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
 Appeal Decision 6011137


     underutilised land and creating additional floorspace within an existing plot.
     However, this depends on acceptable living standards in terms of privacy and
     external amenity space. Because the proposal would impinge on neighbours’ quiet
     enjoyment of their back gardens, there is conflict in this respect.
13. Policy L3.1 would support the church making efficient use of the land at its disposal
    to meet its operational needs, provided this takes into account the importance of
    securing well-designed, attractive and healthy places. In policy DP3 on the key
    principles for such well-designed places, DP3.1 would require this proposal to
    respond to its context, so that it integrates with and enhances its surroundings,
    whilst not precluding change, especially that justified under aforementioned policies
    L2 and L3. However, the quite large, shed-like structure proposed in this rear
    location would not achieve this nor gain support from any of the principles for the
    creation of well-designed places listed under DP3.2. The proposal is without clear
    justification and fails to integrate with and enhance its surroundings, whereby
    Framework national decision-making policy DP3.3 would require it be refused.
Conclusion
14. The second cabin would support the functioning of the church and enhance the
    social benefits it provides to the wider community. The proposal would be of little
    material harm to the character and appearance of the Jersey Gardens street scene.
    However, it would not integrate with or enhance its surroundings and detract from
    the living conditions of surrounding residential occupiers, with regard to visual
    amenity and levels of noise and activity. As a consequence, it would be contrary to
    the revised Framework when read as a whole and I therefore conclude the appeal
    should not succeed.

Jonathan Price
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
