Appeal Decision
Hearing held on 25 August 2026
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by M Clowes BA (Hons) MCD PG CERT (Arch Con) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22nd September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011055
Victoria Vaults, 47-49 Nunnery Lane, York YO23 1AB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Nabeel Hanif [The Vaults (York)] against the decision of City of York
     Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01793/FUL.
•    The development proposed is the change of use of ground floor from public house (sui generis) to
     cafe (Class E).

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2.     Prior to the Hearing, an application for costs was made by Mr Nabeel Hanif [The
       Vaults (York)] against the City of York Council. This application is the subject of a
       separate decision.
Preliminary Matters and Main Issues
3.     The address of the appeal site in the banner headings above follows agreement of
       the parties at the Hearing that it accurately identifies the site location.
4.     The Hearing dealt simultaneously with a counterpart appeal reference 6010035.
       Whilst there are consistent themes between the cases, there are differences and
       so for clarity, I have produced different appeal decisions for each case.
5.     The Council submitted a piece of late evidence during the Hearing to confirm that
       the appeal site was listed as an Asset of Community Value (ACV) on 11 August
       2026. The appellant had already notified me of such in writing prior to the Hearing
       and the acceptance of this information did not therefore prejudice any party.
6.     A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
       17 August 2026 during the appeal process. The main parties were given the
       opportunity to comment on the implications of the revision in relation to the
       proposal, such that I am satisfied that no prejudice has occurred.
7.     Having regard to the written evidence and the discussions at the Hearing, the main
       issues are i) whether the proposed café would result in the loss of a community
       facility and cultural venue; and if so, ii) whether that loss would be justified having
       regard to the evidence of viability and marketing and to the development plan and
       national planning policy.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011055


Reasons
Community Facility
8.     The Victoria Vaults comprises a 2-storey building fronting Nunnery Lane within
       York City Centre, just outside of the historic walls. The parties disagree on the
       proper characterisation of the existing use. Nonetheless, it was last operated as a
       public house/live music venue with accommodation above. Following the
       appellant’s purchase of the appeal site, the commercial use ceased and the first
       floor is currently rented out as a short-term holiday let.
9.     Policy HW1 of the City of York Local Plan (CYLP) 2025, seeks to protect existing
       community facilities, or facilities last used for community purposes [my emphasis].
       Policy D3 seeks to sustain, enhance and add value to York's cultural character
       and supports development that does not cause the loss of cultural facilities,
       activities, services, venues or spaces that deliver cultural opportunities. Together,
       these policies reflect the importance attached by the development plan to the
       retention of facilities which contribute to community life, social interaction and
       cultural wellbeing.
10. As discussed above, Policy HW1 seeks to protect community facilities and permits
    their loss only where specific criteria are satisfied. The objectives of the policy are
    therefore consistent with Policy HC6 of the revised Framework, which seeks to
    guard against the unnecessary loss of valued community facilities and services.
    Consequently, I afford substantial weight to Policy HW1.
11. There is no dispute that the appeal building historically operated as a public house.
    Whilst the appellant is entitled to place weight on the Council's earlier decision to
    remove the appeal site from the ACV register in November 2025, that position has
    subsequently been reversed by the re-listing of the property as an ACV prior to the
    Hearing. The evidence before me does not include the detailed assessments
    which informed either ACV conclusion. I am aware that the appellant has
    requested a review of the most recent listing decision. Nonetheless, the appeal
    site remains listed as an ACV at the time of my determination of this appeal.
12. In any event, the issue before me is not whether the property satisfies the statutory
    tests for inclusion on the ACV register, but whether the proposal complies with
    Policy HW1 of the CYLP. The ACV regime and the planning system serve different
    purposes and apply different statutory and policy tests. Policy HW1 is not
    restricted to assets listed as ACVs, nor does it provide that a facility ceases to be a
    community facility once removed from the register. Rather, it applies more broadly
    to existing and recently used community facilities, with public houses expressly
    identified within the supporting text as an example of such facilities.
13. Accordingly, whilst I have taken both the de-listing and subsequent re-listing into
    account as material considerations, neither is determinative of whether the appeal
    site should be regarded as a community facility for the purposes of Policy HW1.
    My conclusion derives from the nature of the use that was being undertaken at the
    appeal site immediately prior to its closure, irrespective of its status under the
    separate ACV regime. That is a public house that provided a venue for social
    interaction and community activity as clearly expressed in the representations of
    interested parties.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011055


Cultural Venue
14. The appellant submits that no separate planning permission exists for the use of
    the appeal site as a music venue and that it should only be considered as a public
    house. In this regard, he contends that it should not be viewed as a cultural facility.
15. The Council contend that the appeal site functioned as both a public house and a
    dedicated live music venue before its closure. The premises hosted regular
    ticketed live music events 3 nights per week and contained a dedicated stage
    area, together with sound and lighting equipment associated with such events. I
    have heard and read persuasive evidence from interested parties that the venue
    provided opportunities for local and emerging musicians (particularly bands rather
    than soloists), promoters, sound technicians and other creative practitioners to
    develop and showcase their skills before live audiences, in a relatively small
    venue. It also hosted national and international touring bands and in doing so, it
    attracted visitors from a wider area than the local catchment alone.
16. Detailed representations from individuals and local groups including York Music
    Venue Network, The Campaign for Real Ale (CAMRA), the Campaign for Pubs
    and Clements Hall Local History Group, consistently describe the premises as an
    important and dedicated venue for live music, that was publicly recognised as part
    of York's grassroots music infrastructure. In this regard, I note that it received
    support through the Government's Cultural Recovery Fund. It was also the
    recipient of funding from the City of York Council’s grassroots venue support
    grants. Whilst not determinative, the award of specific cultural funding lends
    support to the view that the premises performed an established cultural function in
    addition to its role as a public house.
17. I acknowledge that the appellant has identified a large number of venues in York
    (circa 40) that are said to host live music. However, the Council and interested
    party evidence indicates that very few offer a comparative grassroots music
    function due to occupancy levels, lack of dedicated performance space, frequency
    of events and lack of ticketing. Whilst many of those venues provide some form of
    live music at different intervals, their primary function is as food and/or drink
    establishments, supplemented by occasional open-mic or live music events, rather
    than a regular programme of ticketed performances.
18. The evidence before me, including discussions at the Hearing, indicates that the
    Victoria Vaults was one of only 2 such premises for dedicated live music within the
    city centre, the other being The Crescent. However, the Crescent is understood to
    be a larger venue with a capacity of around 300 people. The Fulford Arms was
    also discussed at the Hearing, but it is located outside of the city centre. In
    addition, there was no conclusive evidence that the FortyFive Vinyl Café performs
    a similar role as a dedicated live music venue with specialist facilities and
    performance space suitable for full bands, such that I am unable to consider it
    comparable.
19. Even if some of the venues identified by the appellant could be regarded as
    providing a broadly similar offer, they amount to no more than a very small number
    of alternatives. I am therefore satisfied that the Victoria Vaults fulfilled a specific
    and relatively uncommon role within York's grassroots music scene, and that there
    is insufficient alternative provision of this particular type of cultural venue within the
    local area to justify its loss. Whether or not the premises was operating beyond its


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011055


       licensed capacity and lawful planning use, I find that it made a meaningful
       contribution to York's cultural life and possessed a level of cultural value beyond
       that normally associated with a public house alone. In reaching this view, I note
       that at the Hearing Mr Waterhouse retracted the conclusion within the Stapleton
       Waterhouse Report that the loss of Victoria Vaults as a live music venue would not
       represent a major loss to York's cultural provision, explaining that he was not
       qualified to make such an assessment. I therefore attach little weight to that
       particular conclusion of the report.
20. It is not for me in considering this S78 appeal to determine the lawful use of the
    appeal site. Nor is it necessary to reach a definitive conclusion regarding the
    precise planning status of the music-related activities undertaken from the
    premises. Taking all of the information presented in the round, I am satisfied that
    whilst the Victoria Vaults operated as a public house, it also functioned as a venue
    that delivered cultural opportunities through the provision of live music events,
    thereby engaging the objectives of Policy D3.
21. Furthermore, Policy HC6 of the Framework expressly identifies both public houses
    and cultural venues as examples of key community facilities. The dual function of
    the appeal site therefore reinforces, rather than undermines the conclusion that the
    objectives of both Policies HW1 and D3 are relevant to the determination of the
    appeal.
22. The proposed conversion of the ground floor into a café would prohibit the public
    house and live music venue use.
Whether the Proposal Would Result in a Loss
23. The appellant contends that the proposed café should be regarded as a
    community facility, thereby meaning that there would be no overall loss of such a
    use. I have carefully considered this argument. I acknowledge that cafés can
    provide opportunities for social interaction and informal meeting. However, the
    mere fact that a commercial premises is open to the public does not necessarily
    mean that it should be regarded as a community facility for the purposes of Policy
    HW1.
24. In this case, there is little evidence before me regarding the specific operation of
    the proposed café beyond its use for the sale of food and drink. There is no
    substantive evidence that it would host community groups, provide meeting
    facilities, support community programmes, accommodate particular social
    functions, or otherwise perform a community role beyond that ordinarily associated
    with a commercial café business. Whilst members of the public would be able to
    use the premises, that factor alone is insufficient for me to conclude that it would
    provide a replacement community facility equivalent in nature to the previous use.
25. I also note that, at the time the application was being considered, reliance was
    placed upon the proposed occupation of the premises by Rockello. This offer has
    subsequently been withdrawn. Although there is no requirement to demonstrate an
    end user, there is still no evidence regarding the manner in which the proposed
    café would operate or the extent to which it would provide any identifiable
    community benefits beyond those associated with a conventional commercial café.
    Accordingly, on the evidence before me, I am not persuaded that the proposed
    café would constitute a replacement community facility for the purposes of Policy


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6011055


       HW1. Rather, I find that it would principally operate as a commercial food and
       drink business.
26. I have nevertheless carefully considered the appeal decision relating to The Bay
    Horse and the Council's decision at the Murton Arms. I do not read either decision
    as establishing that a café must invariably be regarded as a community facility.
    Whether a particular use fulfils such a role is necessarily a matter of fact and
    degree in the circumstances of each case. In the Bay Horse decision, the
    Inspector found that the proposal would provide a replacement community facility
    and make a positive contribution to the range of facilities available locally, in
    circumstances where there were no other coffee shop in the immediate
    surrounding area. Likewise, the Murton Arms decision turned upon the particular
    circumstances of a village location where the Council considered that the
    proposed café would continue to provide a facility for local residents to meet and
    socialise.
27. The circumstances before me are materially different. The appeal site occupies an
    accessible city centre location close to Bishopthorpe Road and Micklegate, where
    a wide range of cafés, restaurants and other meeting places already exist. The
    proposal would not therefore obviously meet a gap in such provision to warrant
    consideration as a community use. Neither The Bay Horse nor the Murton Arms
    decisions lead me to a different conclusion.
28. In any event, even if I were to conclude that the proposed café would constitute a
    community facility, that would not resolve the separate issue of the loss of a
    cultural venue as I have already discussed. There is no evidence before me that
    the proposed café would provide equivalent cultural facilities, activities or services.
    Importantly, neither the Bay Horse nor Murton Arms examples involved the loss of
    a dedicated live music venue. Consequently, the proposal would result in the loss
    of a community and cultural venue and therefore engage the objectives of Policies
    D3 and HW1 of the CYLP.
Whether the Loss is Justified
29. Criteria iv) of Policy HW1 would allow the loss of a commercial community facility
    where evidence is provided demonstrating that the facility is no longer financially
    viable with no market interest. Paragraph 6.10 of the supporting text explains that
    evidence of marketing for a minimum of 2 years without success will be required,
    together with a marketing report and an open book-based viability appraisal,
    demonstrating that the facility is not viable and could not reasonably be made so.
    Though not a requirement of the policy itself, the explanatory text nonetheless sets
    out the type of evidence considered necessary to demonstrate policy compliance.
30. In terms of viability, the appellant relies on a report produced by Nabarro McAllister
    and the trading experience of the most recent venue operator. The evidence
    indicates that the business experienced trading losses, required personal
    injections of capital and faced difficult trading conditions. Information has also
    been provided regarding operating costs associated with the venue and the
    experiences of the previous operator, albeit this is limited in scope. The Nabarro
    McAllister report concludes that the premises are not financially viable as a public
    house and estimates that substantial investment would be required to return the
    ground floor to an operational condition.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6011055


31. The evidence falls short of constituting the open book viability appraisal anticipated
    by the supporting text to Policy HW1. Whilst it demonstrates that the most recent
    operation of the venue was unsuccessful, I am not persuaded that it demonstrates
    that the use itself could not reasonably be made viable. Little evidence has been
    provided regarding whether the venue could be made viable under a different
    ownership structure, management approach or business model, nor has any
    benchmarking been undertaken against comparable venues. Consequently, it is
    unclear why the Nabarro McAllister report concludes that the premises are
    inherently unviable as a public house and live music venue, rather than
    demonstrating that the previous business was unsuccessful. Similarly, the
    suggested refurbishment cost of £250,000 is unsupported by any detailed
    calculations or cost evidence.
32. A number of interested parties contend the venue became increasingly underused
    and was only open intermittently before the appellant took possession. Whilst
    understanding the difficulties associated with operating such uses viably, I cannot
    confidently conclude that the poor financial performance was attributable to the
    use itself being incapable of operating viably in this location, rather than the
    manner in which the previous business was operated and managed.
33. Turning to the marketing evidence, I have had regard to both the Carter Towler
    and Barry Crux exercises. The Carter Towler particulars marketed the property not
    only as a public house and music venue, but also as an ‘excellent medium term
    redevelopment opportunity.’ A purchase resulted from that exercise, namely by the
    appellant, who explained at the Hearing that the property was acquired as an
    investment opportunity. Whilst the eventual sale price was below the original
    asking price, there is no persuasive evidence before me that the agreed figure
    represented an appropriate market value for the continuation of the existing use,
    rather than reflecting, at least in part, the site's redevelopment potential.
34. The subsequent Barry Crux exercise took a different approach. By that stage the
    first-floor accommodation had been refurbished as a short-term holiday let and
    excluded from the letting particulars, with only the ground floor being marketed.
    The appellant contends that the first floor has long been a separate flat. However,
    irrespective of its precise planning status, the evidence indicates that the venue
    previously operated with residential accommodation above. The Carter Towler
    particulars marketed the whole property, including the first-floor accommodation,
    and the Nabarro McAllister report similarly refers to the premises as a public house
    with a manager's flat above. The Barry Crux exercise therefore tested the market
    for occupation of the ground floor alone, rather than for the venue in the form in
    which it had most recently operated.
35. This distinction is important because the evidence suggests that at least some
    prospective operators considered the availability of the upper floors to be material
    to their interest in the property. Stapleton Waterhouse similarly identified the
    exclusion of the flat as a potential issue when assessing future operation of the
    premises as a public house and music venue.
36. Taken together, the two marketing exercises provide useful evidence regarding
    demand for the premises. However, they do not demonstrate that the property was
    marketed solely for continuation of its established use as a public house and live
    music venue with accommodation above, or that it was consistently valued by
    reference to that use. Stapleton Waterhouse identified concerns that the valuation

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6011055


       was high and that further marketing of the property as a whole would be
       appropriate in order to fully test the market. The existence of some interest in the
       property, notwithstanding the asking price, does not demonstrate that the valuation
       was appropriate or that all potential demand had been captured.
37. Even if that was not the case, I am not persuaded that the evidence demonstrates
    an absence of market interest. The Barry Crux marketing exercise generated a
    number of enquiries and viewings, including interest from parties wishing to
    continue public house, hospitality and music-related uses. Whilst they did not lead
    to funded offers, they are nevertheless indicative of ongoing market interest in the
    facility. Furthermore, the absence of the first-floor accommodation from the
    marketing exercise appears to have reduced interest from at least some
    prospective operators. Consequently, I cannot be satisfied that the marketing
    undertaken would necessarily have identified all potential interest in retaining the
    facility in its established form.
38. I acknowledge that the Framework’s recent revision post-dates the adoption of the
    local plan. Policy HC6 resists the loss of key community facilities and public
    service infrastructure, unless amongst other things, it can be demonstrated that
    there is no reasonable prospect of the use being retained. In the case of public
    houses, the policy states that evidence should be provided demonstrating that
    reasonable steps have been taken to market the property for its existing use [my
    emphasis] without success for a period of at least 12 months. This differs from the
    supporting text to Policy HW1 of the CYLP which states a minimum of 2 years
    marketing.
39. I am not convinced by the Council’s position that the appeal site ceases to be a
    public house for the purpose of the Framework simply because the venue is also
    considered to be a cultural venue in this instance. Importantly, Policy HC6 of the
    Framework treats marketing as evidence relevant as to whether there is a
    reasonable prospect of retention, rather than establishing a determinative test
    based solely upon the passage of a specified period of time. Any tension between
    the Framework and Policy HW1 relates principally to the guidance contained within
    the supporting text, rather than the operative wording of the policy itself.
40. In any event, I do not consider it necessary in this case to reach a definitive
    conclusion regarding the weight to be attached to the 2-year marketing expectation
    in the supporting text, nor to determine whether the more recent 12-month period
    in the Framework alters that position. This is because in both policies, the
    marketing periods are evidential rather than determinative.
41. At the Hearing Mr Waterhouse was clear that the only way to fully expose the
    appeal site to market is to offer the whole property for sale and to let, based on a
    valuation of the existing use only. That has not occurred, irrespective of the
    duration of the marketing to date. My conclusions do not turn on the duration of the
    marketing alone. Rather, the central question is whether the evidence
    demonstrates that there is no reasonable prospect of the facility being retained. I
    have found that not to be the case.
Conclusion
42. Drawing these matters together, I find that the Victoria Vaults functioned as both a
    community facility and cultural venue immediately prior to its closure. Whilst the
    proposed café would introduce an alternative commercial use, I am not persuaded

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6011055


         on the evidence before me that it would provide an equivalent replacement
         community facility, nor would it replicate the cultural function performed by the
         appeal site. The proposal would therefore result in the loss of a community facility
         for the purposes of Policy HW1 and a cultural venue for the purposes of Policy D3.
43. I have carefully considered the viability and marketing evidence submitted in
    support of the proposal. Whilst the most recent operation of the venue was
    commercially unsuccessful, I am not satisfied that the evidence demonstrates that
    the facility could not reasonably be made viable, nor that there is no reasonable
    prospect of its retention, having regard to the market interest identified.
    Consequently, I find that the requirements of Policy HW1(iv) have not been met.
44. Whilst Policies D3 and HW1 address different aspects of the appeal proposal,
    there is a clear overlap between them in this case. Having found that the evidence
    does not satisfactorily justify the loss of the community facility, I am likewise not
    persuaded that sufficient justification has been provided for the loss of the cultural
    venue. I therefore find conflict with Policy D3. Consequently, I find that the
    appellant has failed to demonstrate that the loss of the community facility and
    cultural venue would be justified. The proposal would therefore conflict with
    Policies HW1(iv) and D3 of the CYLP as set out above. In reaching that
    conclusion, I find that the proposal would conflict with Policy HW1(iv) irrespective
    of whether the relevant marketing benchmark is 12 months or 2 years.
Other Matters
Heritage Assets
45. The appeal site lies immediately adjacent to, but outside, the Central Historic Core
    Conservation Area (CHCCA). The significance of the CHCCA derives from the
    exceptional survival of York's historic urban form, its medieval street pattern, the
    prevalence of historic buildings of varying periods and styles, the relationship
    between buildings, streets and spaces, and the contribution of landmark heritage
    assets including, but not limited to, the City Walls and York Minster. The
    contribution made by the appeal site to the significance of the CHCCA is therefore
    primarily derived from its role within the surrounding townscape and urban context.
46. The appeal site is also located within the setting of the Grade I listed and
    Scheduled Ancient Monument (SAM) City Walls including Victoria Bar1, and the
    Grade II listed The Moat House opposite2. The significance of the SAM and listed
    building comprising the City Walls and Victoria Bar derives principally from its
    exceptional evidential, historic and architectural value as one of the most complete
    surviving medieval town defences in England. The monument provides tangible
    evidence of York's historic development, illustrates the evolution of the city's
    fortifications over many centuries and remains an important landmark contributing
    to the city's identity and historic character. Its significance is also derived from its
    prominence within the townscape and the ability to appreciate the monument as
    part of the historic approach to the city.
47. The significance of The Moat House derives from its special architectural and
    historic interest as a mid-Victorian building and its contribution to the historic
    townscape of Nunnery Lane.

1
    List Entry No 1259262.
2
    List Entry No 1257034.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6011055


48. Whilst the appeal site does not form part of the SAM, it lies within the urban
    environment in which the City Walls, Victoria Bar and The Moat House are
    experienced. Its contribution to significance is therefore primarily contextual,
    arising from its role within the surrounding townscape rather than through any
    direct historical or functional relationship with the designated heritage assets.
49. The proposal would retain the existing building with the frontage remaining largely
    unchanged. In this regard, the relationship with the designated heritage assets
    would remain neutral post change of use. I therefore find that the proposal would
    preserve the significance of the SAM and the settings of the listed City Walls and
    Victoria Bar, and The Moat House. It would preserve the contribution that the
    appeal site presently makes to the setting of the CHCCA.
50. Consequently, the proposal would accord with Policies D4 and D5 of the CYLP. In
    reaching this conclusion, I have had special regard to the desirability of preserving
    the setting of the listed buildings, as required by section 66(1) of the Planning
    (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990.
Other Decisions
51. I have had regard to the previous appeal decisions referred to by the appellant
    including the 2 Jubilee decisions. In the 2022 appeal the ground floor public house
    was being retained with residential accommodation above3. It did not therefore
    result in the loss of community facilities.
52. Whilst there are similarities with the proposal in the 2025 Jubilee case4, the
    property had been vacant and marketed for a substantial period. The Inspector
    was satisfied having regard to the particular viability and marketing evidence
    before him, including extensive marketing over a prolonged period and his finding
    that there was no compelling evidence of meaningful market interest in the
    continued operation of a public house from the site. Similarly, in the Pinkuah Arms
    decision the Inspector concluded that a future public house use was demonstrably
    unviable, notwithstanding the absence of a marketing exercise5. However, that
    finding was made with regard to it being a rural public house, the catchment
    population, history, vacancy period and the specialist viability evidence before
    them. It was also located within a different local authority area and therefore
    subject to different local planning policies.
53. In this case, I have found that the viability evidence falls short of demonstrating
    that the use could not reasonably be made viable and, importantly, I am not
    satisfied that the marketing evidence demonstrates an absence of market interest.
    Moreover, neither the Jubilee nor Pinkuah Arms performed the same established
    cultural function as I have found existed at the Victoria Vaults. Consequently,
    these decisions do not alter my conclusions in the circumstances of this appeal.
54. Likewise, the Magnet approval6 arose in a different policy context where the main
    issue related to whether the harm arising from the demolition of a Non-Designated
    Heritage Asset would be outweighed by the benefits of the scheme, rather than
    whether the loss of a community use was acceptable.


3
  Appeal decision APP/C2741/W/21/3285000.
4
  Appeal decision APP/C2741/W/25/3362935.
5
  Appeal decision APP/Z1510/W/24/3352799.
6
  Appeal decision APP/C2741/W/22/3305435.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    9
Appeal Decision 6011055


55. I have had regard to the consistency principle arising from North Wiltshire DC v
    Secretary of State for the Environment. However, consistency does not require
    identical outcomes where the evidence and circumstances differ. Whilst I have
    carefully considered the appeal decisions relied upon by the appellant, my findings
    are based on the particular evidence before me in this case regarding the role of
    the Victoria Vaults, the viability information submitted, the marketing undertaken
    and the application of policies within the development plan. The previous appeal
    decisions do not affect my findings.
Other Considerations
56. The appellant contends that refusal of planning permission would increase the
    likelihood of the site being redeveloped for residential purposes. However, the
    proposed residential redevelopment forms the subject of a separate appeal
    decision. Planning permission has not been granted for that proposal. Therefore, it
    does not constitute a fallback position.
57. Several supporters contend that the premises no longer functioned as a
    community asset, that demand for its previous use was limited, and that a café
    would better serve local needs and be more compatible with its surroundings.
    Those matters have been considered in the context of the full body of evidence
    before me, including the site's previous function as a community use and its
    cultural role within the city. Having weighed all of that evidence, I have reached a
    different conclusion for the reasons explained above.
58. The appellant also raised concerns regarding the conduct and involvement of
    certain individuals in the consideration of the application. However, this is a matter
    for the parties involved. My conclusions are based upon my own independent
    assessment of the planning merits of the appeal.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
59. The Council's comments on the revised Framework focused principally on conflict
    with Policy HC67. However, Policy S4 requires a balancing exercise between the
    benefits of development within a settlement and any adverse effects. Accordingly, I
    have undertaken my own assessment of the benefits and harms of the proposal
    having regard to the Framework as a whole.
60. Policy S4 of the Framework establishes a presumption that development
    proposals within settlements should be approved, unless the benefits of doing so
    would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against
    the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
61. The appeal site occupies a sustainable location close to services, facilities and
    public transport opportunities within the city centre of York. The proposal would
    result in the efficient re-use of the ground floor area of an existing building and
    would provide employment opportunities associated with the operation of the café.
    These benefits attract moderate positive weight.
62. I have found that the proposal would preserve the significance of the listed
    buildings and SAM and would not harm the significance of the CCHCA through
    development within its setting. Accordingly, no heritage harm would arise and this
    matter weighs neither for, nor against, the proposal.
7
    With reference to the Council’s email to the Inspectorate dated 9 September 2026.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                   10
Appeal Decision 6011055


63. Against the benefits, I have found that the proposal would result in the unjustified
    loss of an important community facility and cultural venue. Policy HC6 of the
    Framework affords protection to such uses and seeks to resist their loss unless
    specified criteria are satisfied. I have had regard to the appellant's submissions
    that there is no reasonable prospect of the existing use being retained and that
    adequate alternative provision exists elsewhere8. However, there is no evidence
    before me that the safeguarding of this community and cultural use is no longer
    appropriate, or that there is no reasonable prospect of the existing use being
    retained. Consequently, I find that the requirements of Policy HC6 have not been
    met and that the proposal would conflict with that policy. In this regard, the
    proposal would give rise to the type of substantial adverse impact referred to in
    Policy S4(2)(a)(i) of the Framework. I therefore attach substantial weight to the
    adverse effects.
64. Taking all matters into account, I conclude that the substantial adverse impact of
    the proposal would substantially outweigh the moderate benefits arising from the
    re-use of part of an existing building and employment opportunities. Accordingly,
    having applied Policy S4 of the Framework, I find that it does not indicate that
    planning permission should be granted.
65. The proposal would therefore conflict with the development plan and there are no
    material considerations, including the approach of the Framework, that indicate a
    decision should be made other than in accordance with the development plan.
    Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.

M Clowes
INSPECTOR




8
    Inclusive of the appellant’s email dated 10 September 2026 regarding the revised Framework.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  11
Appeal Decision 6011055




                                            APPEARANCES


FOR THE APPELLANT:

Nabeel Hanif                               Appellant and Owner

Tanveer Hussain                            Owner



FOR THE LOCAL PLANNING AUTHORITY:

Gareth Arnold                              Development Manager

Sophie Prendergast                         Planning Officer

David Waterhouse                           Stapleton Waterhouse Ltd




INTERESTED PARTIES:

Cllr Peter Kilbane                         Ward Councillor for Micklegate and
                                           Executive Member for Economy and Culture

Mr Robinson                                On behalf of York Music Venue Network




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       12
