Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by Ryan Cowley MPlan (Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 04 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011906
26 Elmwood Avenue, Feltham, Hounslow TW13 7BE
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Tarsem Kaur Bansi no against the decision of the Council of the London
     Borough of Hounslow.
•    The application Ref is P/2025/3632.
•    The development proposed is conversion of garage into habitable room and loft conversion and
     single storey front extension.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for conversion of garage
       into habitable room and loft conversion and single storey front extension at 26
       Elmwood Avenue, Feltham, Hounslow TW13 7BE in accordance with the terms of
       the application, Ref P/2025/3632, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: P.M.000 Rev 0; P.M.400 Rev B; P.M.500 Rev
              C; P.M.501 Rev C; P.M.600 Rev B; P.M.700 Rev 0.
     3)       The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
              development shall match those used in the existing building.
Preliminary Matters
2.     On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published. The parts of the Framework relevant to this appeal
       have not substantively changed. I have thus not sought further submissions. I have
       had regard to the latest version of the Framework where relevant in this appeal.
Main Issue
3.     The Council’s sole reason for refusal refers exclusively to the proposed front
       extension. Neither the Decision Notice nor the Officer Report set out any concerns
       regarding other elements of the proposal, with regard to relevant planning matters.
       Based on the evidence and my own observations, there is no compelling reason
       for me to reach a different conclusion.
4.     The main issue is therefore the effect of the proposed front extension on the
       character and appearance of the host dwelling and surrounding area.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011906


Reasons
5.     The site comprises a 2-storey semi-detached dwelling, set back from the footpath
       behind a driveway. The front elevation of the appeal dwelling is wide, considerably
       more so than the adjoining property, having been extended to the side at some
       point in its past. The appeal dwelling currently features a single storey, heavily
       glazed, front porch extension, which incorporates the ground floor projecting bay
       window. This is similar to the porch extension at the adjoining dwelling.
6.     The surrounding area comprises a mix of residential and commercial uses.
       However, in the vicinity of the appeal site, this side of the road is predominantly
       characterised by 2-storey semi-detached and terraced dwellings of varying size
       and appearance, set back from the road behind driveways and front gardens.
       Projecting bay windows and porches are a common feature in the street scene,
       though there is considerable variation in the size and design of porches.
7.     The Hounslow Character, Sustainability and Design Codes Supplementary
       Planning Document (SPD) May 2024 – Part A5 Residential Extension Guidelines
       highlights that front extensions must be minor and not alter the overall appearance
       of the house or dominate the character of the street, due to their prominent
       location. It advises that front extensions that are larger than a porch will normally
       be refused because they stand out as unusual, bulky extensions that significantly
       change the appearance of the house and street. The SPD specifies that the depth
       of any porch should not normally extend out past the line of a bay window unless
       there is a clear and acceptable design reason for doing so.
8.     The proposed front extension in this case would project beyond the existing bay
       window, albeit this would be incorporated into the proposal under the proposed
       canopy. A gap would be left between the porch itself and the bay, revealing the full
       form of the original bay that is currently obscured by the existing porch.
9.     The size of the proposal would be proportionate to the size of the appeal dwelling.
       While its design would differ from that of the adjoining dwelling, there has already
       been considerable divergence in size and appearance between each house and
       so it would not appear unduly out of character or significantly unbalance the pair.
10. The terrace of dwellings on the opposite side steps forward of the front elevation of
    the appeal dwelling. The adjacent dwelling features a large porch extension that is
    separate from, and extends beyond, its own bay window. A similar arrangement
    exists along much of the rest of the neighbouring terrace. The proposed front
    extension in this case would not extend appreciably forward of this neighbouring
    terrace and so would not appear unduly obtrusive in views along the road.
11. The proposed front extension would ultimately not appear unusual or bulky in the
    context of the appeal site and its surroundings and would not significantly change
    the appearance of the house or dominate the character of the street. It would
    therefore not have a harmful effect on the character and appearance of the host
    dwelling and surrounding area. It would be in accordance with Policies CC1, CC2
    and SC7 of the Hounslow Local Plan 2015-2030. These policies, among other
    provisions, support high-quality urban design and architecture, seek to ensure that
    developments respond to the wider context and its urban structure, form and
    function, and that residential extensions and alterations complement the original
    building, harmonise with adjoining properties and maintain the character of the
    general street scene.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011906


Other Matters
12. Representations from an interested party raised concerns that the proposed
    garage conversion could become a self-contained residential unit. The Council
    indicated that this matter could have been addressed using a planning condition.
13. While the conversion would accommodate a bedroom, en-suite bathroom and
    utility room, the application was submitted as a householder planning application.
    It does not seek to subdivide the appeal site or create a self-contained dwelling.
    Both the bedroom and utility room would be internally accessible from the rest of
    the dwelling. These rooms would not benefit from a separate external access,
    separate parking or separate private amenity space.
14. Ultimately, if the proposal were not built or used as indicated, or if a material
    change of use to a separate dwelling does occur, then a separate grant of
    planning permission would be required. This condition is thus not necessary.
Conclusion
15. The development adheres to the development plan as a whole and there are no
    other considerations that would outweigh this finding. Accordingly, for the reasons
    given, the appeal succeeds.

Ryan Cowley
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
