Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 24 August 2026
by R Gravett BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 15 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011231
Caravan, Gravel Farm, 250 Gravel Lane, Banks PR9 8BY
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     (‘the Act’) against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Ashley Warren against the decision of West Lancashire Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 2026/0042/FUL.
•    The development proposed is change of use of 'Barn A' to dwelling and 'Barn B' to ancillary garage.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for change of use of
       'Barn A' to dwelling and 'Barn B' to ancillary garage at Caravan, Gravel Farm, 250
       Gravel Lane, Banks PR9 8BY in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref
       2026/0042/FUL, and the plans submitted with it, subject to the conditions in the
       attached schedule.
Application for costs
2.     An application for costs was made by Mr Ashley Warren against West Lancashire
       Borough Council. This is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     The address in the banner heading and decision above has been taken from the
       Council’s decision notice as it is more accurate than the one provided on the
       application form and is consistent with the Existing Location Plan.
4.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (“the Framework”) was published in
       August 2026. The Framework is a material consideration of critical importance
       which should be taken into account from the day of publication. The main parties
       have had the opportunity to comment on any implications for the appeal, and I
       have taken comments received into account.
Main Issue
5.     The main issue is whether the proposed development would be in a suitable
       location for housing having regards to its access to local services, facilities and
       public transport, and to the Council’s spatial strategy.
Reasons
6.     The appeal site is located within the Green Belt. However, the Council concluded
       that the proposal would fall within an exception to inappropriate development at
       paragraph 154 of the 2024 version of the Framework. Based on the evidence


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011231


         before me, I have no reason to reach a different conclusion on this matter.
         Therefore, the proposal would not be inappropriate development in the Green Belt.
7.       Policy HO11(1) of the Framework states that proposals for isolated homes in the
         countryside should only be supported where certain circumstances apply. Whether
         a proposed new dwelling is “isolated” is a matter of planning judgement based on
         the circumstances of the case in hand, but policy S5(3) of the Framework refers to
         isolated homes as ‘lying outside settlements or groups of houses.’
8.       It is not in dispute between the parties that the appeal site is not within any of the
         settlements identified in the hierarchy in Policy SP1, and shown on the Policies
         Map, of the West Lancashire Local Plan 2012-2027 DPD (2013) (LP). LP Policy
         SP1 seeks to ensure new development is sustainable in its location and
         accessibility, amongst other provisions. However, the proposal is for the change of
         use of two former agricultural buildings which are located behind 250 Gravel Lane,
         a dwelling, and the new dwelling would form part of a small group of existing
         dwellings on the southern side of this part of Gravel Lane.
9.       The appeal site is only just over 1km from the edge of the nearest settlement of
         Banks, which is on the opposite side of Southport New Road (A565), and is
         identified in the LP as a ‘Key Sustainable Village.’ The walking route to and from
         Banks is slightly circuitous at the roundabout junction between the A565 and
         Gravel Lane, but the pavement is nonetheless continuous, mainly flat, and it
         passes a ribbon of dwellings and a holiday park on one side of Gravel Lane. The
         proposed new dwelling would not therefore be remote from the nearest settlement.
10. For these reasons, in my judgement, the proposal would not be an isolated home,
    and it does not fall to be considered against Framework policies S5(3) and HO11.
11. The closest bus stop to the appeal site is located a short walk away, close to the
    holiday park entrance on Gravel Lane. From here, there is a bus service between
    Chorley and Southport, which runs every two hours Monday to Saturday and the
    route maps1 show opportunities for onward rail connections in Southport, Rufford
    and Chorley. Although further away, there is also a bus stop on Guinea Hall Lane
    on the outskirts of Bank which has a more frequent (typically half hourly) service
    Monday to Saturday, between Liverpool City Centre, Southport and Preston, and
    an hourly service on a Sunday.
12. The distance and narrow pavements may discourage some future occupiers of the
    dwelling from walking to the bus stop on Guinea Hall Lane, and this would
    particularly be the case for families with young children, older people or those with
    mobility issues. However, although the surface quality varies, the pavements are
    well-lit and wide enough to ensure safe and comfortable movement for most
    pedestrians to both bus stops, during both the daytime and evening hours. I do not
    therefore find the topography, route or any physical barriers to be present which
    would prevent or discourage most future occupiers of the proposed dwelling from
    using available public transport, as a genuine alternative to the private car.
13. The nearest facility to the appeal site is a petrol station kiosk which is within
    reasonable walking or cycling distance. However, this sells a limited range of
    goods and would not meet more than a basic or ‘top up’ shop, and it is unlikely to
    meet the day-to-day needs of future occupiers of the dwelling. There is a primary

1
    Appeal Statement of Case - Appendix 2


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6011231


       school, medical centre, pharmacy and convenience store in Banks, but whilst
       regular journeys to these services and facilities would not be lengthy, they would
       most likely be undertaken by car given the distance.
14. Overall, whilst I accept the location of the appeal site would allow trips to be made
    by bus and bicycle, the distance to the nearest services and facilities in Banks
    would mean that future occupiers of the proposed dwelling would be largely reliant
    on the private car to meet their day-to-day needs. Consequently, although I
    conclude that the proposal would not be an isolated home, it would not be a
    suitable location having regards to its limited access to local services and facilities.
15. It would conflict with LP policies SP1 and GN3 where, amongst other things, they
    seek to ensure that new development is sustainable in its location. In so far as it
    conflicts with these policies, it would also conflict with the spatial strategy at LP
    Policy GN1 which requires development proposals in the Green Belt to be
    assessed against national policy and any relevant LP policies.
16. LP Policy RS1 seeks to limit the scale and type of housing development outside
    settlement boundaries, but as it does not refer to the reuse of existing buildings or
    isolated homes, I do not find it to be determinative to this main issue.
Planning Obligation
17. The appeal is supported by a planning obligation in the form of a signed unilateral
    undertaking, dated 12 June 2026, made pursuant to section 106 of the Act (“the
    Planning Obligation”). Consideration of planning obligations is to be undertaken
    having regard to policy DM6(4) of the Framework and the statutory requirements
    contained in Regulation 122 and 123 of the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL)
    Regulations 2010 (“the Regulations”).
18. Under the statutory framework for biodiversity net gain, subject to some
    exceptions, every grant of planning permission is deemed to have been granted
    subject to the condition that a 10% biodiversity gain objective is met. The Planning
    Obligation provides that the dwelling will be constructed and occupied as a self-
    build house as defined in section 1(A1) of the Self-build and Custom
    Housebuilding Act 2015 (as amended), which is one of the exceptions to this
    statutory requirement. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the Planning Obligation
    meets the tests set out in the Framework and the requirements of the Regulations.
Other Matters
19. Matters of whether there has been any unlawful disturbance of bats or Barn Owls
    falls outside the scope of my consideration of the appeal, but I deal with the
    protection of potential Barn Owl nests further below.
Conditions
20. The Council has provided a list of conditions, which I have reviewed in line with
    policy DM6(1) of the Framework and guidance in the Planning Practice Guidance.
    I have also had regard to the conditions suggested by consultees, and where
    appropriate the wording of these has been amended for simplicity and clarity.
21. Conditions specifying the approved plans and a timescale for the commencement
    of the development are necessary in the interests of certainty.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011231


22. Given the proximity of the neighbouring dwelling, a condition requiring a
    Construction Management or Method Statement is reasonable in the interests of
    maintaining amenity and highway safety during the building works.
23. I note that the existing barns have a concrete floor slab, but in the absence of
    construction details, and given the historic agricultural use of the appeal site, a
    condition is required to ensure that contamination is appropriately addressed to
    minimise risks for future occupiers. This is a pre-commencement condition so that
    appropriate investigation is carried out at a very early stage of development.
24. To minimise the risks of flooding, I have imposed conditions which secure flood
    mitigation measures. This is a pre-commencement condition because a
    satisfactory solution could be prejudiced if left to a later stage in the development
    process. For the same reason, I have imposed a condition requiring the
    development to be carried out and maintained strictly in accordance with the
    drainage details approved.
25. In the interests of highway safety, conditions requiring extension/installation of the
    dropped kerb and vehicle cross-over, visibility splays to remain unobstructed, and
    parking and turning areas to be laid out prior to occupation, and thereafter retained
    as such, are necessary and reasonable.
26. Lighting specification details were submitted with the planning application, but the
    location and number of proposed luminaires is not shown on the plans. A condition
    requiring the submission and approval of external lighting is therefore necessary in
    the interests of minimising light pollution, protecting living conditions of neighbours
    and safeguarding local biodiversity.
27. In the interests of nature conservation, a condition requiring the installation of bird
    boxes is necessary. As the nests of wild birds are protected under the Wildlife and
    Countryside Act 1981, a condition restricting the timing of construction works is not
    necessary. However, to mitigate the loss of a potential nest site for Barn Owls I
    have imposed a condition with requires a detailed ‘Barn Owl Mitigation Plan’ to be
    submitted and approved.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
28. Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 requires that
    applications for planning permission must be determined in accordance with the
    development plan unless material considerations indicate otherwise.
29. The Framework is a material consideration of critical importance. Policy S5 of the
    Framework does not apply to development proposals in the Green Belt. However,
    in locations outside settlements, where development would not be inappropriate in
    the Green Belt, it states that proposals should be approved unless the benefits of
    doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, assessed
    against the national decision-making policies and applying policy S5(2).
30. The only adverse effect or harm I have identified relates to the suitability of the
    location for housing given its limited access to local services and facilities. This
    harm attracts weight against the proposal and results in conflict with the Council’s
    spatial strategy and LP Policies SP1, GN1 and GN3.
31. I have no evidence before me that the development proposal would fail to comply
    with one of the national decision-making policies which state that development

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6011231


       proposals should be refused in specific circumstances (policy S5(2)). Nor do I find
       conflict with Policy TR3 of the Framework in so far as it requires that, in rural
       areas, opportunities to improve walking, wheeling, cycling and public transport and
       enhance the connectivity of an area should be taken where they exist.
32. Policy HO7 of the Framework gives substantial weight to the benefits of providing
    homes and whilst I have little evidence that the proposal would meet a need for
    self-build homes in the community, it would nonetheless contribute to housing
    supply in the area. Further, the change of use of the former agricultural barns to a
    new dwelling would make better use of vacant and underutilised land and
    buildings, a benefit to which Policy L2(1) of the Framework requires substantial
    weight be given. On balance, I conclude that these benefits would not be
    substantially outweighed by the adverse effect identified above.
33. For the reasons given, the proposed development would conflict with the
    development plan but material considerations, including the Framework, indicate
    that a decision should be made other than in accordance with it. I therefore
    conclude that the appeal should be allowed.

R Gravett
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6011231


Schedule of Conditions

1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the date
   of this decision.

2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
   following approved plans:

     1217_200 Existing Location Plan
     1217_202 Proposed Site Plan
     1217_203 Proposed Boundary Treatments
     1217_206 Barn A – Proposed GA Plans & Elevations
     1217_208 Barn B – Proposed GA Plans & Elevations
     1217_212 Proposed Site Sections

3) No development shall take place, including any works of demolition or site
   clearance, until a Construction Management Plan (CMP) or Construction Method
   Statement (CMS) has been submitted to, and approved in writing by the Local
   Planning Authority. The approved CMP or CMS shall be adhered to throughout the
   duration of the development.

4) No development shall take place until an assessment of the risks posed by any
   contamination, carried out in accordance with British Standard BS 10175:
   Investigation of potentially contaminated sites - Code of Practice and the
   Environment Agency‚ Land Contamination Risk Management (LCRM) (or
   equivalent British Standard and Model Procedures if replaced), has been submitted
   to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. If any contamination is
   found, no development shall take place until:

     i. a report specifying the measures to be taken, including the timescale, to
     remediate the site to render it suitable for the development hereby permitted has
     been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority;
     ii. the site has been remediated in accordance with the approved measures and
     timescale; and
     iii. a verification report has been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
     Planning Authority.

     If, during the course of development, any contamination is found which has not
     been previously identified, work shall be suspended until:

     i. additional measures for the remediation of the site have been carried out in
     accordance with details that shall first have been submitted to and approved in
     writing by the Local Planning Authority; and
     ii. a verification report for all the remediation works has been submitted to and
     approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.

5) No development shall take place until a detailed design of the flood mitigation
   measures as identified in the Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) by Townsend Water
   Limited (referenced: FD235, Version 1, dated 27 October 2025) including a flood
   warning scheme and evacuation plan, has been submitted to and approved in
   writing by the Local Planning Authority.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6011231




6) No development shall take place until a detailed Barn Owl Mitigation Plan, in line
   with 8.0 of the submitted Ecological Appraisal carried out by Simply Ecology
   Limited, September 2025 (Ref. AWQ004/03) has been submitted to and approved
   in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The Mitigation Plan shall give details of
   the type, location, management and maintenance of the pre- and post-works
   nesting boxes/lofts and the timings of installation. The development shall be carried
   out in accordance with the plan and post-works nesting boxes/lofts retained
   thereafter.

7) Prior to first occupation of the dwelling hereby permitted, a dropped kerb shall be
   extended and installed at the carriageway edge and a vehicle cross-over
   constructed across the footway (and/or verge) fronting the site in accordance with
   the Lancashire County Council Specification for Construction of Estate Roads. The
   dropped kerb and vehicle cross-over shall thereafter be retained as such.

8) Prior to first occupation of the dwelling hereby permitted, the parking and turning
   areas shown on 1217_202 Proposed Site Plan shall be surfaced or paved in
   accordance with a scheme to be submitted to, and approved in writing, by the Local
   Planning Authority. The areas shall thereafter be always kept free of obstruction
   and available for the parking and/or turning of vehicles.

9) Prior to first occupation of the dwelling hereby permitted, details of the number,
   type, location and timing of the installation of other bird nesting boxes to be
   incorporated into the scheme have been submitted to, and approved in writing, by
   the Local Planning Authority. The bird boxes shall be installed in accordance with
   the agreed timing and shall be retained thereafter.

10) The development hereby approved shall be carried out and maintained for the
    lifetime of the development as per the following documents and plans:

     Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) by Townsend Water Limited (referenced: FD235,
     Version 1, dated 27 October 2025)
     Drainage Strategy Report by Gadsden Consulting (referenced: 25446, dated 21
     November 1015)
     Drainage Layout by Gadsden Consulting (drawing no. 25446-GAD-00-00-DR-C
     1000-P01)
     Drainage Details by Gadsden Consulting (drawing no. 25446-GAD-00-00-DR-C
     1070-P01)

11) Nothing shall be erected, retained, planted and/or allowed to grow at or above a
    height of 0.9 metres above the nearside carriageway level which would obstruct the
    visibility splay shown on 25MAY002/15/003 - Site Access Strategy. The visibility
    splays shall be always maintained free of obstruction for the lifetime of the
    development.

12) Prior to installation, details of any external lighting shall be submitted to and
    approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The lighting shall then be
    installed in accordance with the approved details and retained as such thereafter.

*End of Schedule*


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
