 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 17 August 2026
 By SJ Desai BSc MSc MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 1 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011863
 68 Barnes Avenue, Barnes, Richmond Upon Thames, London SW13 9AJ.
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by William Christopher Byrne against the decision of the Council of the London
      Borough of Richmond Upon Thames.
 •    The application Ref is PA26/1033.
 •    The development proposed is part single / part double storey extension.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for part single / part
   double storey extension at 68 Barnes Avenue, Barnes, Richmond Upon Thames,
   London SW13 9AJ in accordance with the terms of the application, Reference
   PA26/1033 and the plans submitted with it, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: KTD-01, KTD-02, KTD-03 REV A and KTD-99
              Fire Safety Statement.
     3)       The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
              development hereby permitted shall match those used in the existing
              building.
     4)       The roof area of the extension hereby permitted shall not be used as a
              balcony, roof garden or similar amenity area.
Preliminary Matter
2. A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
   August 2026. However, I am satisfied that the policy approach relevant to this
   appeal has not fundamentally changed and that no party has been prejudiced by its
   publication. Accordingly, I have had regard to the current version of the Framework
   in reaching my decision.
3. The appellant submitted revised drawings with the appeal to correct a discrepancy
   between the floor plans and elevations concerning the arrangement of an existing
   rear window and door. The change does not alter the scale, form or siting of the
   proposed extension or the matters which led to the Council's refusal. I am satisfied
   that no party would be prejudiced by my consideration of these drawings and I have
   determined the appeal on that basis.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6011863


Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
   appearance of the host dwelling and the surrounding area.
Reasons
5. The appeal property is a two-storey semi-detached dwelling located within an
   established residential area. It occupies an irregularly shaped plot close to the
   junction of Barnes Avenue and Verdun Road. The neighbouring dwelling at 86
   Verdun Road (No.86) is positioned at an angle to the appeal property, reflecting the
   different alignment of the two streets.
6. The proposal comprises a part single and part two-storey extension to the side of
   the dwelling. The Council raises no objection to the single-storey element, which is
   substantially the same as development previously granted planning permission.
   Based on the evidence before me I see no reason to disagree.
7. The first-floor element would be approximately 3m wide at the front and would be
   set back around 0.75m from the original front elevation. Its ridge would also be
   approximately 0.4m below that of the existing dwelling. The extension would initially
   be set approximately 0.75m from the side boundary. However, because the
   boundary splays towards the dwelling, it would meet and follow the boundary
   towards the rear.
8. The Council's House Extensions and External Alterations Local Plan
   Supplementary Planning Document (2015) (the SPD) advises that two-storey side
   extensions should normally be positioned at least 1m from the side boundary and
   that development which significantly reduces an important space or gap between
   neighbouring houses will not normally be acceptable. The proposal would not
   accord fully with this guidance. However, the SPD is guidance and the proposal
   must be assessed having regard to the particular characteristics of the site and its
   effects on the host dwelling and surrounding area.
9. The relationship between the appeal property and No.86 is unusual. The properties
   address different streets and are not positioned parallel to one another. The
   splayed boundary and differing building alignments mean that the proposed first-
   floor extension would not directly align with No.86. A visible separation would also
   remain towards the front of the site, where the relationship would be most apparent
   from the street. In these circumstances, I do not consider that the proposal would
   result in the two properties appearing joined or give rise to a harmful terracing
   effect. The possibility that No. 86 might itself be extended in the future does not
   alter my finding.
10. The proposal would reduce the existing gap with No.86 and would not maintain the
    separation sought by the SPD for the full depth of the first-floor extension.
    However, because of the orientation of the buildings, views towards this space from
    Barnes Avenue and Verdun Road are principally oblique and relatively limited.
    Moreover, the open and verdant character around the junction is more readily
    defined by the highway verges, trees and other vegetation than by the space
    between these particular dwellings. Given these site-specific circumstances, I am
    satisfied that the harm which the SPD guidance seeks to avoid would not arise.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      2
 Appeal Decision 6011863


11. The appeal property forms a semi-detached pair with 66 Barnes Avenue. The
    extension would be positioned on the opposite side of the dwelling and, given its
    set back and lower ridge, would remain subordinate to the host building.
    Consequently, it would not materially undermine the appearance or legibility of the
    semi-detached pair.
12. Overall, I conclude that the proposal would not harm the character or appearance
    of the host dwelling or the surrounding area. As such, the proposal would accord
    with Policy 28 of the Richmond upon Thames Local Plan ‘The best for our borough’
    - 2024 to 2039 (2025) which, amongst other things, seeks to ensure that
    development is compatible with local character. For the same reasons, the
    proposal accords with overall design objectives of the SPD.
Conditions
13. The Council has suggested a number of conditions which I have considered having
    regard to the tests of policy DM6 of the Framework and advice in the Planning
    Practice Guidance. In addition to the statutory time limit, a condition specifying the
    approved plans is necessary to provide certainty. As the submitted Fire Safety
    Statement is included within the approved documents secured by that condition, a
    separate condition requiring compliance with it is unnecessary. A condition
    requiring external materials to match the existing dwelling is necessary in the
    interests of character and appearance. A condition, with wording amended for
    clarity, restricting the use of the roof area of the extension is necessary in the
    interests of protecting the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers.
14. A condition relating to non-road mobile machinery is not necessary or
    proportionate, having regard to the limited scale and nature of the development. I
    have not included the Council's suggested informatives as they largely relate to
    matters governed by other legislation or provide general advice and are not
    necessary for the determination or implementation of this appeal.
Conclusion
15. For the reasons given above, having taken account of the development plan as a
    whole, along with all other relevant material considerations, the appeal should be
    allowed.

SJ Desai
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
