Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 August 2026 by Ellie Nutman BA (Hons)
Decision by B Plenty BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 8 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011155
Isles House, Arbory Drive, Padiham, Lancashire BB12 8JS
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Adam Sykes against the decision of Burnley Borough Council.
•   The application Ref is HOU/2026/0002.
•   The development proposed is wooden garden shed in South-East corner of the garden.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for wooden garden shed
   in South-East corner of the garden at Isles House, Arbory Drive, Padiham,
   Lancashire BB12 8JS, in accordance with the submitted details and the ‘Images of
   Garden Shed’ document.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. For conciseness I have taken the description of development from the Council’s
   decision notice, however I have removed the term retrospective from the
   description as this is not a form of development. The development I observed on
   site appears to largely reflect the plans and description of development.
4. As the proposal is in a conservation area and relates to a listed building, I have had
   special regard to sections 66(1) and 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
   Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act).
5. A Revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
   17 August 2026. There have been some layout and subsequent paragraph
   numbering changes, as well as minor relevant alterations to the ways in which
   heritage matters are considered. I am however satisfied that, having reviewed the
   relevant changes, they do not have a material bearing on the substance of the main
   issue or indeed the arguments of the main parties thereon. Since they would not
   therefore be prejudiced, I have proceeded without further consultation.


Main Issue
6. The main issues of the development are;

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011155


    •    its effect on the setting of the nearby Grade II listed building, Isles House, and
         the extent to which it preserves or enhances the character or appearance of the
         Padiham Conservation Area (CA).
    •    its effect on the nearby non-designated heritage asset (NDHA) 90 West Street
         (No 90).
Reasons for the Recommendation
Conservation Area & Setting of Listed Building
7. The significance of the CA derives from the harmony created by its traditional
   materials, fine-grained townscape, cheek-by-jowl development pattern and the
   relative intactness of its historic built environment, which together allow the area's
   historic evolution to be readily understood and appreciated. West Street is
   characterised by a row of uniform cottages with modest front gardens. Opposite,
   the rear gardens and courtyards of properties on Whalley Road, together with their
   boundary walls, gates and occasional garages or outbuildings, are visible within
   this part of the conservation area.
8. Isles House was listed in 1990 (Ref: 1273919) and dates from the 19th century. I
   find that the special interest of the listed building derives from the dwelling’s grand
   principal elevation due to its symmetrical fenestration layout with a central entrance
   and its relationship with the street scene. The substantial and formalised garden
   area which fronts West Street forms an important component of the listed building's
   setting, allowing its scale, architectural composition and status to be appreciated
   from the public realm. Whilst the principal elevation is highly visible from the street
   scene, the garden area itself is enclosed by a stone wall which substantially
   screens views into the garden area when viewed from West Street.
9. Although the shed is partially visible above the boundary wall, ancillary domestic
   structures, garages, outbuildings and enclosed garden spaces already form part of
   the character of this section of West Street. As such, the development is viewed
   within a context where small-scale domestic development is an established feature.
   Given its modest scale, traditional timber construction and limited visibility, it does
   not appear discordant within the street scene, nor does it disrupt the established
   grain, enclosure or spatial character of the conservation area.
10. As set out above, the top half of the shed structure is visible from West Street.
    Whilst the upper part of the shed is visible from West Street, it does not
    automatically mean there is harm to the listed building or conservation area. The
    structure is of simple and typical domestic design and materials, and the dark
    colour lessens its visibility and prominence under the shadowy canopy of trees and
    the surrounding foliage. It therefore appears as a subordinate feature within the
    garden rather than a structure competing with or distracting from the appreciation of
    the listed building. It does not interrupt key views of the principal elevation or
    diminish the ability to appreciate the building's architectural qualities and historic
    relationship with the street. Consequently, the proposal has a neutral effect and
    preserves the significance of the listed building and its setting, and the listed
    building continues to make a positive contribution to the CA.
11. Whilst domestic outbuildings are more commonly positioned to the rear of
    dwellings, Isles House occupies an uncommon plot arrangement whereby access
    is taken from the rear of the site, via Arbory Drive, and visitors reach the principal

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011155


     elevation by passing through the front garden. Consequently, whilst the garden
     makes a positive contribution to the setting of the listed building and the
     appreciation of its significance, it also functions as the property's principal private
     amenity space. In these circumstances, I do not find the presence of a modest
     domestic outbuilding, within the garden, to be inherently inappropriate. Given its
     modest scale, limited visibility and subordinate appearance, the shed does not
     detract from the formal character of the garden or the positive contribution it makes
     to the setting and significance of the listed building and CA. The use of the shed for
     the storage of equipment associated with the maintenance of the garden further
     supports its appropriateness in this location.
12. Given the above I conclude that the proposal preserves the setting of the Grade II
    listed building and the character and appearance of the Padiham Conservation
    Area. This satisfies the requirements of the Act, and accords with policies HE5,
    HE6 and HE9 of the Framework and policy HE2 of the Burnley Local Plan
    (2018)(LP). Collectively, these require that development affecting Conservation
    Area’s and Listed Building’s to maintain the aspects of the setting which contribute
    to its significance, including views into and out of it and the general relationship
    between the asset and the character of the surrounding landscape or townscape.
Non-Designated Heritage Asset
13. The adjacent neighbour is No 90, which is a NDHA as it is included within the
    Council’s Local List. Its significance derives from its cottage like appearance and its
    uniformity within a row of other cottages, and the modest, and open front garden
    areas that serve each dwelling. Policy HE7 of the Framework relates to NDHA, and
    requires that where harm is identified, it is weighed against any benefits of the
    scheme.
14. Whilst the development is seen within the context of the NDHA, its modest scale,
    simple domestic appearance and limited projection above the boundary wall
    ensures that the cottage-like character, form and uniformity of No 90 together with
    the group of historic dwellings remain readily appreciable. As such, the proposal
    neither detracts from the significance of the non-designated heritage asset nor
    diminishes its contribution to the character of the surrounding area.
15. Therefore, the development does not appear prominent or incongruous within the
    street scene and has a neutral effect on the NDHA. It does not prevent the cottage
    from being appreciated or maintained, and therefore I have not identified any harm
    in this regard, which satisfies the requirements of Policy HE7 of the Framework,
    and accords with LP policy HE3 which requires that proposals affecting the setting
    of a non-designated heritage asset will be required to give due consideration to its
    significance and ensure that this is protected or enhanced where possible.
Other Matters
16. Concern has been raised that the development causes overshadowing, loss of
    sunlight and increased disturbance to neighbouring properties. Whilst limited
    shadowing may occur at certain times of day, I have not been provided with
    detailed evidence to demonstrate that the development results in a material loss of
    daylight or sunlight. Furthermore, the outbuilding is used for incidental domestic
    purposes and there is nothing to suggest that its use results in materially greater
    levels of noise or disturbance than would ordinarily be expected within a residential
    environment.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011155


17. The occupiers of No 90 state that they are responsible for maintaining the gable
    wall and that the development restricts access for inspection and repair. Whilst I
    acknowledge these concerns, issues relating to private rights, covenants,
    obligations contained within title deeds and access arrangements between
    neighbouring landowners are civil matters and do not, in themselves, determine
    whether planning permission should be granted. In any event, my observations on
    site demonstrated that a gap remains between the structures to facilitate
    maintenance.
18. Whether this gap results in a reduction of daylight reaching the gable wall of No 90,
    potentially resulting in moss growth and potential moisture ingress, is unclear and
    no detailed evidence has been submitted to demonstrate that this is a likely
    consequence of the development. On the evidence before me, I am unable to
    conclude that the development would result in such harm.
19. I have also not been provided with any evidence to demonstrate that there is real
    potential fire risk associated with the timber structure. In any case fire safety and
    compliance with Building Regulations are controlled under separate legislation.
20. Regarding the planting of laurel trees, I have not been provided with evidence
    demonstrating that the planting would result in planning harm. Any future
    maintenance of planting would remain a matter for the landowner.
Conclusion and Recommendation
21. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I
    recommend that the appeal should be allowed.

Ellie Nutman
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
22. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed.

B Plenty
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
