Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 26 August 2026
by E Everitt BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 07 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011719
Raynards Rest, Willis Lane, Four Marks, Alton, Hampshire GU34 5AP
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the
     Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•    The appeal is made by Mrs D Timms against the decision of East Hampshire District Council.
•    The application Ref is EHDC-25-1438-PAQ3A.
•    The development proposed is change of use of agricultural building to dwelling.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    The description of development set out above is taken from the Council’s decision
      notice as no description was provided on the application form. It is consistent with
      the description used by the appellant on the appeal form. I do not consider that this
      has prejudiced any of the parties and I have proceeded with the appeal on this
      basis.
3.    Within their appeal submission, the appellant provided additional information
      relating to the historic use of the appeal site. The Council has been given the
      opportunity to provide comments on this information. I have had regard to the
      comments received and have considered the proposal in light of the submitted
      information.
Background and Main Issue
4.    Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted
      Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) (the GDPO) permits
      development consisting of a change of use of a building that is or was (but is no
      longer) part of an established agricultural unit and any land within that building’s
      curtilage to a use falling within Class C3 (dwellinghouses) of Schedule 1 to the
      Use Classes Order, together with building operations reasonably necessary to
      convert the building to a use falling within Class C3 (dwellinghouses) of that
      Schedule or to extend that building.
5.    Paragraph Q.1 of Class Q sets out a number of technical limitations and
      restrictions. This includes restrictions which apply depending on when a site
      formed part of an established agricultural unit, with restrictions for buildings
      currently and formerly part of established agricultural units set out in Q.1(a) and
      Q.1(b) respectively.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011719


6.    The submitted application form indicates that the appeal site is currently part of an
      established agricultural unit. However, the appellant’s Statement of Case indicates
      that Q.1(b) is relevant as the building is a former agricultural building. Irrespective
      of this discrepancy, the Council argues that insufficient information has been
      provided to demonstrate that the existing building and site has formed part of an
      established agricultural unit.
7.    Accordingly, the main issue is whether the proposal would be permitted
      development under Class Q.
Reasons
8.    An agricultural building is defined in Schedule 2, Part 3, paragraph X of the GPDO
      as a building (excluding a dwellinghouse) used for agriculture which is so used for
      the purposes of a trade or business. ‘Agricultural use’ refers to such uses. An
      ‘established agricultural unit’ for the purposes of the GPDO is defined as
      agricultural land occupied as a unit for the purposes of agriculture, for the
      purposes of Class Q, on or before 20th March 2013 or for 10 years before the date
      the development begins.
9.    The appeal site consists of a building located within an enclosed parcel of land.
      The information before me indicates that the site comprises part of a former
      smallholding purchased by the appellant in 2015, at which time the remainder of
      the agricultural land previously used by Mr E Stainer as part of a calf rearing
      enterprise until the mid-1990s, and subsequently as a smallholding, was sold off
      separately to another local farmer. It is understood that the site has sat effectively
      unused for some time, with the building previously used as an agricultural
      workshop redundant from an agricultural use since about 2018/19, although the
      appellant has continued basic site maintenance.
10. The appellant has submitted statements and statutory declarations provided by a
    relative of Mr Stainer and two of his former customers. From this evidence, it is
    clear that the building was formerly in agricultural use in accordance with the
    definition within the GPDO on and before 20th March 2013. A copy of a Record of
    Movements of Animals associated with Mr Stainer has also been shared which
    provides evidence of agricultural trade activities, albeit this document refers to the
    address of Mr Stainer rather than where his cattle were kept.
11. Notwithstanding the above, the evidence before me does not demonstrate that the
    building and site formed part of an established agricultural unit, as is required by
    Class Q. Indeed, the evidence does not provide me with any clear definition of the
    location or extent of what the appellant considers to be the former established
    agricultural unit or give me a clear indication as to how the appeal site formed part
    of that unit. Therefore, in the absence of any substantive evidence, such as land
    ownership information or agricultural holding records, I cannot be certain that the
    site previously formed part of an established agricultural unit.
12. I acknowledge that there does not need to be a tenancy agreement in place to
    comply with the requirements of Class Q and that the use of Ranch Farm is not
    directly relevant to the use of the appeal site, given separate historic ownership. I
    also acknowledge that it is not unreasonable to expect that the physical
    characteristics of the site and surrounding area would have changed since the
    agricultural use ended and the land was sold to separate owners. Nevertheless,


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011719


      these matters do not overcome the lack of evidence demonstrating that the site
      previously formed part of an established agricultural unit.
13. Schedule 2, Part 3, Paragraph W(3) of the GPDO sets out that the decision maker
    may refuse a prior approval application where the proposed development does not
    comply with, or the developer has provided insufficient information to enable the
    authority to establish whether the proposed development complies with, any
    conditions, limitations or restrictions specified as being applicable to the
    development in question.
14. For the reasons set out above, I have not been provided with sufficient information
    to enable me to establish that the proposal would comply with the requirements of
    paragraph Q.1(b). Consequently, I am unable to conclude that the proposal would
    be permitted development under Class Q.
Other Matters
15. In light of my findings above, matters relating to whether the development would
    consist of building operations other than those reasonably necessary for the
    building to function as a dwellinghouse and the conditions suggested by the
    Council are not determinative.
Conclusion
16. For the reasons given above, the appeal should be dismissed.

E Everitt
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
