 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 7 August 2026
 by B J Sims BSc (Hons) CEng MICE MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date:19 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011759
 10 Ilmington Road, Brent, HA3 0NH
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Dr Amit Shah against the decision of Brent London Borough Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/0134.
 •    The development proposed is demolition of side garage and utility room and erection of two-storey
      side-to-rear extension, 2 No side dormer window extensions, extension to existing rear dormer
      window and installation of 1 No front rooflight to dwellinghouse.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed
Procedural Matter
2. The application was refused on the basis of a series of drawings listed on the
   refusal notice and duly submitted in connection with this appeal. These indicate a
   proposed roof height in excess of that of the existing house and a proposed first
   floor layout showing Bedroom 3 illuminated by an obscure-glazed side window.
3. The appeal statement submitted on behalf of the Appellant is based upon a
   reduction to the proposed roof height, an amended first-floor bedroom layout and
   revised foundations where they would be close to a neighbouring tree, together
   with an offer to make further amendments to the dimensions of the two proposed
   side dormers.
4. It is fundamental to the appeal process, following the refusal of the fully detailed
   application, that material amendments of this kind cannot be considered at the
   appeal stage, having not hitherto been subject to public consultation. This appeal
   can only proceed on the basis of the scheme formally considered in detail and
   refused by the Council. That is the approach I must take in this decision.
5. Irrespective of the outcome of this appeal, the question of whether an amended
   scheme might be acceptable would be a matter for a fresh planning application to
   the Council.
Main Issue
6. Having regard to the details refused by the Council and properly for consideration
   in this appeal, I consider the main issue to be the effects the first floor of the side-
   to-rear extension and the dormer extensions to the roof would have on the
   character and appearance of the appeal property in its street context.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6011759


Reasons
Character and Appearance
7. Policies DMP1 and BD1 of the adopted Brent Local Plan (BLP) seek high-quality
   design for all built development, supported by a Residential Extensions and
   Alterations Supplementary Planning Document (REA SPD). This includes the
   advice that roof extensions should not exceed the ridge height of the existing main
   dwelling and that any roof extensions should complement the existing roof with
   dormers set at least 0.2m above the eaves height.
8. I share the views of the Council that the loss of the present side garage and the
   construction of the single-storey ground floor elements of the proposed built
   additions to No 10 Ilmington Road would be unobjectionable in terms of the
   foregoing policies and guidance.
9. Like the Council, my chief concern lies with the first and second floor elements of
   the side and rear extensions and dormers, as proposed in the original application.
10. The hipped roof of the first floor of the side to rear extension would raise the roof
    some 0.5m above the present main ridge level, strictly contrary to the REA SPD.
11. Although the side and extended rear dormers would be set up from the eaves and
    down from the raised ridge, that on the side facing No 8 would reduce the space at
    roof level between Nos 8 and 10, replacing two existing slender chimney stacks.
12. In my view, these additions would cumulatively cause the roof of No 10 to appear
    excessively bulky, giving the house a top-heavy appearance, especially when
    viewed from the street. The roof additions would thus be disproportionate and
    harmful to the present form of No 10 itself and, in turn, would appear incongruous
    and detrimental to the street frontage of Ilminster Road, which currently exhibits a
    relatively harmonious character and appearance.
13. For this reason, I consider that the proposed development would be unacceptably
    contrary to Polices DMP1 and BD1 of the BLP in terms of its architectural design
    and that this alone warrants dismissal of the appeal.
Other Matters
Trees
14. The Council cites, as its second reason for refusal, concern over the wellbeing of a
    mature tree at No 8 Ilmington Road, which stands close to the boundary with
    No 10, such that it is likely that its roots would be vulnerable to the excavation and
    construction works necessary for the proposed side and rear extensions. There is
    no evidence, in the proposal subject to appeal, to indicate that this tree would be
    protected by appropriate foundation measures.
15. While such measures might be secured by a planning condition, given that the tree
    is not protected by Order, the appeal proposals are not strictly compliant with BLP
    Policy BG12, which protects trees from the effects of development and requires a
    tree survey where nearby trees may be affected.
16. Given my finding above with respect to the main issue of character and
    appearance, I make no further reference to the matter of the adjacent tree.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
 Appeal Decision 6011759


Residential Amenity
17. Concerns are raised by the resident of No 8 Ilmington Road regarding the effects of
    the proposed extension on natural light reaching that property and on its outlook
    and privacy. However, for the same reasons as set out by the Council, I do not
    consider that the nearest single-story part of the extension nor the more distant roof
    extensions would have any such harmful effects.
18. I note that facing windows are proposed to be fixed shut and obscure-glazed to
    safeguard privacy. However, that would adversely affect the amenity of Bedroom 3
    and this factor also weighs against the appeal.
Conclusion
19. For the overriding reason of harm to the character and appearance of No 10 and
    the street scene of Ilmington Road, contrary to development plan and national
    policy, I reach the conclusion that this appeal should be dismissed.



B J Sims
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
