 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 5 August 2026
 by N McGurk BSc (Hons) MCD MBA MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 28 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011502
 2 Wheatley Lane, Ilkley, West Yorkshire, LS29 8BS
 •   The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 against a refusal to grant express consent.
 •   The appeal is made by EG on the Move against the decision of the City of Bradford Metropolitan
     District Council.
 •   The application Ref is 26/00783/ADV.
 •   The advertisement proposed is a 5 metre high internally illuminated totem sign.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. The application follows an earlier proposal for a totem sign at the site, refused
   under Ref 25/02670/ADV.
Main Issue
3. The main issue in this case is the effect of the proposed advertisement on visual
   amenity, having regard to the character and appearance of the surrounding area.
Reasons
4. The appeal site forms part of a drive-through coffee shop with electric vehicle
   charging bays, on a corner plot at the junction of the A65 (Leeds Road) and
   Wheatley Lane (B6382), on the northern edge of Ben Rhydding, Ilkley. A petrol
   filling station adjoins the site to the west. Residential properties lie on the opposite
   side of Wheatley Lane to the east, with open playing fields to the south. The site is
   not within a Conservation Area, nor is it in the setting of a Listed Building or subject
   to any other heritage designation.
5. The surrounding area has a mixed character, combining roadside commercial uses,
   including the adjoining petrol filling station, with detached, terraced and semi-
   detached housing along Wheatley Lane. Notwithstanding this mix of uses, the site
   sits within the immediate residential setting formed by the housing along Wheatley
   Lane which faces towards the appeal site.
6. The proposed sign would be a 5 metre high internally illuminated totem, sited in the
   north-west corner of the site. It would include a large, 1.8m diameter, branded
   illuminated sign to the top, a non-illuminated directional sign beneath that and a
   further illuminated sign advertising electric vehicle charging prices lower down.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
    Appeal Decision 6011502


7. The sign would occupy a prominent and elevated position within the site and would
   be visible from residential frontages along Wheatley Lane.
8. Immediately to the west of the appeal site, the petrol filling station has an existing,
   previously approved illuminated totem sign of a larger scale than that proposed.
   However, I consider this to be an isolated, historic feature confined to the petrol
   station plot itself, rather than a fair reflection of the character of commercial signage
   across the wider locality.
9. During my site visit, I observed that, away from this single adjoining feature,
   commercial signage within the wider locality along Wheatley Lane and its
   approaches is generally modest, understated and muted in scale and illumination.
10. Notwithstanding the presence of the single, larger totem at the adjoining petrol
    station, I find that the appeal sign, in its prominent and elevated position, would
    appear disproportionate and discordant against the generally more low-key
    commercial signage in the wider locality. The harm arising would be exacerbated
    as a result of the tall, wide, illuminated “Starbucks halo” at the top of the tall pole
    affording the sign an unbalanced and “top-heavy” appearance.
11. Whilst the sign would be located on the opposite side of the site from the residential
    properties on Wheatley Lane, I find that its height, elevated siting, illumination and
    discordant appearance would combine to result in it appearing as a prominent and
    incongruous feature, drawing the eye from a variety of locations, including from
    these nearby dwellings.
12. Further, whilst I note that the appeal sign would perform the functions of providing
    directional information and advertising the price of electric vehicle charging, I
    consider that its overall scale, design and prominence would add materially to the
    overall visual presence of signage that already exists, leading it to appear as visual
    clutter and further compounding the harm identified above.
13. Taking all of the above into account, I find that the proposed advertisement would
    be detrimental to visual amenity, contrary to the National Planning Policy
    Framework1 which amongst other things, seeks to protect local character.
Other Matters
14. In support of its case, the appellant refers to economic and operational benefits
    including the display of electric vehicle charging prices and support for the site’s
    economic viability. However, these and any other benefits arising do not outweigh
    the harm identified.
15. I note Ilkley Town Council’s comments in respect of Policy INDP19 of the Ilkley
    Neighbourhood Development Plan, which forms part of the adopted Development
    Plan, and which is not supportive of internally illuminated signs.
Conclusion
16. For the reasons given above, the appeal does not succeed.

N McGurk
INSPECTOR
1
    National Planning Policy Framework (December 2024), paragraph 141.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                   2
