 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 27 August 2026
 by D J Barnes MBA BSc(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date:11 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011347
 1A Hawkins Lane, Burton upon Trent, Staffordshire DE14 1PT
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by K Huson against the decision of East Staffordshire Borough Council.
 •    The application Ref is P/2026/00097.
 •    The development proposed is the erection of security fence and gates.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the erection of
   security fence and gates at 1A Hawkins Lane, Burton upon Trent, Staffordshire
   DE14 1PT in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref P/2026/00097,
   subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: 2522/01A Site Plan Existing; 2522/02A Site
              Plan Proposed and 2522/03 Site Location Plan.
Procedural Matter
2. The revised National Planning Policy Framework was published in August 2026 but
   does not raise any new matters which affect the assessment of this appeal
   scheme.
Main Issue
3. It is considered that the main issue is the effect of the proposed development on
   the character and appearance of the surrounding area, in particular the
   streetscene.
Reasons
4. The proposed development includes the erection of a 2.4 metre high “V mesh”
   security fence with a gate enclosing an area of land used for the display of vehicles
   for sale. The appeal site is situated close to a busy traffic light controlled junction
   around which there are a mix of commercial and residential properties, including
   127 Horninglow Road which is a Listed Building in a poor physical condition.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6011347


5. The council has not identified that the proposed fence would cause harm to the
   heritage significance of this designated heritage asset, whether to the building
   itself, its setting or any features of special architectural or historic interest. When
   considering the statutory duty associated with Listed Buildings, there are no
   reasons to disagree with the council’s assessment concerning the lack of heritage
   harm which would be caused by the proposed development.
6. On the opposite side of Hawkins Lane is a parking and transport yard associated
   with the Molson Coors Brewery which is enclosed by a palisade metal fence.
   Although, this fence is set back from the footway to the rear of grass strips and the
   boundary supplemented by mature planting, it is a visually conspicuous feature
   within the streetscene.
7. Elsewhere along this part of Hawkins Lane the front boundaries include low brick
   walls, including at the appeal site, and a chain link fence. The 2-storey front
   elevations of some of the near-by dwellings abut the rear of the footway. To the
   north of the dwellings and the Brewery there are commercial buildings with a mix of
   fences and low walls defining their front boundaries.
8. The appellant has referred to other schemes where fencing has been approved by
   the council. However, no details about the locations and planning circumstances of
   these other schemes have been provided. Accordingly, these other schemes can
   only be given limited weight in the determination of this appeal.
9. The council’s East Staffordshire Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document
   (SPD) guidance refers to boundaries providing an adequate level of security for the
   development, which does not undermine the character of the area. As claimed by
   the appellant, “V mesh” fencing would be of light weight construction and there
   would be views through the fence. From medium and longer distant viewpoints, the
   fence would not be a visually intrusive feature within the streetscene. The parked
   vehicles would remain the dominant visual features.
10. Closer to the appeal site the proposed fence would become a more obvious feature
    within the streetscene. However, the appeal scheme would not be so conspicuous
    so as to be a visually dominant feature within the streetscene or the wider
    surrounding area. There would still be views into the site and the vehicles parked
    on-site would still remain the visually dominant features within the streetscene. The
    visually prominent feature within the streetscene would remain the palisade fence
    associated with the Brewery.
11. Although there would be some harm caused to the character and appearance of
    the streetscene associated with the siting and design of the proposed fence, the
    degree of harm would not be so significant to justify this appeal failing, particularly
    within the context of the mixed use area within which the site is located. The
    character and appearance of the surrounding area would not be undermined and
    the appeal scheme would not visually be a highly fortified boundary.
12. For the reasons given, it is concluded that the proposed development would not
    cause unacceptable harm to the character and appearance of the surrounding
    area, in particular the streetscene, and, as such, there would not be a conflict with
    Strategic Policy 24 and Detailed Policy 1 of the East Staffordshire Local Plan.
    These are general design policies which include reference to development
    responding positively to the context of the surrounding area.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         2
 Appeal Decision 6011347


     Conditions
13. The council has suggested conditions in the event that this appeal succeeds which
    have been assessed against the tests identified in the National Planning Policy
    Framework and the Planning Practice Guidance. For reasons of clarity, a condition
    is necessary to identify the approved drawings. Accordingly, it is concluded that
    this appeal should be allowed.



D J Barnes
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     3
