Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by Graham Wraight BA(Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 15 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011330
Land and buildings to the south of Cowley Lane, Dronfield, S18 7UR
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Lana Beatson against the decision of North East Derbyshire District Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01050/OL.
•    The development proposed is demolition of existing equestrian buildings and replacement with a new
     dwelling with matters of appearance, scale and layout (custom and self-build scheme)

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A new version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published on 17 August 2026 and I have referred to that revised document in my
       determination of this appeal. I am satisfied that the parts of the Framework most
       relevant to this appeal have not substantively changed from the previous iteration
       and therefore I have not sought comments from the main parties. Reference to
       valued landscapes has been removed from the new Framework and consequently
       I have not addressed the Council’s case in that regard.
3.     I have used the description of development given on the decision notice, as it is
       evident from the submissions made by the appellant that the description was
       amended during the course of the planning application to reflect the fact that the
       matters of appearance, scale and layout were ultimately being considered at
       outline stage. I have made my assessment of the appeal on that basis, with
       reference to the plans submitted where they refer to matters which are not
       reserved.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are:
     (i)      Whether the proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt
              having regard to the Framework and relevant development plan policies;
     (ii)     The effect of the proposal on the purposes of the Green Belt;
     (iii)    The effect of the proposal on the landscape; and
     (iv)     Whether any harm by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm,
              would be clearly outweighed by other considerations, so as to amount to the
              very special circumstances required to justify the proposal.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011330


Reasons
Whether inappropriate development
5.      Policy GB7 of the Framework sets out categories of development which are not
        inappropriate in the Green Belt. This includes at GB7e ‘the redevelopment of
        previously developed land (including a material change of use to residential or
        mixed-use including residential), which would not cause substantial harm to the
        openness of the Green Belt’. Policy SS10 of the North East Derbyshire Local Plan
        2021 (LP) is not consistent with the new Framework in terms of Green Belt
        development on previously developed land (PDL). The Framework states at Annex
        A paragraph 2 that development plan policies (or parts of those policies) which are
        materially inconsistent with national decision-making policies in the Framework
        should be given very limited weight. Policy ENV1 of the Dronfield Neighbourhood
        Plan 2019 (NP) refers directly to the Framework. I have therefore made my
        assessment of Green Belt matters on the basis of the policies set out in the
        Framework.
6.      The parties disagree as to what extent the appeal site can be considered to be
        PDL. There is common ground that the area closest to the two stable buildings is
        PDL and that the land was lawfully developed. Various aerial images provided by
        the appellant show this land partially enclosed by fencing, with the land around the
        stables in effect being ‘squared off’. At the time of my site visit the fencing had
        been removed, but the extent of that enclosure is established both on the aerial
        images and on the plans that have been submitted. The appellant states that the
        partial enclosure was purely for practical purposes associated with the moving of
        horses between the stables and the grazing land, but to my mind it can reasonably
        be taken to be the curtilage of those stable buildings in clear and obvious terms.
7.      The land immediately beyond where the previous fencing was is open and
        undeveloped. It no doubt has a functional and operational link to the stables as
        part of the wider equestrian use. But it is pertinent that the Framework draws a
        limit on whether a site was previously developed land by reference to the curtilage
        of the building, as opposed to simply allowing for the inclusion of any area of land
        around a building no matter how large or small. It is not certain that the polytunnel,
        hay store and glasshouse are on land that was lawfully developed, but irrespective
        of this they are physically and visually distinct from the stable buildings and have
        their own separate curtilage which is both physically defined on the site and on the
        plans. It does not follow that all intervening land between their curtilage and that of
        the stables must be PDL when characteristically it does not appear as such and
        when there is no built development on that land.
8.      The proposed dwelling itself would be located on the agreed area of PDL, but its
        garden would not. With regard to that area of land, the appellant seeks to rely on
        what is now Policy GB7f.iii of the Framework which refers to ‘material changes in
        the use of land (such as changes of use for outdoor sport or recreation, or for
        cemeteries and burial grounds)’. However, caselaw1 has established that
        residential uses do not fall within this exception, and that the category is not an
        open ended one.
9.      The appeal site therefore consists partly of PDL and partly of non PDL. The area
        which is not PDL is essential to provide the outdoor amenity space necessary to
1
    RB of Kingston upon Thames v SSLUHC [2023] EWHC 2055 (Admin)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            2
Appeal Decision 6011330


         provide acceptable living conditions for the future occupants of the proposed
         dwelling and it could not be severed or excluded whilst at the same time providing
         an acceptable scheme. It is logical to require that all of the appeal site must be
         PDL to qualify for the exception set out under Policy GB7e of the Framework, and
         that requirement is not met. The proposal is therefore inappropriate development
         in the Green Belt.
10. There are representations before me from both parties with respect to whether the
    proposal would cause substantial harm to the openness of the Green Belt. There
    would be harm to openness, but substantial harm is a high threshold and even on
    comparison of the proposed dwelling solely with the two stable buildings that exist
    on the area of PDL where the proposed dwelling itself would be constructed, I do
    not consider that this threshold is exceeded. Nonetheless, the Framework is clear
    that inappropriate development is, by definition, harmful to the Green Belt and
    should not be approved except in very special circumstances as per Policy GB6. I
    shall return to this in the planning balance.
11. My attention has been drawn to another dwelling2 which has been permitted by the
    Council close to the appeal site. However, having assessed the proposal and
    undertaken a site visit, the Council considered that the entirety of that site
    constituted PDL. Having considered the proposal that is before me on its own
    merits, that is not the conclusion I have come to in this appeal case.
12. For these reasons, I find that the proposed development would be inappropriate
    development in the Green Belt.
Green Belt purposes
13. The proposal would not conflict with purposes a, b or d of Policy GB2 of the
    Framework. There would be no fundamental conflict with purpose GB2e. With
    regard to GB2c there would be a degree of encroachment into the countryside
    because the garden area beyond the PDL would bring the land into residential use
    with likely enclosure and domestic paraphernalia, but this would be only a minor
    encroachment. This would in effect be cancelled out should the polytunnel, hay
    store and glasshouse prove to be lawful and were removed as proposed.
Landscape
14. The appeal site is within an Area of Multiple Environmental Sensitivity (AMES) as
    set out in the LP. It is located within the Wooded Hills and Valleys landscape type
    set out in the Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire and Yorkshire Coalfield Character Area
    38. The key characteristics of this character area include broadly undulating
    topography, the presence of woodlands and sparsely scattered settlement of
    farmstead and hamlets. The wider landscape that can be seen from the appeal
    site appears consistent with those characteristics.
15. The proposed dwelling would have an appearance akin to a large agricultural
    building, but its use would betray an impact different to that of such a building.
    There would be a formal parking area adjacent to it on which it is likely that
    vehicles would be present more frequently than with respect to both an agricultural
    use or the current use, and lighting within and around a dwelling would almost
    certainly be greater than if it was in either of those uses. In addition, there would

2
    25/00547/FL


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011330


       be likely to be domestic paraphernalia associated with the garden area and some
       means of boundary enclosure. There is no reference to individual dwellings being
       characteristic of the landscape area and compared to what currently exists on the
       site there would be a material difference in terms of the impact on the landscape.
16. Whilst there is some existing screening present, in particular from Cowley Lane, it
    is likely that this screening would be lesser in those months when trees are not in
    leaf. In any event, whether there is an impact on the landscape is not directly
    dependent on the visibility of the proposed development. The landscape
    designation covers a much larger area of land, and its characteristics are defined
    by factors such as the landform, natural features and built development. From the
    information that is before me, the proposal would not be characteristic of the wider
    landscape and would result in harm to it.
17. However, Policy SDC3 of the LP states that proposals for new development will
    only be permitted where they would not cause significant harm in landscape terms.
    The harm in this case would be localised and mitigated to some degree by the
    design of the proposed dwelling, its replacement of existing stable buildings and by
    screening of the appeal site. As noted above, there has also been a similarly
    designed dwelling permitted very close to the appeal site, also resulting from the
    replacement of stables. There would seem to be a reasonable likelihood that that
    dwelling will be built out and if so it would become part of the character of the
    AMES. These factors mean that the harm would be below the bar of significant
    harm to the AMES and thus that no conflict with Policy SDC3 of the LP would
    arise.
18. Policy SS9 of the LP requires that development respects the form, scale and
    character of the landscape, Policy SDC12 of the LP requires development to
    respond positively to local character and context and Policy EN2 of the NP
    requires development proposals to contribute to the protection, maintenance and
    enhancement of the local landscape. There is therefore some apparent tension in
    the policies of the development plan in that Policy SDC3 allows for there to be
    harm, including harm to the AMES, as long as it is not significant harm. I have
    treated Policy SDC3 as the primary policy against which to assess the proposed
    development, as it directly references the AMES.
Other Considerations
19. The proposal would be delivered as a self-build dwelling and a Unilateral
    Undertaking has been provided securing it as such. There is very limited evidence
    provided by either main party relating to the supply of self-build dwellings in the
    district and whether or not the Council is meeting its legal obligations. There would
    also be the more general benefit in that the proposal would boost the supply of
    housing. Whilst I am mindful of the weighting set out in Policy HO7 of the
    Framework, in the absence of evidenced accommodation needs of the community
    being provided, these are considerations to which I afford moderate weight in
    favour of the proposed development. There appears to be some potential for
    ecology enhancement on the site as a result of the proposed development, and
    this too carries moderate weight in its favour.
20. The appellant contends that there would be a visual improvement as a result of the
    proposed development, in that buildings and structures would be consolidated and
    that the overall appearance of the appeal site would be improved. However, what


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6011330


       exists at present are structures typical of rural countryside locations, and I have
       found that there would be some harm to the landscape as a result of the appeal
       development. I do not consider that there would be a betterment in terms of Green
       Belt openness from the proposed consolidation, given the size of the proposed
       dwelling. There is no substantive evidence provided to demonstrate that there
       would be a reduction in traffic as a result of the proposed development. I do not
       therefore weigh these considerations in favour of the proposed development.
21. I do not doubt that the proposed dwelling would provide a high standard of housing
    amenity for future occupiers. Furthermore, the proposal is of a good design, and it
    would not have an adverse impact on the living conditions of the occupiers of
    existing dwellings in the locality. However, these should be prerequisites of any
    scheme, and thus they weigh neutrally in the planning balance.
Planning Balance & Conclusion
22. The Framework at Policy GB6 paragraph 2 states that inappropriate development
    is, by definition, harmful to the Green Belt and should not be approved except in
    very special circumstances. Such circumstances will not exist unless the potential
    harm to the Green Belt by reason of inappropriateness and any other harm
    resulting from the proposed development, is clearly outweighed by other
    considerations. In making this assessment, substantial weight should be given to
    the harm to the Green Belt which would be caused, including harm to its
    openness.
23. The proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt and would
    result in harm to openness, albeit below the threshold of substantial harm. There
    would be a neutral impact on the Green Belt purpose GB2e if existing buildings
    were lawful and they were removed. There would be some harm to the landscape,
    although this would not be significant harm and it would not be in conflict with the
    most relevant development plan policy.
24. Whilst there are other considerations identified to which I have given moderate
    weight in favour of the appeal proposal, they do not clearly outweigh the harm to
    the Green Belt. Consequently, the very special circumstances necessary to justify
    the development do not exist.
25. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the development conflicts with the
    policies of the Framework where they seek to protect the Green Belt. Therefore,
    the appeal should be dismissed.

Graham Wraight
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
