Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 August 2026
by R Aston BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23rd September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6011283
37 Town Lane, Aylsham NR11 6HH
    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    The appeal is made by Aimee Wood against the decision of Broadland District Council.
    The application Ref is 2026/0293.
    The development proposed is described as ‘roof replacement to create first floor for additional
     bedrooms’.

Decision
1.    The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for development
      described as roof replacement to create first floor for additional bedrooms at
      37 Town Lane, Aylsham NR11 6HH in accordance with the terms of the
      application, Ref 2026/0293, subject to the following conditions:
       1) The development hereby permitted shall be begun before the expiration of
          three years from the date of this decision.

       2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
          following approved plans: Proposed Elevations and Floor Plans (PL01 Rev D),
          Site Layout and Site Location Plan (PL02 Rev E), Indicative Overlooking
          Section Analysis (PL03) and Existing Plan, Elevations and Site Layout (EXO1
          Rev B).
       3) The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
          development hereby permitted shall match those used in the existing building.
       4) No development shall take place, including any works of demolition, until a
          Construction Method Statement has been submitted to, and approved in writing
          by the Local Planning Authority. The Statement shall provide for:
                      i. the parking of vehicles of site operatives and visitors;
                     ii. loading and unloading of plant and materials;
                    iii. storage of plant and materials used in constructing the
                         development;
                   iv. wheel washing facilities;
                     v. measures to control the emission of dust and dirt during
                         construction;
                   vi. a scheme for recycling/disposing of waste resulting from
                         demolition and construction works;
                   vii. delivery, demolition and construction working hours.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011283


           The approved Construction Method Statement shall be adhered to throughout
           the construction period for the development.
       5) Notwithstanding the drawings referred to in condition 2 the development hereby
          permitted shall not be occupied until full details of the type, design and
          specifications of the windows and rooflights in the rear elevation (including but
          not limited to levels of obscurity and opening/closing restrictors/mechanisms)
          have been submitted to, approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority
          and installed to their satisfaction. The windows and rooflights shall be retained
          in the approved form thereafter.
       6) Notwithstanding the provisions of schedule 2, part 1, classes B and C of the
          Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) Order 1995 (as
          amended) (or any order revoking and re-enacting that order with or without
          modification), no additions or other alteration to the roof of the dwellinghouse
          shall be erected other than those expressly authorised by this permission.
Procedural Matters
2.    On 26 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
      Framework) was published. The parties were given an opportunity to provide
      comments on the significance of this for their case and I have taken any comments
      received into account.
3.    My attention has been drawn to email correspondence between the parties where
      the appellant sought make revisions to the design to address the Council’s
      concerns. This includes reference to a number of plans and at my request the
      Council clarified the plans on which they made their decision on. No further
      comments were received from the appellant and I have determined the appeal on
      that basis. At my site visit I was satisfied that I was able to see everything I needed
      to determine the appeal from the appeal property having received a representation
      I also visited No. 3 Wright’s Close but was unable to gain access to the property.
Main Issue
4.    The main issue in this appeal is the effect of the proposal on the living conditions
      of future and neighbouring occupiers, with particular regard to No. 3 Wrights Close
      in terms of privacy.
Reasons
5.    The appeal property is a single storey residential dwelling in an area where I
      observed the fine grain of development and topography within the historic core of
      Aylsham resulted in properties, of varying forms and sizes, and from different
      periods, in close proximity to each other. This includes infill style properties such
      as the appeal property and more modern development such as Wright’s Close to
      the rear. Properties are sited close together with modest yards and side/rear
      gardens and on non-uniform plots which results in opportunities for mutual
      overlooking.
6.    The appeal property sits on a modest plot with narrow rear and side gardens. The
      rear lawn area is bordered by an approximately 1.8 metre high close boarded
      fence and then immediately adjacent to that No. 3 Wrights Close, a two storey
      detached property with its ground floor utility room and large rear conservatory
      located close to the boundary fence. It also sits slightly higher than the ground

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011283


       level of the appeal property. Mutual overlooking effects were evident and I was
       able to observe an internal window blind immediately adjacent to the fence serving
       what appeared to be the ground floor non-habitable room.
7.    No. 3 also contained three first floor rear facing windows set slightly further back
      than the conservatory but with views over the appeal dwelling and its garden
      appearing possible. The evidence before me indicates these all serve ‘sanitary’
      and therefore are non-habitable rooms. Whilst the appellant refers to standard
      planning guidance which ‘stipulates a minimum separation distance of 12m’ no
      reference is given to where that originates from and no standards of the
      development plan or other guidance are before me. It is essentially a judgment,
      including consideration of proposed design, distance, room function and
      topography.
8.    There is currently no built form at first floor level on the appeal property so the
      proposal would extend built form over the existing footprint closer to properties at
      the rear, in particular No. 3 Wrights Close but not obtrusively or unacceptably so. It
      would introduce fenestration at first floor level where previously there was none
      although I observed first floor rear facing windows on surrounding residential
      properties. The bathroom window would be obscurely glazed, with the long sloping
      tiled roof of No. 3 opposite and details of any necessary levels and opening
      restrictions could be secured by condition so its effects would not be material.
9.    There would appear to be no direct line of sight from the lower rooflights given
      their position close to the floor level. These units would also incorporate obscure
      glazing, which would be acceptable for this bedroom and such an opening, and
      fitted with 100 millimetre fire-egress privacy restrictors to only be fully opened in
      the event of a fire. As these units will also be top hung, the restricted opening
      would force any outward field of vision downwards into the rear garden of the
      appeal property.
10. The two higher units are shown as clearly glazed and would be electronically
    operated. They would be positioned higher on the roof slope because of a sill
    height designed to maximise internal daylight and ventilation. The two lights would
    appear to be positioned at standard eye level which would limit direct horizontal
    lines of sight to the neighbouring properties. Despite this a small degree of
    overlooking could still occur and there would also be an increased perception of
    being overlooked from some areas of No. 3.
11. However, the bedroom is modest; it would be served by sufficient light for its size
    and whilst the lights could not be fixed entirely shut for fire safety reasons, the
    upper lights could also be installed with restrictors, be obscurely glazed or have
    suitable privacy film applied and acceptable living conditions could still be
    achieved. I also note that despite earlier views, the Council’s Questionnaire
    requests a further condition ‘that the first-floor bedroom windows in the west facing
    rear elevation to be installed as a fixed window and obscured to a specification of
    not less than the equivalent of classification 3 of Pilkington Glass…’.
12. Subject to agreement of the final details, secured by condition, the proposal would
    not result in a significant or unacceptable loss of privacy for neighbouring
    occupiers. Further I see no reason why the proposal should result in an oppressive
    or unacceptable living environment for existing occupiers in terms of outlook, light
    or ventilation. It would not be significantly harmful to the living conditions or


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011283


         reasonable enjoyment and occupation of neighbouring properties in terms of
         privacy and the living conditions for future occupiers would be acceptable.
13. The proposal would therefore comply with Policy GC4 (iii and iv) of the Broadland
    Local Plan Development Management Development Plan Document 2015 insofar
    as it requires meeting the reasonable amenity needs of all potential future
    occupiers, considering the impact upon the amenity of existing properties and
    ultimately avoidance of a significant detrimental impact on amenity. My attention
    has been drawn to other policies submitted with the appeal that not referred to in
    the Council’s decision notice. However, they appear to relate to highway safety
    and landscape matters and are not therefore relevant.
14. Turning to the Framework, under Policy S4 development proposals within
    settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in this Framework. It goes onto refer to at 2 a. ii.
    which is relevant in this case under Policy L2 1. d as development within a
    residential curtilage.
15. The proposal would not cause harm to the character and appearance of the host
    property, street scene or the conservation area. I have also found that subject to
    conditions, acceptable living standards for residents and neighbours in terms of
    access to daylight, sunlight, privacy would be achievable. It would therefore
    comply with the relevant criteria. There would be no harm to designated heritage
    assets under Policy HE6. The proposal therefore benefits from national policy
    support under Policies L2 (making effective use of land) and P3 (living conditions)
    and should be approved because I have not identified any adverse effects, in
    accordance with Policy S4 (principle of development within settlements).
Other Matters
16. The site lies within the Aylsham Conservation Area (the ACA). Its effects are not a
    reason for refusal and having regard to my statutory duty under s.721 and the
    comments of the Council’s specialist adviser the proposal would not have any
    harmful impact on the character or appearance of the ACA by virtue of the
    principal elevation being well designed to relate well to the street scene, the
    proposal being in keeping with the existing dwelling and other additions to
    properties within the ACA that contribute to its significance. There would be no
    conflict with the development plan in terms of built and historic environment
    effects.
17. Turning to nutrient neutrality, this enables decision makers to assess and quantify
    mitigation requirements of new developments. It is intended to allow new
    development to be approved with no net increase in nutrient loading within the
    affected catchments. Natural England considers that nutrient neutrality is an
    acceptable means of counterbalancing nutrient impacts arising from development
    to mitigate what would otherwise have an adverse effect on the integrity of
    European Sites within those catchments.
18. The Council’s officer report does not identify any protected sites and states that
    ‘this application is for an extension on an existing residential unit and will not
    increase the number of dwellings’. Further that it can ‘be safely determined with

1
    Planning Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas Act 1990.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 4
Appeal Decision 6011283


       regards the Conservation of Species Habitats Regulations 2017 (as amended)’.
       The proposal is for an extension of an existing dwelling to provide improved family
       living accommodation and above the ground floor of an existing building. It would
       utilise the services and connections of the existing dwelling with no increase in
       occupants.
19. There is nothing to indicate that the proposal would therefore affect water quality
    through increased nutrient loading and would have an adverse effect on the
    integrity of sensitive sites and thus require mitigation to ensure it would be nutrient
    neutral. The project will not therefore result in a Likely Significant Effect, either
    alone, or in combination, on specific qualifying features. On the evidence before
    me, an Appropriate Assessment under the Habitat Regulations and notification to
    Natural England is not required before planning permission can be granted for this
    particular Householder development. The proposal is not liable for Green
    Infrastructure Recreation Avoidance Mitigation as it relates to an existing dwelling.
20. In reaching this view I have taken account of the representation from the occupier
    of No. 3 Wrights Close, including concerns regarding loss of light. I have
    considered privacy above but given the distance between the properties and their
    orientation I do not consider there would be an unacceptable loss of light or
    overshadowing of that building or its garden.
Conclusion
21. Aside from the standard conditions required, I have imposed a condition requiring
    a Construction Method Statement to be submitted given the narrow and restricted
    nature of Town Lane. Having regard to the Council’s suggested further condition I
    have imposed a condition to require full specification/details of the windows and
    rooflights to be submitted, approved in writing and installed to the Council’s
    satisfaction prior to occupation. This is necessary in the interest of ensuring the
    design is as effective as intended and the protection the living conditions of
    neighbouring occupiers and avoidance of significant impacts. A condition is also
    required to limit further additions and alterations to the roof to protect the living
    conditions of neighbouring occupiers from further additions and alterations that
    could result in significant impacts.
22. For the reasons given above, the proposal would comply with the development
    plan, when read as a whole. Material considerations, including the Framework do
    not indicate a decision should be made otherwise.
23. Having considered all other matters raised, I therefore conclude that the appeal
    should be allowed.



Richard Aston
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
