Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 27 August 2026
by D Harris-Watkins BA(Hons) PgD MRICS
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 04 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011250
River Gwash Trout Farm, Belmesthorpe Lane, Ryhall, Rutland PE9 4JZ
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Lawrence & Vicki Ball against the decision of Rutland County Council.
•      The application Ref is 2025/1386/FUL.
•      The appeal development is construction and external lighting of curved entrance walls, gates and
       gate piers off Belmesthorpe Lane and the erection of a 1.9m high closeboard fence along the
       northern boundary.

Decision
1.      The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.      The application form confirms that the development has been completed, and I
        observed this during my site visit. I have determined the appeal on that basis. I
        have however omitted “retrospective” from the description of development in the
        banner heading above, as this relates to the narrative of how the development has
        occurred and does not describe an operative part of the development.
3.      On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
        Framework) was published. Those parts of the Framework most relevant to this
        appeal have not been significantly amended. As a result, I have not sought further
        submissions. I have referred to the latest version of the Framework where relevant
        in this appeal.
Main Issue
4.      The effect of the development on the character and appearance of the street
        scene.
Reasons
5.      The appeal development consists of the entrance and boundaries of a residential
        property located on the edge of Ryhall. The entrance to the village comprises a
        single lane carriageway bounded by hedgerows and trees to either side. The
        approach is marked by a timber village gateway and signage, and in the
        background are a mixture of stone and brick two storey dwellings, including
        elements of the adjacent development1 currently under construction. The
        immediate surrounding boundary treatments comprise primarily of hedging with a
        mix of post and rail fencing, black metal railings, interspersed with some close

1
    2023/0991/FUL

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011250


       boarded fencing. The use of soft landscaping to the boundaries of the dwellings
       and the intervisibility with the wider countryside, provide a verdant approach to the
       village and a rural character to the street scene.
6.     Formerly the appeal site’s boundary comprised a relatively straight length of
       hedgerow along the highway edge, which contributed positively to the rural street
       scene and verdant approach to the village. The Design Guidelines for Rutland
       Supplementary Planning Document 2022 highlights the importance of hedgerows
       to the rural character of the district. The appeal property was accessed via the
       adjacent driveway to the north, formerly providing access to the River Gwash Trout
       Farm and now providing access to the residential development that has replaced
       it.
7.     Under 2023/0427/FUL, the appellant sought amongst other things to provide a
       separate access to the appeal property. The approved entrance comprised timber
       gates hung on stone pillars bounded by hedging. The approved northern boundary
       treatment was a post and rail fence, with a hedgerow inside the fence.
8.     The appeal development comprises stone gate pillars and timber gates but instead
       bounded by curved stone walls with red brick copings, which are lit up with
       uplighters. The development has removed a comparatively much larger section of
       the hedgerow than that approved under 2023/0427/FUL. Though stone walls are
       evident away from the appeal site further into the village, these are predominantly
       shorter in height than the appeal development’s and have a simpler appearance,
       with either rubble stone copings or copings with a relatively plain design. The walls
       of the appeal development have been constructed using traditional materials, are
       to a high quality, and their stark colour will fade over time, nevertheless they are
       considerably more modern, lit up, and in an area dominated by softer boundary
       treatments of hedging and fencing. The removal of a considerable section of the
       hedgerow and the modern appearance of the development results in an urbanising
       effect on the rural street scene and harmfully affects the verdant approach to the
       village.
9.     The appellant has proposed the brightness of the lights and the timing they are
       switched on to be controlled by condition. I have not been provided with the
       precise specification of the lights. Furthermore, I am not satisfied this would
       sufficiently mitigate the urbanising effect of the development and the harm caused,
       as the harm is still apparent during daylight hours.
10. The height, length and relationship of the close boarded fence on the northern
    boundary of the site with the neighbouring residential development’s driveway,
    means it is visually prominent when exiting the village. The appellant has planted
    hedging on the outside of the fencing, which would typically help screen the fence
    in the future. Due to the minimal width between the fence and driveway there
    would however be pressure to have the hedge cut back so it does not overhang
    the driveway. As a result, I am not satisfied that it would grow to sufficient density
    to notably obscure the fencing. Though the fence would weather, it would not
    sufficiently reduce its visual impact.
11. There are a limited number of examples of close boarded fences in proximity to
    Belmesthrope Road, however they do not have the same relationship as the site in
    terms of the transition of the edge of the settlement to open countryside. The close
    boarded fence to the neighbouring development, has a hedgerow planted in front


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011250


        of it with considerably more space than the appeal development’s, such that it
        would be able to grow sufficiently to mitigate the fences visual effects.
12. Furthermore, the hedging is not demonstrated on the submitted plans. As a result,
    I am not satisfied that a condition would pass the tests as set out in the National
    Planning Policy Framework.
13. For the reasons above, the development results in a harmful effect on the
    character and appearance of the street scene. The development conflicts with
    policy CS19 of the Rutland: Local Development Framework: Core Strategy
    Development Plan Document 2011 and policies SP15, SP17 and SP23 of the
    Rutland Local Plan: Site Allocations & Policies Development Plan Document 2014
    (the DPD), that seek amongst other things that development should have a
    positive effect on local distinctiveness and should complement the character of the
    area and not have an adverse impact on it.
14. Policy SP7 of the DPD has also been referenced by the Council, which concerns
    non-residential development within the countryside. The appeal development
    comprises boundary treatments to a residential dwelling. Consequently, I have not
    found policy SP7 of the DPD determinative in the appeal.
Other Matters
15. I have taken into account the appeal raised in the New Forest National Park
    Authority2. I have limited information of this appeal to determine how comparable it
    is to the appeal before me now; however, I note from the limited details this is for a
    materially different development within a different context. In any event I have
    determined the appeal on its own merits and site-specific context.
16. Representations have also been made showing there is some support locally for
    the current appeal development, however this does not inherently make the effects
    of the development acceptable nor provide reason to allow the appeal.
Conclusion
17. The appeal development conflicts with the development plan and the material
    considerations do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in
    accordance with it. Therefore, the appeal should be dismissed.

D Harris-Watkins
INSPECTOR




2
    6000518


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
