Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 20 August 2026
by Eleni Marshall BSc (hons) MSc FRICS FAAV MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 7 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011524
The Leys, 63 Booth Rise, Northampton, West Northamptonshire, NN3 6HP
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
    to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs G Dickens (Dunclent Properties) against West Northamptonshire
    Council.
•   The application Ref is 2025/5109/FULL.
•   The development proposed is change of use of Class C2 Residential Care Home to a Sui-Generis
    House in Multiple Occupation.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. Since the determination of this application the Government issued the new revised
   version of the National Planning Policy Framework 2026. On this occasion I do not
   consider there any need to revert to the main parties regarding this change. The
   new policies for decision making do not substantially alter matters relating to the
   main issues which are the subject of this appeal.
3. The appeal is subject to an application for costs. This is subject to a separate
   decision.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are the impact of the proposal upon neighbouring residential
   amenity and the character of the residential area with regard to comings and goings
   and the amenity of occupants with regard to amenity space within the site.
Reasons
5. The appeal site is a large, single storey, building located within a built-up area
   which is primarily residential in character. To the front of the building is an existing
   car parking area with areas of amenity space at the end of the site as well as within
   an enclosed courtyard area. The appeal site is currently classified, in planning
   terms, as Use Class C2 due to its historic use as a residential care home. Nothing,
   within the evidence that is before me, challenges the site’s lawful use as a care
   home and, on this basis and given the reason for refusal, consideration should be
   had as to whether the proposal (to change the use to a large house in multiple
   occupation (HMO), for a maximum of 32 persons, would result in significant
   intensification of the use of the property compared to its lawful use.
6. I understand, from the background information, that the application was made on a
   retrospective basis insofar as at the point the application was submitted the site

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011524


     was occupied by unconnected persons, however, the appellant’s statement now
     outlines that the property is vacant. Regardless or not, therefore, of whether the
     proposal is made and determined on a retrospective basis, the basis for
     determination is unchanged. It falls to consider the proposal against the Local
     Plan, taking into account all material considerations, based upon the evidence that
     is before me and my observations at the time of my site visit.
7. Use of the appeal site as a large HMO, for a maximum of 32 persons, would be
   materially different in character from the lawful use as a care home and the
   proposal would result intensification of activity compared to its current lawful use
   even taking into account the potential activity generated by a care home. A care
   home by its very nature would be occupied by older persons/residents who are
   unlikely to own a car or contribute notably in terms of activity to, from, in and
   around the site. HMOs in general are more transient in nature and would introduce
   a more intensive use with higher turnover of residents within what would be an a
   very large HMO in this case. The intended use would not have a comparable
   impact to the previous operation.
8. Activity associated with a care home would, evidently, result in associated
   movement and activity as a result of staff, visitors and deliveries but these would,
   generally, be more coordinated as a result of overall management of the site versus
   up to 32 individuals sets of movements across a wider part of the day including
   later into the evenings due to the nature of occupation proposed. This would
   include, for example, the opportunity or desire for visitors or socialising which,
   regardless of management plans (which could be secured by condition), naturally
   result in comparably greater levels of noise, nuisance and general comings and
   goings than a care home. I find that this would have an adverse impact on the
   living conditions of occupiers of nearby properties by reason of increased comings
   and goings of individuals living independently in the property which would be at
   odds with the prevailing residential character of the area and the site uses within
   the immediate locality noted within third party comments. .
9. The appeal site benefits from private/communal amenity space to the rear of the
   site as well as within a central courtyard which I consider appropriate taking into
   account that there are further formal and informal open space/recreational
   opportunities in the locality which are within walking distance. I am, therefore,
   satisfied that the proposal would result in adequate levels of amenity for future
   occupants of the proposal taking into account onsite and offsite opportunities,
   within walking distance, reasonably available for utilisation due to the site’s location
   as evidenced by the appellant. The proposal would be consistent with
   Northampton Local Plan Part 2 2023 (LP) Policy Q2 insofar as the communal
   garden space would meet the reasonable needs of its users.
10. Though not stated within the refusal reason on the decision notice, the Council
    raise, within their statement of case, greater demand for car parking with greater
    reliance on need for refuse storage and associated residential amenity issues.
    Environmental health, as a statutory consultee have no objection to the proposal
    subject to consideration of refuse and waste which I find can be appropriately
    secured by condition requiring details of refuse storage to be submitted for approval
    on site and the facilities to be permanently retained and maintained.
11. The Council’s statement also raises, as do third party comments, concerns with
    regard to parking. West Northamptonshire Council highways, as a consultee, state

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
Appeal Decision 6011524


     no objection to the parking survey. Comments from Northamptonshire Police are
     acknowledged, however, the site is located within a sustainable location which
     would negate the need for all occupants to have a car. The parking survey, carried
     out during the application period, demonstrates that there is a significant amount of
     available on street parking within the survey zone which are in locations that do not
     impact highway safety or capacity. I am, therefore, satisfied that the proposal is
     accompanied by a robust assessment and that based upon the evidence before me
     reasons for refusal, or concerns, on highway grounds with specific regard to
     parking cannot be reasonably sustained.
12. Despite my findings as to parking, amenity space (for occupiers of the proposal)
    and some matters, such as refuse, being able to be dealt with appropriately via
    condition this does not outweigh the issues identified with regard to adverse impact
    on the living conditions of nearby properties and the residential character of the
    area as a result of the proposed intensity of occupation. The proposal would be
    contrary to West Northamptonshire Joint Core Strategy Local Plan Part 1 2014
    (CS) Policy H5 which seeks to only allow houses in multiple occupation where they
    would not adversely affect the character and amenity of existing residential areas.
13. Whilst the committee meeting did not discuss the Houses in Multiple Occupation
    Supplementary Planning Document 2019 (SPD) it is still a material consideration
    with Principle 1 providing guidance that applications for HMOs will take into account
    considerations such as not resulting in a material change or adverse impact on the
    character and amenity of the area. I acknowledge that the proposal would not
    result in more than 10% of the total number of HMOs within a 50-metre radius,
    however, the SPD is guidance and is written to advise on the most commonly
    encountered scenarios within applications.
14. A HMO of this size would not be a specific consideration within that guidance, but it
    is clear it seeks to avoid concentration. The proposal would result in a HMO far
    larger than the vast majority of large HMOs and this would, on its own, result in
    notable concentration. The proposal may be consistent with principle 1 in terms of
    basic, headline, numbers of HMO dwellings (i.e. number of sites) within the stated
    radius, but the ultimate objective is to create, support and maintain, a balanced,
    mixed and inclusive community and avoid adverse impact on the character and
    amenity of the area. I find that, for the reasons set out, the proposal would be
    contrary to the objectives of that guidance within the SPD.
15. I note that the appellant outlines the Government’s objective of boosting the supply
    of housing in the context of the Council’s housing supply. In this case the proposal
    seeks to convert an existing care home which, by its classification (Use Class C2)
    is already a residential building which already contributes to housing land supply.
    Even if this were not the case as a starting point, and the site was non-residential,
    its conversion to a HMO would generally still only be recorded as one single unit in
    terms of housing supply. In this case the weight attributable to the proposal in
    terms of matters such as housing supply would be limited and the adverse impacts
    identified would substantially outweigh the benefits of the proposal.
16. Making effective or efficient use of land and underutilised buildings in sustainable
    locations is a clear objective of both national and local planning/decision-making
    policies. Such uses should not be pursued in a manner which would fail to provide
    acceptable living standards for neighbours due to, in this case, inappropriate
    intensification of use of the site in contrast to the residential character of the area.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
Appeal Decision 6011524


Other Matters
17. I note third party comments which have been received at both application and
    appeal stages. I have dealt with matters relating to living conditions of nearby
    occupiers, parking, amenity space for occupiers of the proposal, refuse and
    character of the area as part of consideration of the main issues above.
18. National Decision-Making Policy DM7 confirms that planning decisions should not
    seek to duplicate or extend controls imposed by separate regulatory regimes other
    than where there is a development plan policy in place applying optional technical
    standards for the development proposed. It should be assumed, unless there is
    clear evidence to the contrary, that those separate regimes will operate effectively
    (separate regulatory regimes). Fire safety would, therefore, be a matter for HMO
    licencing or building regulations, respectively.
19. The type of occupants is not a material planning consideration nor is garden
    maintenance. Fear of a precedent is insufficient reasoning for refusal and is
    therefore of limited weight; each case must be considered on its own merits.
    Comment is noted with regard to advertisement of the proposal, however, it is
    evident in this case that local residents were able to respond to the consultation
    even without a site notice and there was no statutory requirement for a site notice
    to be displayed in this case.
Conclusion
20. For the reasons outlined above, and taking into account all other matters raised, I
    conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

Eleni Marshall
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       4
