Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 September 2026
by S Poole BA(Hons) DipArch MPhil MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 October 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6011963
Land behind 5 Lapworth Close, Orpington BR6 9BW
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Jeyahar, Grand Galactic Developments Limited, against the decision of
    the Council of the London Borough of Bromley.
•   The application Ref is 25/04146/FPA.
•   The development proposed is described on the application form as “3 new terraced houses”.

Appeal B Ref: 6011964
Land behind 5 Lapworth Close, Orpington BR6 9BW
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Jeyahar, Grand Galactic Developments Limited, against the decision of
    the Council of the London Borough of Bromley.
•   The application Ref is 26/00698/FPA.
•   The development proposed is described on the application form as “2 detached houses”.


Decisions
Appeal A Ref: 6011963
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal B Ref: 6011964
2. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
3. The National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was revised on
   17 August 2026. Those parts of the Framework most relevant to this appeal have
   not been amended. As a result, I have not sought submissions on the revised
   Framework, and I am satisfied that no party’s interests have been prejudiced by
   taking this approach.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are the effects of the proposals on:
     (i) the living conditions of the occupiers of 5 and 6 Lapworth Close with particular
     regard to outlook and natural light; and
     (ii). the character and appearance of the surrounding area.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6011963 and 6011964


Reasons
Living Conditions
5. The appeal site comprises a parcel of land that previously formed a large part of
   the rear garden of 5 Lapworth Close. The site faces, and is accessed from,
   Berrylands and is bounded by the rear garden of 6 Lapworth Close to one side, the
   rear garden of 74 Avalon Road to the other, and what remains of the rear garden of
   No. 5 to the rear.
6. The Appeal A proposal would comprise the erection of a terrace of three 2-storey
   houses with bedrooms within the roof space. The terrace would be sited very close
   to the rear boundary of the site, particularly House 1. As a consequence of this
   siting, the terrace would be an overtly prominent feature in views from the rear
   garden of No. 5 and from rear ground floor windows within both No. 5 and its
   attached neighbour No. 6. Due to its siting, height and bulk I therefore conclude
   that this proposal would result in an unacceptable loss of outlook from Nos 5 and 6.
7. The Appeal B proposal would comprise the erection of a pair of detached 2-storey,
   3-bedroom houses each with a bedroom within the roof space. I note that these
   dwellings would be set slightly further from the rear boundary than the Appeal A
   proposal but a little closer to the side boundary shared with No. 6. In addition, the
   overall bulk of the pair of dwellings would be less. Despite this, and due to its
   siting, height and bulk, the Appeal B proposal would also result in an unacceptable
   loss of outlook from Nos 5 and 6.
8. For these reasons I conclude that both proposals would result in unacceptable
   effects on the living conditions of the occupiers of Nos 5 and 6. The proposals
   therefore fail to accord with Policy 37 of the Bromley Local Plan (2019) (BLP) and
   Policy D3 of the London Plan (2021) (LP) which, amongst other matters, expects a
   high standard of design and layout that respect the amenity of the occupiers of
   neighbouring buildings.
9. I recognise that both proposals would cause a degree of overshadowing of the rear
   garden of No. 5 in the morning. However, for the vast majority of the day good
   levels of sunlight within this garden would be retained. In this regard there would
   not be an unacceptable effect on neighbours’ living conditions. This lack of harm
   does not outweigh the clear harm identified above.
Character and Appearance
10. The appeal site is situated within a residential area comprising a mix of types and
    ages of 20th century suburban 2-storey housing with off-street parking at the front
    and gardens to the rear. On the opposite side of Berrylands there is a pair of
    detached houses and in the nearby part of Avalon Road there are semi-detached
    houses with relatively wide frontages. Both proposals would be compatible in scale
    to nearby housing and would have a similar relationship to the street.
11. Both proposals would be cramped in terms of their relationship to the appeal site’s
    boundaries. However there are gardens to either side of the appeal site and the
    ground floors of the proposals would be set below the level of the road, therefore
    reducing their apparent height, bulk and massing in public views. Due to their siting
    I am therefore satisfied that the proposals would not have an unacceptable effect
    on the character and appearance of the surrounding area. In this respect they


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6011963 and 6011964


     accord with BLP Policies 3, 4 and 37 and LP Policy D3 which, amongst other
     matters, require housing schemes to respect local character, spatial standards,
     physical context and density. There is also compliance with the aims of the
     Council’s Urban Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document (2023) in this
     respect.
12. For the reasons set out under the first main issue, and having regard to all other
    matters raised, I conclude that the appeal should fail.



S Poole
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
