Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 30 August 2026
by J Somers BSocSci (Planning) MA (HEC) MRTPI IHBC
An Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State

Decision Date: 18 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011661
 27 Lansdowne Street, Coventry CV2 4FN
 • The appeal is made under Section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a
   refusal to grant planning permission.
 • The appeal is made by Dr Tamara Smyrnova against the decision of Coventry City Council.
 • The application reference is PL/2025/0002120/FUL.
 • The development proposed is described on the Application Form as ‘Change of use from C3
   Dwellinghouse to C4 House in multiple occupation.’

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main issues
2. The main issues are:
     • The effect of the proposal upon the housing mix of the area; and
     • Whether the living conditions of the proposed House of Multiple Occupation
       (HMO) are compliant with the Development Plan policies; and
     • The effect upon highway safety as a result of the site’s use.
Reasons
Housing Mix and Balance
3. The appeal site is a mid-terraced two storey dwelling that appears to date from
   the turn of the twentieth century as part of a speculative development of a
   number of terraced properties. The surrounding area contains rows of narrow
   streets with long rows of terraced dwellings which are tightly knit and gives a
   dense residential environment. Lansdowne Road lies to the edge of the
   speculative housing estate, with the modern hospital premises opposite. The
   appeal site is two storeys tall with a large dormer to the rear with the roof space
   converted into living space.
4. In undertaking changes of use from dwellings to HMOs the Coventry Homes in
   Multiple Occupancy Development Plan Document (DPD) Policy HMO2 concerns
   concentration and thresholds of HMOs whereby a HMO concentration of 10% or
   more within a 100 metre radius will not be supported. Additionally, DPD Policy
   HMO3 involves the concept of ‘sandwiching’ which aims to prevent unacceptable
   adverse impacts on amenity and to control the concentrations of HMOs and lists

www.planningportal.gov.uk/planninginspectorate     1
Appeal Decision: 6011661

     criteria that HMOs are required to comply with in terms of mix between HMO and
     residential properties.
5. Based on the Council’s evidence presented within the Officer Report, within a
   100 metre radius there are 83 residential dwellings (excluding flats) and 25
   HMOs giving a 30.1% concentration of HMOs within a 100 metre radius. This
   appears to be based upon Council records of HMO licensing in the area and
   property records as to which dwellings are separate houses/ converted flats
   which is an appropriate evidence base. The Appellant has also submitted
   evidence that suggests that there are 164 residential units whereby they believe
   that there is 17 HMOs which including this proposal would be 18 HMOs and
   giving a concentration of 10.9%. It is unclear where the Appellant’s source data
   comes from as it appears to have been created by the Appellant and appears to
   also include flats which are not meant to be included in the calculations. I
   therefore give limited weight to these calculations which do not appear to be very
   reliable and sourced upon appropriate independent evidence. Despite this, it is
   clear that there is over a 10% concentration of HMOs within a 100 metre radius,
   whereby the proposal would be made contrary to DPD Policy HMO2.
6. I note that the Appellant in their Statement of Case (SoC) sees limits as
   mechanical and not reflecting actual harm, however the policy is seeking a more
   even distribution of HMOs which is a part of proper planning for mixed and
   balanced communities and does this by suggesting a percentage. Additionally, I
   do not see this as a prohibition of HMOs, as material considerations and viewing
   the Development Plan as a whole may also outweigh the conflict. I am unclear
   what the Appellant means when in their view Inspectors “have repeatedly
   confirmed that HMO concentration policies should not be applied mechanically”
   and no evidence has been submitted which would support such a claim.
   Additionally, I note discussion in the Appellant’s SoC that there have been HMO
   appeals in Arun, Broxtowe, Leeds, and Nottingham where Inspectors have
   approved HMO applications, but no details of cases, policy position and whether
   the circumstances are similar to this proposal. As such I cannot give weight to
   these claims without sufficient evidence.
7. Turning to the ‘sandwiching effect’ contained in DPD Policy HMO3, currently
   No.s19 and 29 Landsdowne Street are HMO properties with 4 residential
   properties in between (21, 23, 25, 27). The proposal at No. 27 would mean that
   21, 23, 25 would be ‘sandwiched’ between No.19 and Nos. 27, 29, which would
   lead to the sandwiching effect as per DPD Policy HMO3. I can appreciate
   comments from the Appellant’s SoC with regards to other streets in the locality
   such as King Richard Street being contrary to the policy, however it is likely that
   these HMOs were in situ prior to the relatively recent adoption of the policy, and
   part of the reasoning for putting measures in place to further plan and manage
   HMOs in the area moving forward.
8. Consequently, in conclusion of this matter, I find that the proposal would result in
   an over concentration of HMOs in the area which would be harmful to the mix
   and balanced communities which DPD Policies HMO2 and HMO3 promote. As
   such the proposal would be contrary to DPD Policy HMO2 and HMO3 as
   discussed previously.




www.planningportal.gov.uk/planninginspectorate   2
Appeal Decision: 6011661

Living Conditions
9. The Council’s concerns in respect of this main issue is the size of proposed
   bedroom 6, which is located within the roof at the front of the property. Room
   sizes are required to comply with DPD Policy HMO4 together with the Council’s
   guidance from the Licensing Team. Room measurements for HMOs are required
   to be at least 6.5Sqm of useable floorspace for one person; 2.3 metres over 75%
   of the room area; and where the ceiling height is less than 1.5 metres, the floor
   area underneath is disregarded and not counted as ‘useable space’ as are other
   spaces such as circulation space behind doorways, stairs etc1.
10. The roof of the property is at a 45 degree pitch, and common with these types of
    Victorian/Edwardian properties, the roof purlin is about half way up the pitch of
    the roof which is also indicated on the floor plan. The side elevation plan shows
    that at the distance of the roof purlin, the head height is approximately 1.5
    metres, meaning that it is only the small rectangular component of the room and
    the two spaces behind the two doors that would be above 1.5 metres. Much of
    the two areas behind the doors are excluded from the calculation as they are
    circulation space, meaning that the area does not appear to comply with the
    minimum size requirements to be utilised as living accommodation. I note that
    there are comments in the Appellant’s SoC which suggest that Officers from the
    licensing team inspected and approved the room for use as sleeping
    accommodation, however no evidence of this assessment forms part of the
    appeal documents. I therefore cannot give any of these anecdotal claims any
    weight within my decision.
11. With the above in mind, I conclude on this matter that it has not been
    demonstrated that the proposed bedroom 6 would provide adequate space in
    accordance with the policy and guidance in order to be utilised for sleeping
    accommodation. The scheme would therefore cause significant harm to the
    living conditions of a future occupier and therefore be made contrary to DPD
    Policy HMO4 as described previously.
Parking and Highway Safety
12. According to the Coventry Connect Supplementary Planning Document (SPD),
    the proposed HMO would generate a need for three vehicular parking spaces,
    which as there is no off-site parking, this would need to be provided on the road.
    Lansdowne Street and the surrounding streets contain unrestricted on street
    parking. Whilst on my site visit, I noticed that there was availability for parking
    spaces along Lansdowne Road, in order to demonstrate that the existing road
    network could accommodate the increase in parking, a parking survey would
    need to be submitted by an independent transport consultant as a result of
    parking surveys etc.
13. The Appellant as part of the appeal has submitted some photographs of parking
    in the surrounding area which have been time stamped 19 June 2026 between
    15:00-12:00am. This is not sufficient information in order to demonstrate that the
    surrounding road network is able to cater for the increased street parking caused
    by the proposed use. I note that the Appellant feels that the Council should



1
    Coventry City Council Licensing Team, Amenities and Facilities Guide for Houses in Multiple Occupation (HMO), P9-10

www.planningportal.gov.uk/planninginspectorate              3
Appeal Decision: 6011661

     produce evidence, however it is for the Appellant to demonstrate that the
     proposal will not cause harm as it is their planning application. I also note
     comments around business car parks that are available in the evening as no one
     is working, however these are private car parks and there is no formal
     agreement in place which enables this to occur.
14. Taking the above into account, and based on the information provided, it has not
    been demonstrated via sufficient evidence that the proposed use is able to be
    accommodated within the existing road network. As such the proposal would be
    made contrary to DPD Policy HMO1 and LP Policy AC3 as described previously.
Other Matters
15. I appreciate the Appellant’s SoC which includes benefits present in this scheme,
    which include the provision of different forms of housing within a sustainable
    location, and additionally that there would be short term economic benefits in the
    construction of the scheme and longer-term socio-economic benefits from
    expenditure in the local area from the proposed tenants. Benefits stated such as
    cycle storage, efficient reuse of a dwelling are private benefits and could also be
    provided in a scheme that is more compliant with development plan policies.
16. Taking the above into account the benefits of the scheme are not outweighed by
    the harm caused to amenity, parking and concentration of HMOs as described
    previously.
Conclusions
17. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal be dismissed.

     J Somers
     INSPECTOR




www.planningportal.gov.uk/planninginspectorate   4
