 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 26 August 2026
 by Martin Andrews MA(Planning) BSc(Econ) DipTP & DipTP(Dist) MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 30 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011009
 7 Douro Street, London E3 2TS
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Simon Noakes against the decision of the London Borough of Tower
      Hamlets.
 •    The application Ref. is PA/26/00211.
 •    The development proposed is a mansard roof to be constructed on the existing flat roof to provide an
      additional bedroom, bathroom, and playroom.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issue
2. The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the
   host dwelling; the terrace of which it forms part, and the Fairfield Road
   Conservation Area. The terrace is locally listed and the building as part of the
   terrace is therefore regarded as a non-designated heritage asset.
Reasons
3. I saw on my visit that No. 7 forms part of a terrace which includes a group of flat-
   roofed dwellings which also share the same design for the front elevation. Although
   the appearance of the terrace changes, including pitched roofs, nearer the junction
   with Fairfield Road, the appeal dwelling is seen in the context of its more immediate
   neighbours with a uniformity and symmetry that makes an important contribution to
   the street scene and the conservation area.
4. For the appellant it is argued that the recessed position of the proposed roof
   addition would ensure that the front elevation of the building would remain
   undisturbed. However, a mansard roof would be a bulky roof with a distinctive
   design out of keeping with the existing appearance of the dwelling. And as such I
   am satisfied that it would be noticeable from a number of vantage points in the
   street scene and perceived negatively.
5. The grounds of appeal also refer to the significant presence and scale of nearby
   dwelling blocks, but rather than having the effect of limiting the visual impact of the
   proposed roof additions by way of comparison, I consider that these reinforce the
   necessity to maintain the design integrity of the existing dwelling and the positive
   contribution that it makes to the street scene.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision Ref. 6011009


6. Overall, I find that the addition of the mansard roof would significantly alter the
   character and appearance of the dwelling and in a form that would be a jarring
   feature in Douro Street. Accordingly, the extension would draw the eye and be
   seen as being harmful to the character and appearance of the Fairfield
   Conservation Area. There would therefore be an unacceptable conflict with
   Policies S.DH1 & S.DH3 of the Tower Hamlets Local Plan 2020 and Policies D4 &
   HC1 of the London Plan 2021.
7. I have also had regard to Polices HE6 and HE7 of the National Planning Policy
   Framework, August 2026. As regards Policy HE6 there would be incremental harm
   to the significance of the Fairfield Conservation Area as a designated heritage
   asset and with no meaningful public benefit to outweigh this. In the case of Policy
   HE7, the harm caused to the significance of the dwelling and the terrace as a non-
   designated heritage asset would not be outweighed by the benefit to the appellant
   of the additional accommodation, nor by any temporary economic benefit arising
   from its construction.
8. For the above reasons, and having had regard to all other matters raised, the
   appeal fails.

Martin Andrews
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
