 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 8 September 2026
 by P Eggleton BSc(Hons) MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 01 October 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011337
 Land west of Sunnyside, Glentham LN8 2FA
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr Dale Lui on behalf of Nettleham Development Ltd against the decision of
     West Lindsey District Council.
 •   The application reference is WL/2025/01036.
 •   The development proposed is three over 55's detached dwellings.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issues
2. The main issues are whether the proposal would be in an appropriate location for
   new development, and the effect on the character and appearance of the area.
Reasons
3. The proposal would result in three large 4-bedroom houses. It is proposed that
   occupation would be restricted to require that at least one resident would be aged
   55 years or older. The houses would differ from general market houses as they
   would be built to a higher accessibility standard than part M of the building
   regulations. They would also include a shared communal garden, in addition to the
   private gardens, for growing fruit and vegetables, described as a measure aimed at
   reducing isolation.
4. The proposed site lies beyond, but adjacent to, the relatively modern development,
   Sunnyside and would be accessed through it. In this respect, it would extend the
   village to the west along the south side of the A631. New development has been
   permitted adjacent to the Sunnyside houses to the south. That site has houses to
   the south and east along High Street. There is not development to the west of the
   appeal site on this side of the A631.
5. There is development on the north side of the A631 with distinct individual houses
   and a former nursery representing historic development adjacent to the road. The
   area between the two houses closest to the built-up area of the settlement has
   permission to be developed. This will consolidate housing development to the west
   of the settlement. The planning report in relation to that housing development
   identifies that as the land is between the two properties and extends no deeper
   than the garden centre, it was accepted as being within the developed footprint of



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision: 6011337


     Glentham. There is also significant development approved at the garden centre
     further to the west and a housing site allocation.
Suitability of the location
6. The Central Lincolnshire Local Plan (LP) was adopted in 2023. The council has a
   five year supply of housing sites and satisfies the latest housing delivery test.
7. LP Policy S1 identifies Glentham as a small village. It advises that well connected
   or well served small villages may receive some limited growth, primarily through
   allocations in the plan, in order to achieve a balance between ensuring the vitality
   of the village and the rural character. Beyond site allocations, development will be
   limited to that which accords with Policy S4.
8. Policy S4 advises that small villages will experience limited growth to support their
   role and function, including on unallocated sites in appropriate locations within the
   developed footprint of the village. Having regard to the glossary definitions, this site
   would not be within the developed footprint of the village as it would extend beyond
   it to the west. The continuous built form of the settlement clearly ends at the current
   extent of the Sunnyside houses on this side of the A631. It would also significantly
   extend the core shape and form of the settlement rather than retain it. Whilst I have
   had regard to the development accepted by the council to the north of the A631,
   this does not alter my conclusion with regard to this site. The policy only accepts
   development immediately adjacent to the settlement if it is for affordable housing.
   This proposal conflicts with Policy S4.
9. The appellant has provided a report which assesses the need for specialist housing
   for older people in West Lindsey. It indicates that the Central Lincolnshire Housing
   Needs Assessment (HNA) does not identify the need for West Lindsey specifically;
   or identify the future needs of those not living within communal establishments. It is
   suggested that there is a deficit for all market-led specialist accommodation types
   for older people in West Lindsey and that the largest deficit is for ‘market age
   exclusive and sheltered accommodation’. It is reported that this is projected to
   increase.
10. The evidence of a growing need for accommodation for the elderly in general, is not
    disputed by the council. The evidence provided by the appellant is numeric and
    makes reference to the estimated combined need for ‘market age exclusive and
    sheltered accommodation’. The evidence provided does not demonstrate what this
    need represents in terms of size, location and quality of dwellings, needed in the
    future for older people, as referenced in Planning Practice Guidance (PPG). The
    evidence presented does not indicate how much, or if any part of the numeric need
    for market age exclusive accommodation, would relate to large 4-bedroom
    dwellings, particularly in an edge of a small rural settlement location.
11. LP Policy S23 sets out that developers are expected to provide housing solutions
    that contribute to meeting the housing needs of the housing market area, as
    identified in the latest HNA and in any other appropriate local evidence. This means
    new residential development should maintain, provide or contribute to, a mix of
    housing tenures, types and sizes to help support the creation of mixed, balanced
    and inclusive communities.
12. The supporting text states that ‘it is recognised in the HNA that Central Lincolnshire
    has an ageing population which will lead to specific accommodation needs.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision: 6011337


     Improved space standards are gradually being introduced through building
     regulations to ensure that housing has adequate space to meet wider needs and
     can be adapted easily to meet changing needs. These optional standards,
     specifically M4(2) (accessible and adaptable buildings) and M4(3) (wheelchair user
     dwellings), are already being delivered in developments’. Whilst the development
     plan encourages housing with higher access standards, it does not anticipate the
     need for housing sites beyond those allocated and allowed by its policies, which
     currently provide a positive overall housing supply.
13. The evidence presented does not demonstrate that the specific details of this
    proposal would address an evidenced unmet need. The proposal does not
    therefore gain support from Policy S23 and conflicts with Policy S4(3).
Character and appearance
14. The Sunnyside houses have significantly altered the approach to the settlement
    and the character of the settlement edge. These houses are currently screened to
    an extent, in longer views from the west, by the existing vegetation along the side
    of the appeal site and the A631. Even with existing vegetation retained and
    enhanced, including within the blue line area, given the height and positions of the
    proposed houses and the rising ground before them, the new dwellings would
    detract from the approach to the settlement and the character of the countryside, as
    experienced when approaching the settlement from the west.
15. The development would conflict with LP Policy S53 as it would fail to contribute
    positively to local character, landscape and townscape. Although outside the
    village, it would also conflict with the requirements of Policy S4(2) as it would not
    preserve or enhance the settlement’s character and appearance; and would
    significantly harm the character and appearance of the surrounding countryside
    and the rural setting of the village.
16. With regard to the development plan, the proposal would conflict with its individual
    policies and the LP when taken as a whole.
Weight to be afforded to the development plan
17. The appellant suggests that the development plan places less emphasis on
    specialist housing for the elderly than the National Planning Policy Framework 2026
    (Framework) and that the Framework should therefore be afforded more weight.
    The Framework was published after the decision was issued but the parties have
    had the opportunity to comment on it. The Framework sets out that development
    plan policies (or parts of those policies) which are materially inconsistent with
    national decision-making policies in the Framework should be given very limited
    weight.
18. The LP considers the accommodation needs of specific groups in the community,
    referencing the needs of older people as set out above with regard to Policy S23.
    The provisions within the PPG, which are referred to by the appellant, date from
    when the LP was being prepared and adopted. The PPG is clear that it is up to the
    plan-making body to decide whether to allocate sites for specialist housing for older
    people. Given the above, it is not considered that the LP is inconsistent with the
    Framework with regard to Policies S1, S4 or S23 and can be afforded full weight.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
 Appeal Decision: 6011337


19. It is suggested that local housing requirements have risen since the adoption of the
    LP. This is a matter for the review of the LP which is already underway. This will be
    required to take into account the plan making Polices HO1 and HO5 of the
    Framework referred to by the appellant. This does not reduce the primacy of the
    development plan at this time.
National Planning Policy Framework 2026 and other considerations
20. Planning law requires that applications for planning permission be determined in
    accordance with the development plan, unless material considerations indicate
    otherwise. The national decision-making policies in the Framework are a material
    consideration in making decisions and should be read alongside the policies in the
    development plan.
21. The site lies outside the settlement and Framework Policy S5 provides a list of
    developments that should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects. This proposal does not represent
    infill development as suggested by the appellant as it extends development away
    from the settlement. The only other relevant matter within the list is part (j),
    development which would address an evidenced unmet need.
22. There is no unmet need for housing in general. With regard to specialist housing, it
    has already been established that the evidence does not specifically identify a need
    for large 4-bedroom houses for the over 55’s. The proposal does not address an
    unmet need in that respect. Policy S5(4) is clear that if development does not
    satisfy its criteria, it should only be approved in exceptional circumstances, where
    the benefits of the proposal would substantially outweigh the adverse effects,
    including to the character of the countryside and in relation to promoting
    sustainable patterns of movement.
23. It has already been concluded that the proposal would result in harm to the
    character of the countryside and in that respect, it would fail to satisfy Framework
    Policy N2(1a) with regard to landscape character. With regard to promoting
    sustainable patterns of movement, the village has a small shop and a very limited
    range of other local services. Generally, as described by the appellant, residents
    would be reliant on Market Rasen, or other settlements, for services such as health
    care, schools and supermarkets. Although there is a bus stop nearby and journey
    times are described as being relatively short, as no evidence has been provided
    with regard to bus frequency, it cannot be assumed that a convenient service would
    be available.
24. Framework Policy TR3(1a) advises that proposals should be in locations that are
    sustainable, limiting the need to travel, particularly by private car; and offer a
    genuine choice of transport modes. It advises that the Connectivity Tool should be
    used alongside other relevant quantitative or qualitative evidence in assessing the
    connectivity of particular locations. The Connectivity Tool provides a particularly low
    score for connectivity. Whilst it is positive with regard to comparisons with other
    local sites and rural villages, it reflects the physical situation on the ground,
    including the local absence of services and the need to travel to access them.
25. Based on the evidence presented and my findings during my visit, it must be
    concluded that this site is poorly connected and residents would be likely to rely
    heavily on the use of private vehicles to access most services, other than the small
    local shop, public house and other village services. This location would not limit the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        4
 Appeal Decision: 6011337


     need to travel, particularly by private car; or offer a genuine choice of transport
     modes and results in conflict with Policy TR3.
26. With regard to meeting the need for homes, Framework Policy HO7 requires that
    substantial weight be given to the benefits of providing homes which will contribute
    towards meeting the evidenced accommodation needs of the community, as
    identified through needs assessments and other relevant evidence. This includes
    homes needed for different groups. Policy HO9, offers support for specialist forms
    of accommodation if they offer living conditions and access to services which are
    appropriate to the needs of their residents and users.
27. This proposal would satisfy the requirement that specialist housing for older people
    would be delivered to M4(2) accessibility standards. Nothwithstanding the positive
    supply of housing sites generally; and my concerns regarding the need for the
    houses currently proposed, it has already been found that this is not a location
    where residents are able to access frequently used services easily and safely by
    walking, wheeling (including mobility scooters) and by public transport.
28. As need has not been established, either generally or with regard to this specific
    form of specialist housing, only moderate weight is afforded to the additional
    provision of housing as it supports the Framework’s economic objective, as the
    building works and the activities of the residents would add to the economy; and its
    social objectives as residents would contribute to the maintenance of existing
    services. Reference has been made to the community provisions within the village
    and residents would help to support those activities. It would however conflict with
    the environmental objective of the Framework.
29. It is not clear why the proposed density at this site would be so low. Even having
    regard to net density and the exclusion of the area of communal garden, it
    represents a very low density housing scheme. It therefore conflicts with
    Framework Policy L3(2b) which requires that development footprints should make
    the best use of a site’s development potential. In these circumstances, the policy
    indicates that the development should be refused.
30. Reference has been made to other housing sites which the appellant considers are
    spatially less favourable when considered against the built form, linear settlement
    pattern and the built character of the historic core of Glentham. This includes the
    nearby allocation within the LP. Whilst I have had regard to these in reaching my
    conclusions, I must consider this proposal on its own particular merits and in the
    light of current local and national policy. This is also the case with regard to the
    appeals referenced by the appellant.
Conclusions
31. The proposal would not be in an appropriate location for new development; and
    would result in harm to the character and appearance of the area. It would be in
    clear conflict with the development plan which can be afforded full weight. The
    Framework is clear that the planning system should be genuinely plan-led.
32. The Framework represents a material consideration but the evidence presented
    does not demonstrate that this specific proposal would meet an identified need. It
    does not therefore satisfy its requirements with regard to specialist housing
    delivery, or housing delivery generally. The proposal conflicts with its policies with
    regard to landscape character, promoting sustainable transport and making

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         5
 Appeal Decision: 6011337


     effective use of land. Taking the Framework as a whole, it weighs against the
     proposal. Policy L3(4) is clear that development proposals that do not make
     efficient use of land should be refused; and furthermore, there are no exceptional
     circumstances that indicate that the benefits of the proposal would substantially
     outweigh the adverse effects, including to the character of the countryside and in
     relation to promoting sustainable patterns of movement.
33. Although there are material considerations that provide weight in favour of
    development, they are not sufficient to outweigh the concerns; and they do not
    indicate that a decision contrary to the development plan should be reached. I
    therefore dismiss the appeal.

Peter Eggleton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       6
