Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 14 September 2026
by H Whitfield BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 16 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011381
238 Caulfield Road, East Ham, Newham, London E6 2DQ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) against
     a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr James Adebayo (Jamores Limited) against the decision of the Council of the
     London Borough of Newham.
•    The application Ref is 26/00254/FUL.
•    The development proposed is the change of use of existing dwellinghouse (C3 use) to children's home
     for 3. no children (C2 use). Conversion and extension of existing attached garage to create a separate
     planning unit consisting of an additional children's home for 1. no child (C2 use).

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a single-storey rear
       extension and rear elevation alterations, subdivision of the dwellinghouse, conversion
       and extension of the side garage to a children’s home (Use Class C2) for 1 no. child
       and the change of use of the main dwellinghouse to a children’s home (Use Class C2)
       for 3 no. children, with associated alterations at 238 Caulfield Road, East Ham,
       Newham, London E6 2DQ in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref
       26/00254/FUL and subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.     For the avoidance of doubt, I have used the description from the application form in
       the banner heading above. However, in my formal decision I have used the
       description from the decision notice with minor amendments to omit superfluous
       details, as this more accurately describes the development.
3.     The evidence indicates that the appeal scheme is part-retrospective insofar as the single
       storey rear extension and rear elevation alterations have already taken place. However,
       I observed on my site visit that the alterations to the front elevation to facilitate the
       conversion of the garage and subdivision of the property had not been undertaken.
       I have determined the appeal on this basis and based on the submitted plans.
4.     During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
       (2026) (the Framework) was published. The main parties were provided with an
       opportunity to comment on the implications of the revised Framework, and I have
       considered the revised Framework in my determination of this appeal.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues in this appeal are:
       •   the effect of the proposed development on the supply of family housing in the
           Borough;

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011381


       •   whether the site is a suitable location for the proposed development, having
           regard to identified need;
       •   whether the development would provide acceptable living conditions for future
           occupants having particular regard to the provision of facilities;
       •   the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of neighbouring
           occupants having particular regard to noise and disturbance; and
       •   the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of the
           area.
Reasons
Family housing
6.     The appeal building is a two-storey, three bedroomed end-of-terrace dwelling located
       in a predominantly residential area. The appeal scheme proposes the extension and
       subdivision of the existing dwelling to create two C2 use care homes, one of which
       would accommodate up to three children and the other would be a single occupancy
       home. The home is intended to support children with complex learning, emotional and
       or behavioural difficulties who would be cared for by staff on a 24 hour basis.
7.     The spatial strategy in the Newham Local Plan (2018) (NLP) supports the stabilisation
       of communities and protection of family housing. Policy S1 of the NLP states that
       mixed and balanced communities should be achieved where homes are not created
       at the expense of the provision and protection of family housing, which is defined as
       houses or flats that contain three or more bedrooms.
8.     Policy H4 of the NLP states that the Council will specifically protect three and four or
       more bedroomed family housing. In adopting this approach, the Council recognises
       that the greatest housing need within the Borough is for family-sized dwellings. These
       policies align with Policy HO1 of the Framework which requires that planning policies
       reflect the housing needs of different groups in the community, including families with
       children.
9.     Notwithstanding the above, Policy H4 of the NLP sets out that the subdivision or
       conversion of family dwellings may be appropriate subject to meeting various
       exception criteria. I have no information before me as to whether the site is located
       within a town or local centre, or along a section of a Quality Movement Corridor or
       Linear Gateway within 400m of a town or local centre. However, the dwelling has a
       clearly defined front entrance, access to external private amenity space to the rear,
       and is not located above an existing occupied commercial unit. It would therefore fail
       to meet all the criteria set out under part 2.a. of Policy H4.
10. The appellant contends that the occupation of the care homes would not be dissimilar
    to a family environment and would support local children. While this is not in dispute,
    even though the property would remain in residential use, conversion to C2 use would
    preclude the dwelling from being utilised as family housing, even if the change of use
    could be reversed in the future. This scheme would therefore remove a family-sized
    dwellinghouse from the market, which the development plan specifically seeks to
    resist.
11. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude that the development would result in the
    loss of a family-sized dwelling and thus would have a detrimental effect on the supply

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011381


       of such housing within the Borough, for which there is an identified need. This is
       contrary to Policy H4 of the NLP which specifically seeks to protect family housing.
       However, as the property would still retain a residential use would provide housing,
       albeit for a different purpose, I find no conflict with Policy H8 of the London Plan or
       Policies S1, H1, or H3 of the NLP insofar as they support the creation of mixed and
       balanced communities and housing of different types, sizes and tenures.
Whether the site is a suitable location to meet an identified need
12. Policy H3 of the NLP states that new specialist use class C2 properties will be
    directed towards local need, should be appropriately located in terms of the
    achievement of mixed and balanced communities and the ability to meet the needs of
    its occupants. The policy also states that occupancy from residents from outside of
    Newham should not on average comprise more than 33% of total residents. This is
    reflective of Policy H12 of the London Plan which supports the delivery of supported
    and specialist housing which meets an identified need, including accommodation for
    young people with support needs.
13. In respect of need, the Newham Children in Care Sufficiency Strategy 2022- 2025
    states that there are insufficient local places for children and young people with
    multiple and complex needs, including those at risk of Child Sexual Exploitation, Child
    Criminal Exploitation, young people with disabilities and young people with social,
    emotional and mental health needs. The Council confirms that the key areas of
    shortage are for therapeutic provisions for children with complex needs and specialist
    provisions for children with disabilities and the evidence indicates that there is an
    increasing need for solo homes within the borough. Because of these shortages, the
    Council explains that the complex needs of Newham children are not being met by
    existing care homes and that developments that do not cater for these complex and
    higher-level need profiles do not support the identified needs in the Borough. These
    matters are not disputed by the appellant.
14. The appeal scheme proposes two specialist care homes, one three-bed unit and one
    solo home for children aged 5 to 18 years old with complex learning disabilities,
    emotional and/or behavioural difficulties. The Council’s Social Services Children and
    Young Persons Commissioner explains that this aligns with the Borough’s
    commissioning priorities for homes that can support children with complex and severe
    learning needs within the age range. Based on the evidence before me, I see no
    reason to come to a different conclusion. The care homes would therefore help to
    meet an identified need.
15. To ensure such developments meet specialist housing requirements, Policy H3 sets out
    that proposals for housing other than conventional housing should include an
    appropriately detailed and resourced management plan demonstrating the residential
    population mix and other management practices that minimise safeguarding risks,
    maximise opportunities to create and sustain social networks and access appropriate
    support, and ensures that the development is neighbourly. Proposals should also
    demonstrate the achievement of quality standards appropriate to the use, which the
    Council has confirmed that, given the primary purpose of this home is for the provision of
    care for children and young people, would be the Ofsted quality standards.
16. In this respect, the Council raises concerns regarding the lack of detail as to how the
    proposed care model will meet the specific needs of children with complex learning
    disabilities and insufficient information regarding the specific learning disability model.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011381


       However, the appellant’s case is supported by various documents including a
       Management Plan, Statement of Purpose and Function (SOP), and Specialist Housing
       and Community Facilities Statement. These documents set out the proposed level of
       care provision, provide a management plan of how the facilities would be operated and
       managed, including details of staffing and how children would be clinically supported.
       A company profile has also been provided detailing staff experience.
17. In terms of the appropriateness of the location for the intended use, there is no
    persuasive evidence before me that demonstrates that the appeal building would be
    incapable of accommodating the two care homes. Based on the evidence before me, I
    see no reason why an appropriate care model to meet the needs of children of Newham
    could not be delivered by the appeal scheme or why the care homes would be incapable
    of achieving the relevant Ofsted criteria, which is a separate regulatory process.
18. Concerns are also raised in relation to the appellant’s location risk assessment which
    the Council considers fails to evidence meaningful engagement, consultation, or
    intelligence-sharing with relevant local agencies or safeguarding partners. However,
    the evidence before me details the management practices that would be put in place
    to minimise safeguarding risks and ensure the safety and supervision of children. My
    attention has not been drawn to any specific planning policy which requires the
    appellant to consult directly with other agencies as part of the planning application
    process either. While the appellant has identified community safety risks in the area,
    these are likely to be applicable across London. Nevertheless, the evidence indicates
    that collaborative working with relevant bodies will ensure that placements are
    carefully managed to mitigate risks. Overall, I am satisfied that the evidence before
    me appropriately details the management practices that would be put in place to
    minimise safeguarding risks.
19. The scheme would result in the creation of two care homes on this street. However,
    there is no substantive evidence before me that would indicate that the proposal would
    lead to an overconcentration of C2 uses within the area to the detriment of the balance
    of the community. The surrounding area is predominately characterised by residential
    properties, and this would still be the case if the appeal were to be allowed. In any
    event, the operation of the properties in the manner described would not, in many
    respects, differ significantly from the current function of the appeal building as a larger
    family dwelling, regardless of the likelihood or frequency of visits from external parties.
20. The appeal scheme would increase local specialist care capacity and proposes to
    provide a level of care that would align with the Borough’s commissioning priorities for
    homes that can support children with complex and severe learning needs. There is no
    evidence before me that the appeal building, and care provision would be incapable
    of meeting the appropriate service model necessary to meet the local need
    commissioning gap and nothing before me to suggest that these homes would not
    deliver good outcomes for children of Newham.
21. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude that the site is a suitable location for the
    proposed development, having regard to identified need. This complies with Policy H3
    of the NLP and Policy H12 of the London Plan, the intentions of which seek to ensure
    that appropriate forms of accommodation are provided in the right locations and meet
    identified needs. It also aligns with Policy HO1 of the Framework which requires that
    planning policies reflect the accommodation needs of different groups in the
    community, including looked after children. While the Council has referred to Policy


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6011381


       SP1 of the NLP, as this relates to place-making principles it is not determinative in my
       consideration of this main issue.
Living conditions – future occupants
22. The scheme proposes one three-bed care home and one solo care home, that could
    accommodate a maximum of four children. Each child would have their own bedroom,
    which the Council states would meet the minimum required space standards. The
    Council’s concerns relate to a lack of dedicated therapy/sensory room and allocated
    area for carers on duty for administration and management purposes.
23. However, both properties would have dedicated ‘rest rooms’ and the Council has not
    clearly articulated why these would be unsuitable for therapeutic care purposes or
    could not serve as a sensory space. The homes would also have separate living rooms
    from the rest rooms and bedrooms used by the children, and I see no reason why
    these would be unsuitable for day-to-day administrative tasks either. The appellant also
    advises that staff have access to an office which supports the administration of the
    homes and provides opportunities for meetings with partners/stakeholders. In any
    event, the Council has not directed me to any specific local or national planning policy
    which sets out the internal space and facility requirements for care homes and based
    on the information before me, the homes would provide sufficient facilities required for
    the day-to-day operations of the children’s homes.
24. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude the development would provide acceptable
    living conditions for future occupants having particular regard to the provision of
    facilities. This complies with Policies SP1, SP3 and H3 of the NLP insofar as they seek
    high-quality developments that meet the specialist accommodation care needs of its
    occupants. It also accords with Policy P3 of the Framework where it supports
    developments which provide healthy living conditions for occupiers.
25. Whilst the Council has referred to conflict with the London Plan, it has not referred to
    any specific policies against which it considers there to be conflict. Accordingly, any
    perceived conflict has not been determinative in my consideration of this main issue.
Living conditions – neighbouring occupants
26. The appeal relates to an existing residential dwelling located in a predominantly
    residential area. At the time of my site visit I experienced relatively low levels of noise
    and disturbance, consistent with it being a residential suburb. Whilst my visit can only
    represent a snapshot in time, there is nothing in the evidence to suggest that what I
    observed was uncommon.
27. The care homes would accommodate up to four children who would be supported by
    carers working 24-hour shifts. The evidence indicates there would be a maximum of
    three to four staff members on site at any one time during staff changeover periods
    and that visitors to the site would be on an appointment basis.
28. The Council raises concerns about the co-location of the two care homes next to one
    another and the effects of the cumulative level of activity associated with residents,
    staff and professional visitors through noise and disturbance. However, the purpose
    of the care homes and the level of care provision seek to replicate normal home life
    and day to day living through establishing structures, routines, facilitating regular
    attendance at school, health appointments and leisure activities while linking in with
    social services. Given the scale of the two care homes, the level of associated


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6011381


       occupation, pattern and intensity of use would not be dissimilar to family households
       occupying dwellings of these sizes.
29. There would be activity and additional movements associated with the carers and
    other visiting professionals. However, I have no persuasive evidence that this would
    result in more comings and goings than visitors or deliveries to a family home or
    would result in a noticeable or harmful increase in noise or disturbance. This is
    despite the co-location of the two homes together, which may have some shared
    movement patterns, for example from visiting professionals.
30. Interested parties have raised concerns regarding anti-social behaviour in the area,
    including disruption to community cohesion and the effects on the residential
    character of the area. However, I have no substantive evidence before me that the
    placement of up to four children across the two care homes would lead to a material
    escalation in anti-social behaviour. Nor that they would prevent community stability or
    alter the residential character of the area.
31. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude the development would not harm the
    living conditions of neighbouring occupants having particular regard to noise and
    disturbance. This complies with Policies SP1 and SP8 of the NLP and Policy D3 of
    the London Plan insofar as they seek high-quality, neighbourly developments that
    avoid negative impacts for neighbours and help prevent impacts of noise. It also
    accords with Policy P3 of the Framework which supports developments which do not
    give rise to, or contribute to, an unacceptable level of noise pollution.
Character and appearance
32. The appeal site relates to a two-storey semi-detached dwelling at the end of Caulfield
    Road, which is predominately characterised by two-storey semi-detached and
    terraced properties of a similar scale and design. While some properties in the street
    appear to have been altered over time, the street scene maintains a relatively regular
    and cohesive appearance with consistent architectural features and palette of
    materials. The appeal building has a single storey flat roofed garage which adjoins the
    side elevation of the dwelling and is accessed via a dropped kerb with a high metal
    gate in line with the back edge of the pavement.
33. The appeal scheme proposes a single storey flat roofed extension to the rear of the
    existing garage to facilitate its conversion to a separate one-bedroomed care home.
    The extension would be relatively modest in scale and height and given the context of
    the appeal site, is unlikely to be highly prominent in the public realm. The extension
    would be finished with white render and the changes to the front elevation include the
    replacement of the existing garage door with a pedestrian door and window. While
    this portion of the building would still read as a single-storey subordinate range to the
    two-storey dwelling, the changes to the façade of the garage would introduce a clearly
    separate access from the main dwelling, establishing it as a separate unit of
    accommodation and there is nothing before me to suggest that these changes would
    not be carried out to a high quality.
34. The façade of the converted garage range would incorporate typical domestic
    features that would not be incongruous in this context and the use of render across
    the front elevation would assimilate well within the street scene which features a
    range of render, brick and painted brickwork finishes. No development is proposed
    beyond the existing front elevations and therefore there would be no effect on the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6011381


       consistency of the building line and overall, the proposed development would not
       undermine the coherency of the street scene.
35. The Council has suggested that the existing metal gate to the front of the garage
    diminishes the legibility of the development and undermines its sense of place,
    reinforcing a hostile and industrial appearance for the care home. However, no gates
    are shown on the proposed site plan or elevations. Nevertheless, I note the gate is an
    existing established feature in the street scene and there is nothing before me to
    suggest that it does not benefit from express or deemed planning permission. In the
    event that it was to be retained, the change of use of the building behind it would have
    little bearing on its impact in the street scene and ultimately would result in no greater
    harm on the character and appearance of the area than the existing situation.
36. The Council has referred to a requirement to reinstate the existing dropped kerb in
    front of the garage to a footway in the interest of public safety and visual amenity.
    However, there is nothing before me to suggest why the retention of the dropped kerb
    would be harmful on either account. It is also suggested that a green roof should be
    incorporated on the converted garage range to offset the loss of greenery from the
    rear of the site and lack of proposed planting. However, I have not been directed to
    any planning policy which requires green roofs or landscaping to be included within
    developments, and the evidence does not indicate that any greenery or trees that
    may have been removed were subject to any specific protection. Irrespective of this,
    the existing flat roof of the garage does not feature a green roof, and this is not
    harmful to the character and appearance of the area. As such, I do not consider the
    inclusion of a green roof to be necessary in this case.
37. For the above reasons, I conclude the development would not result in harm to the
    character and appearance of the area. This complies with policies SP1 and SP3 of
    the NLP and Policy D4 of the London Plan insofar as they seek high-quality design
    which responds to local character, reinforces local distinctiveness and integrates with
    the surrounding context. It also accords with Policy DP3 of the Framework which
    supports well-designed places and developments that respond to their context.
Other Matters
38. The site is located within the 6.2km Zone of Influence of the Epping Forest Special
    Area for Conservation (SAC) which is a European Designated Site afforded protection
    under the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended) (the
    Habitat Regulations). The appeal scheme would replace a three bedroomed dwelling
    with two children’s care home that would accommodate up to four children and
    several staff. Given the nature and scale of the proposed use, the level of occupation
    of the care homes are unlikely to significantly exceed that which might reasonably be
    expected to take place at the existing dwelling. On this basis, the appeal scheme
    would not lead to increased recreational pressure upon the SAC and thus no likely
    significant effect on its integrity, either individually or in combination with other
    schemes. Accordingly, it would not be fair, reasonable or necessary to require
    contributions to Strategic Access Management and Monitoring measures.
Planning Balance
39. The appeal scheme would result in the loss of a family-sized dwelling, adversely
    affecting the supply of such housing for which there is an identified need in the
    Borough, contrary to the aforementioned policies of the NLP and London Plan.
    However, the scheme would deliver two specialist care homes which would meet an

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6011381


       identified need for homes for children and young people with complex and severe
       learning needs and solo homes. The evidence before me does not indicate whether
       this scheme would contribute towards the area where there is the greatest identified
       housing need. However, the provision of both specialist accommodation and family
       housing forms part of the mix of balanced communities and the policy context before
       me indicates that there is a need for both.
40. Although the appeal scheme would lead to the loss of a family home which would
    result in harm, it would provide two specialist units of accommodation which would
    meet the needs of other residents of the Borough which equally weighs in favour of the
    scheme. This aligns with the development plan where it seeks to provide housing of all
    tenures which support mixed and balanced communities and the Framework insofar as
    it supports planning decisions that reflect the housing needs of different groups in the
    community. No other harm has been identified.
41. For the reasons given above, I therefore find that in the particular circumstances of this
    case, the appeal scheme would accord with the development plan when read as a
    whole, and material considerations do not indicate that a decision should be taken
    other than in accordance with the development plan.
Conditions
42. I have considered the conditions suggested by the Council against the tests in the
    Framework and the Planning Practice Guidance. Where appropriate, I have amended
    the wording of the conditions to improve precision and enforceability.
43. As the scheme is not wholly retrospective, I have imposed conditions specifying the
    period for commencement and requiring the development to be carried out in
    accordance with the approved plans in the interests of planning certainty. I have also
    imposed a condition requiring the submission of details of a secure cycle store, in the
    interests of promoting sustainable transport.
44. The Council has suggested a condition requiring the submission of material samples
    and architectural details including the window specifications. However, the appeal site
    is not in a particularly sensitive area, and the evidence indicates that the materials are
    proposed to match the appeal building. Accordingly, in the interest of the character and
    appearance of the area, I have imposed a condition requiring the materials to be in
    accordance with those listed on the planning application form.
Conclusion
45. For the reasons given above I conclude that the appeal should be allowed.

H Whitfield
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6011381


                                           SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans and documents:
                   •    Location Plan drawing no. 100 Rev. A
                   •    Existing and Proposed Site Plan drawing no. 101 Rev. A
                   •    Proposed Elevations drawing no. 105 Rev. B
                   •    Proposed Floor Plans drawing no. 104 Rev. B
     3)       The external surfaces of the development hereby permitted shall be
              constructed of the materials specified on the planning application form and
              approved plans.
     4)       The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied until a scheme for
              secure bicycle storage has been submitted to and approved in writing by the
              local planning authority. The submitted details shall include the location,
              design and appearance, layout and dimensions of the storage facility. The
              scheme shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details before
              any part of the development is first brought into use and kept available for the
              storage of bicycles thereafter.
                                              END OF SCHEDULE




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         9
