Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 13 August 2026
by K E Down MA(Oxon) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011833
14 Brunel Road, High Wycombe, Bucks, HP13 5SR
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Joe Sepede against the decision of Buckinghamshire Council.
•   The application Ref is PL/26/00075/FA.
•   The development proposed is a single storey front extension and a single storey rear extension.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issue
2. There is one main issue which is the effect of the proposed rear extension on the
   living conditions of occupiers of 12 Brunel Road with respect to outlook.
Reasons
3. The appeal dwelling is a semi-detached house of traditional, gable ended design,
   set in a street of similar dwellings. It and its neighbours sit on land below street
   level with gardens that fall away to the rear. The appeal dwelling and its non-
   attached neighbour, No12, are set on a slightly staggered building line with No12
   forward of No14. There is a difference in levels between the two properties with the
   ground levels to the rear of No12 being noticeably lower than the decking to the
   rear of the appeal dwelling.
4. The original single storey garage at No12 has been converted to habitable
   accommodation. It has an obscure glazed window and door to the rear, understood
   to serve a bathroom. The dwelling also has two tandem single storey rear
   extensions, in total about 5-6m in depth and set about 3m from the shared
   boundary. These appear to be stepped down from the floor level in the host
   dwelling, following natural ground levels. The extensions have two large side
   windows facing towards No14. At the appeal dwelling the original garage has been
   replaced by a narrower side extension with a side access some 0.9m wide.
5. The proposed extension would project some 5m behind the original rear elevation
   of the dwelling and occupy the full width of the building. The finished floor would
   continue on a level with the floor of the existing dwelling, resulting in the extension
   increasing in height relative to the falling original ground level. The Council
   estimates that it would have a maximum height of about 3.7m above original
   ground level at No12. Beyond the extension there would be a raised patio with
   steps leading down to the garden.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision Ref: 6011833


6. The combination of the relative height of the proposed extension, its depth and its
   proximity to the shared boundary would result in it appearing overbearing when
   seen from the side windows in the rear extensions at No12, from which it would
   appear to loom over that property. Although the rearmost extension at No12 has
   glazing to the rear this would not overcome the loss of outlook from the side
   windows, particularly the one furthest from the rear elevation. Overall, the proposed
   extension would have a noticeably enclosing effect on outlook from No12 which
   would materially harm the living conditions of occupiers.
7. Nevertheless, I am satisfied that, despite the level difference, the rear patio at No12
   would retain an open outlook owing to its position generally beyond the proposed
   extension and its unrestricted outlook over its own garden and to the south. I am
   also satisfied that, notwithstanding the concerns of a third party, there would be no
   loss of light or privacy to No12 owing to its position to the south of the appeal site,
   the distance of separation and the proposed privacy screen suggested by the
   Council which could be secured through a planning condition.
8. The appellant suggests that it is the effect on the patio at No12 which most
   concerns the Council, but my reading of the Council’s evidence suggests that this is
   an additional concern following consideration of the effect on habitable rooms. It is
   also suggested that side windows are “not afforded the same level of outlook as
   rear or front facing windows” but that will vary on a case by case basis. In this case
   the existing large side windows currently enjoy an open outlook above the
   boundary fence to the rear of the appeal dwelling which should be protected as for
   any habitable room.
9. The appellant suggests that a 2m boundary fence could be erected between the
   two properties which would be higher than the existing fence. That may be so but
   this would have a lesser effect than the proposed extension which would be
   noticeably higher. Finally, it is suggested that an extension could be constructed
   under permitted development rights that would have a similar impact to the
   proposed extension. However, no details of such an extension have been
   submitted and so this argument carries little weight.
10. It is concluded on the main issue that the proposed single storey rear extension
    would have a materially detrimental effect on the living conditions of occupiers of 12
    Brunel Road with respect to outlook. In consequence, it would conflict with Policies
    DM35 and DM36 of the Wycombe District Local Plan, adopted 2019. Taken
    together and amongst other things these expect new development to improve the
    character of the area and the way it functions and, in particular, preserve the
    amenities of neighbouring properties, including outlook.
11. The Council raises no objection to the proposed single storey front extension and I
    agree this would be acceptable. Nevertheless, this would not alter or outweigh my
    findings regarding the single storey rear extension.
12. For the reasons set out above and having regard to all other matters raised,
    including the presence of other rear extensions in the immediate area, I conclude
    that the appeal should be dismissed.


K E Down
INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
