Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 10 August 2026
by R C Shrimplin MA(Cantab) DipArch RIBA FRTPI FCIArb MCIL
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date:03 September 2026


Appeal Reference: 6011755
192 Ware Road, Hoddesdon, Hertfordshire EN11 9EY
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr. S. Tona against the decision of the Borough of Broxbourne Council.
•   The application reference is 07/26/0256/HF.
•   The development proposed is described in the application form as follows: “two storey side
    extension, 2 storey rear extension, front feature gable extension, loft conversion & detached garage”.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary point
2. The ‘National Planning Policy Framework’ was revised in August 2026 but, in this
   instance, the issues most relevant to the appeal remain unaffected by the revisions
   that have been made to it. I am therefore satisfied that there is no requirement to
   seek further submissions on the revised Framework, and that no party would be
   disadvantaged by such a course of action. In this appeal, I have had regard to the
   most recent version, of course.
Main issue
3. The first main issue to be determined in this appeal is the effect of the proposed
   development on the character and appearance of the host building and its
   surroundings. The second is its effect on neighbours’ residential amenity.
Reasons
4. Ware Road (the A1170) is one of the main roads into Hoddesdon from the north
   and it carries a significant volume of traffic, although the surroundings are
   predominantly residential in character in the vicinity of the appeal site. Along this
   part of the road, some of the houses are set back from the main highway and
   number 192, together with its neighbours to the north, is served by a smaller slip
   road, to which the property has access. By contrast, properties to the south have
   direct access on to the main road. There is a variety of dwellings in the area, with
   buildings of different types and sizes.
5. Number 192 Ware Road is a detached two-storey house, with a single-storey
   element one side, built up to the north boundary. It has a good-sized plot, with a
   back garden that is mainly laid to grass and an area of garden to the side of the
   house, which adjoins the southern boundary. Beyond this side boundary, a

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision: 6011755


     footpath connects Ware Road and Danemead, to the east, adding to a sense of
     spaciousness.
6. It is now proposed to construct two-storey side and rear extensions, together with a
   front gable extension and loft conversion. A separate detached garage would be
   added at the front of the property.
7. Development Plan Policies include an emphasis on the importance of good design.
   In particular, Policy DSC1 of the ‘Broxbourne Local Plan’ (dated June 2020) is
   aimed at achieving a “high standard of design” and it sets out some broad design
   criteria that are relevant to proposals generally. Policy DSC2, on the other hand, is
   specifically concerned with extensions and alterations to existing buildings and it
   requires such proposals to “respect the character and design of the original
   building”. Policy EQ1 is concerned with protecting neighbours’ residential
   amenities (including their “outlook”).
8. The design approach reflects provisions in the revised version of the ‘National
   Planning Policy Framework’ which, like its predecessor, aims at “achieving well-
   designed places”.
9. In this case, the proposed alterations and extensions would have the effect of
   creating a very different building from the existing modest house at 192 Ware
   Road. The project would have the effect of replacing the existing house with a new
   building. That would not be objectionable in itself, however, and, in this case, there
   are good reasons to consider the design of the finished new house on its own
   merits.
10. The proposed new building would be considerably larger than the existing house,
    taking up almost the entire width of the site and creating a large block, with a
    “crown roof” over the main part of the footprint. In addition, a detached garage
    building would be constructed on the front part of the site, close to the frontage on
    the main road.
11. The completed house would extend into its back garden, well beyond the rear of
    the neighbour at number 188, which is set forward on its own plot. The retained
    garden area at the appeal site would still be clearly satisfactory but the long flank
    wall of the finished house would dominate the rear part of number 188 (to the
    south). The large and relatively unrelieved expanse of the new flank elevation,
    much closer to its side boundary than that of the existing house, would impinge to
    an unreasonable degree on the neighbours’ outlook at number 188. The new
    building would not significantly overshadow the neighbouring garden, while the first-
    floor windows in the elevation could be obscured to preserve privacy, but the effect
    on the neighbours’ outlook would be very harmful.
12. Apart from its scale, the finished building at number 192 would be striking in
    appearance architecturally, with a bold stairwell window in the centre of an
    elevation dominated by three gables. The design would have some affinities with
    other more modern designs in the locality but it would be unlike its more restrained
    neighbours.
13. Overall, the bulk and massing of the finished building, together with the detached
    garage building, would create an unduly dominant and intrusive form in the
    streetscene that would be out of keeping in the immediate context and harmful to
    the character and appearance of the surroundings. Moreover, the proposed

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
Appeal Decision: 6011755


     development would have a particularly harmful impact on the residential amenities
     of number 188, having an overbearing effect at the rear of the property. Thus, the
     scheme would amount to an overdevelopment of the site that would be
     unacceptable in planning terms.
14. Evidently, the appeal site lies within an established urban area, which is
    “sustainable” in planning terms, and the proposed development would make a
    substantial and useful addition to the existing house. Nevertheless, I am convinced
    that the harm that would be done to the character and appearance of the
    surroundings and the impact on the neighbours’ residential amenities outweigh the
    benefits of the project.
15. Hence, I have concluded that the scheme before me would conflict with both
    national and local planning policies (including Policies in the ‘Broxbourne Local
    Plan’) and that it ought not to be allowed. Although I have considered all the
    matters that have been raised in the representations, I have found nothing to cause
    me to alter my decision.



Roger C. Shrimplin
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
