Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by F Rafiq BSc (Hons) MCD MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011321
Land to the rear of 14 Cross Hills, Kippax LS25 7JP
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Colin McCarthy against the decision of Leeds City Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/01204/FU.
•    The development proposed is a retrospective application: car park layout at Ash Court and storage
     unit rear of Cross Hills.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The storage unit was in place at the time of my visit. For clarity, I have determined
       the appeal based on the submitted plans. This includes the ‘Car Parking
       Allocation’ plan1 which the decision notice references as a plan that the decision
       was based on.
3.     Although the ‘Technical Note: Highways’2 contains swept path analysis plans that
       show a different layout, as does a plan3 submitted with the appeal, it is important
       that what is considered at appeal is the same as that at the application stage. I
       have therefore proceeded to determine the appeal accordingly.
4.     The revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published
       on 17 August 2026. I have considered the revised Framework in determining
       this appeal.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues are the effect of the proposed development on:
         •    highway safety in relation to access and car parking provision, and;
         •    the character and appearance of the area.
Reasons
Highway safety
6.     The appeal site comprises an area of land between commercial properties on
       Cross Hills and a recently constructed terrace of three dwellings. It includes a

1
  Drawing No: 25008-VIA-LDS-KIP-SK-TP-0101 Rev. P01
2
  13 February 2026
3
  June 26

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011321


       parking area to the front of these dwellings which is accessed from Ash Court, and
       a single storey building accessed from Cross Hills.
7.     The storage building has resulted in the reduction of parking for the adjacent three
       dwellings. The car parking arrangement shown on the submitted plan referenced
       in the decision notice shows a row of six parking spaces with no disabled
       parking provision.
8.     The loss of three parking spaces has removed visitor parking provision for the
       three dwellings. It has been indicated that there is capacity in the nearby parking
       area serving Kippax House and Kippax Mews. Although the evidence before me
       indicates that there is spare parking capacity within these nearby parking areas,
       they lie outside the red-line boundary and therefore do not form part of the appeal
       site. As this land lies outside the applicant's control, a condition requiring reliance
       upon these nearby parking areas would be unreasonable.
9.     Even if the alternative car parking layout shown on the swept path analysis plans
       are considered, this only shows a vehicle around 4.3m in length and not 4.8m
       which is more representative of the minimum parking bay length required to
       accommodate a typical modern family car. Even at this reduced length of 4.3m,
       vehicles are shown overhanging the paved and artificial grass areas beyond the
       marked bays, while access to one of the bays requires manoeuvring partially
       within another parking space. I do not consider that this layout allows for adequate
       manoeuvring to access the parking spaces.
10. The storage building does not provide off-road parking, nor does its layout facilitate
    vehicle parking. It is used in connection with the management and maintenance of
    a nearby residential apartment building and generates limited activity. However,
    this may not be the case for future operators or occupiers, who may require more
    frequent vehicular access associated with the use of the building.
11. The submitted swept path analysis shows vehicles using the western access to the
    storage building for both ingress and egress. To undertake the turning manoeuvre,
    vehicles need to pass over a car parking area. If vehicles were parked within this
    area or within the shared service yard/access to the rear of the commercial
    properties, this would impede turning manoeuvres and would likely result in
    vehicles utilising the eastern access to exit, which the appellant acknowledges has
    restricted visibility.
12. The appellant has referenced data that shows no nearby accidents and that
    reduced visibility splays are a common feature in the area. However, the
    introduction of the storage building has resulted in additional vehicle movements
    along the access, increasing the potential for conflict between vehicles. Even a
    small increase would have unacceptable road safety implications, bringing
    vehicles into greater conflict with passing traffic and increasing the risk
    of accidents.
13. I therefore conclude that the proposed development has an unacceptable adverse
    impact on highway safety in relation to access and car parking provision. As such,
    it conflicts with Policies T2 and P10 of the Leeds Core Strategy (Core Strategy),
    Policy GP5 of the Leeds Unitary Development Plan Review (UDP) and Policy TR6
    of the Framework, which seek, amongst other matters, development that
    maximises highway safety and provides safe and secure access.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011321


Character and appearance
14. There are a variety of buildings in the area around the appeal site, comprising of a
    range of materials, forms and layouts. This is also reflected in the scale of the
    surrounding built form, with single, two and three storey buildings being present.
    This variance provides for a mixed character, further cemented by the mix of uses
    in this Local Centre location.
15. The storage building, despite its large footprint, is a single storey structure. Its flat
    roof form differs from the predominant gable or hipped roof forms in the
    surrounding area, but this roof form does limit the scale of the structure. I also
    observed buildings with flat roof forms in the surrounding area, which contribute to
    the mixed character of the locality.
16. Although the building is more visible from Ash Court than from Cross Hills, it
    appears as a single storey structure against the backdrop of a two-storey terrace
    and I do not therefore find that its appearance is overdominating or appears
    incongruous in the context of its surroundings, including the recently
    constructed terrace.
17. I therefore conclude that the proposed development does not have an
    unacceptable adverse effect on the character and appearance of the area. As
    such, it complies with Policy P10 of the Core Strategy and Saved Policies GP5
    and BD6 of the UDP, which seek, amongst other matters, development that is
    appropriate to its context and respects character. It is also compliant with Policy
    BE1 of the Kippax Neighbourhood Plan and Policy DP3 of the Framework.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
18. Policy S4 of the Framework states that development proposals within settlements
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in the Framework.
19. The proposal utilises previously developed land which weighs in favour of the
    development. However, it occupies part of the approved car park to the
    neighbouring residential terrace rather than wholly vacant or underutilised land and
    this therefore attracts limited positive weight. I have found that there is no harm
    arising in relation to character and appearance, but this is a neutral matter.
20. The proposal has an unacceptable harmful effect on highway safety. This harm
    would be long lasting and is contrary to Policy TR6 of the Framework. I therefore
    attach significant weight to this harm.
21. Taking these points together, the benefits of granting planning permission are
    substantially outweighed by adverse effects, when assessed against the national
    decision-making policies of the Framework.
22. Consequently, I conclude that the proposal does not accord with the development
    plan as a whole, and there are no other considerations, including the Framework,
    that indicate that I should take a decision other than in accordance with this. The
    appeal is dismissed.

F Rafiq INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
