 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 1 September 2026
 by Martin Andrews MA(Planning) BSc(Econ) DipTP & DipTP(Dist) MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 30 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011358
 73 Great Cambridge Road, Tottenham, London N17 7LN
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Dersim Orhan against the decision of the Council of the London Borough
      of Haringey.
 •    The application Ref. is HGY/2026/0812.
 •    The development proposed is the erection of a side and rear extension including enlargement of the
      existing rear extension; loft conversion with rear roof extension and rooflights.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issue
2. The main issue is the effect of the proposed alterations and additions on the
   character and appearance of the host dwelling, the terrace of which it forms part,
   and the street scene at the junction of Great Cambridge Road and a side road,
   Devonshire Hill Lane.
Reasons
3. The appeal dwelling forms the southern end of a long terrace of houses of
   essentially the same design fronting onto Great Cambridge Road. This end position
   increases its prominence, because in addition to the front elevation it enables both
   short and longer views across the junction of its flank and rear.
4. The angle of the side road is such that the appeal site is wedged shaped. And with
   the appeal scheme proposing a two-storey addition tight to the footpath for the full
   length of the two-storey element of the existing building, this description also
   applies to the extension.
5. As regards the proposed extension’s effect on the front elevation to Great
   Cambridge Road, the continuation of the existing ridge and eaves lines and the
   absence of any set-back from the front wall would fail to achieve the subordination
   necessary to avoid harm to the appearance of the house. By the same token these
   factors would have an adverse effect on the symmetry and rhythm of the terrace
   that provides a pleasing frontage to Great Cambridge Road.
6. When seen from Devonshire Hill Lane, the proposed hip to gable alteration and
   8.6m width dormer roof extension, and to a lesser extent the extended flat roof
   ground extension, would combine to result in a perception of an overly extended
   building on this prominent corner site.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision Ref. 6011358


7. The absence of any fenestration in the extended flank of the building, unlike the
   existing, would compound the unsympathetic design, and overall the appeal
   scheme would result in an end of terrace dwelling that unduly prioritises the
   advantages of additional living space over design merit and a positive contribution
   to the public realm.
8. For the appellant it is argued that extensions, loft conversions and roof alterations
   are already common features of the local townscape and that the end of terrace
   position of the appeal dwelling provides a unique opportunity for additional
   development. Reference is also made to precedents from existing extensions of a
   substantial size to corner properties at Nos. 99 and 101 Great Cambridge Road.
9. I inspected these at the time of my visit and although all three buildings would
   adjoin the pavement, Devonshire Hill Lane has a far more open aspect when seen
   from Great Cambridge Road than is the case with Mayfair Gardens. Furthermore,
   both dwellings at the latter maintain the frontage symmetry of their respective
   terraces and No. 101 has neither a dormer extension nor a hip to gable addition.
   The rear of No. 99 does have extensions of a significant size, but I am unable to
   cite these as positive examples meriting additional weight for the appellant’s case
   in this appeal.
10. Overall, I find that the appeal scheme would have an unacceptably harmful effect
    on the character and appearance of the host dwelling, the wider terrace, and the
    street scene. Accordingly, there would be conflict with Policies DM1 & DM12 of the
    Haringey Development Management DPD 2017; Policy SP11 of Haringey’s Local
    Plan: Strategic Policies 2013-2026 adopted 2017; Policies D3 & D6 of the London
    Plan 2021, and with Government policy in Policy DP3 in Section 14: ‘Achieving
    Well-Designed Places’ of the National Planning Policy Framework August 2026.
11. The appeal therefore fails.

Martin Andrews
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
