Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 September 2026
by Edward Dade BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30th September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6011714
4-6 Ashford Road, Tenterden, Kent TN30 6QU
•    The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
     1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Alex Clarkson-Tooze against the decision of Ashford Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is PA/2025/2072.
•    The works are alterations to the shop frontage, to include altering a sign (Retrospective).

Appeal B Ref: 6011717
4-6 Ashford Road, Tenterden, Kent TN30 6QU
•    The appeal is made under section 20 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
     1990 (as amended) against a refusal to grant listed building consent.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Alex Clarkson-Tooze against the decision of Ashford Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is PA/2025/2073.
•    The works are alterations to the shop frontage, to include replacing a hanging sign with a flat sign
     (Retrospective).

Decision
1.     Appeal A is dismissed.
2.     Appeal B is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
3.     As the appeals relate to listed building consent, I have had special regard to s16(2)
       of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act).
4.     On 17 August, government published a new National Planning Policy Framework
       (the Framework). The policies in the Framework are material considerations which
       must be taken into account in decision-making from the day of its publication. The
       Framework maintains the overarching objective to conserve and enhance the
       historic environment, and those provisions do not differ materially from the policy
       framework addressed in the parties’ submissions. Moreover, s16(2) of the Act
       remains the principal statutory test for appeals concerning listing building consent.
       Therefore, in this instance it is not necessary to consult the parties on the
       provisions of the new Framework.
5.     Since the building is within a conservation area, s72(1) of the Act requires I pay
       special attention to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or
       appearance of that area. The reasons for refusal in respect of each proposal
       concern the effects of the works on the character and appearance of the listed
       building only. However, both parties discuss the characteristics of the Tenterden



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6011714 & 6011717


         Conservation Area in their written submissions. Therefore, I am satisfied that
         exercising my duties under s72(1) would not prejudice any party.
6.       The works are not subject to section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory
         Purchase Act 2004 and do not need to be determined in accordance with the
         development plan. I have had regard to the development plan policies cited on the
         Council’s decision notice only insofar as they are a material consideration.
7.       In the interests of clarity and consistency with the site location plan and other
         applications documents, in the header above I have amended the site address to
         include reference to both nos 4 and 6. The description of development indicates
         the proposals are submitted retrospectively, and the application forms state the
         works are complete. The appeals therefore seek to regularise the completed works
         which I observed during my site visit. I have determined the appeals on their
         planning merits, taking account the submitted plans and my observations.
Main Issues
8.       Having regard to the above, the main issue in these appeals is whether the works
         described by Appeal A and Appeal B would preserve the special architectural and
         historic interest of the Grade II listed building and the character and appearance of
         the Tenterden Conservation Area.
Reasons
9.       The appeals relate to nos 4-6, which contains an estate agent business with a
         ground floor shop front. These units sit within a wider terrace row which is a Grade
         II listed building, comprising nos 2 to 22 (even)1.
10. The building was listed in 1950 but dates from the mid-19th century. It is of two-
    storey height and has a slate roof, simple cambered doorcases and sash windows.
    Whilst the ground floor is finished in brick, the first-floor level is clad with
    horizontal, white-painted, timber weatherboarding. Against its simple form and
    uncluttered design, these external materials provide a striking contrast between
    the upper and lower storeys of the terrace row.
11. The appellant does not consider the building to be unique or of great significance
    and suggests the building to be of a fairly common style for the area and
    throughout Kent. Although this building type may not be unusual locally, rarity is
    not the only measure of special interest. In this case, the terrace’s age, coherent
    vernacular form, surviving sash windows, brickwork and white-painted
    weatherboarding collectively illustrate the local architectural tradition and
    contribute to its special architectural and historic interest and significance.
12. Whilst there is another commercial use at the northern end of the terrace, the row
    mainly comprises dwellings. The ground floor bow windows at nos 4-6 imply its
    commercial use is long-established and form visually prominent features which
    represent a distinct design difference from fenestration within the row.
    Nonetheless, nos 4-6’s architectural form, design, and external materials are
    consistent with the wider terrace row and therefore these units contribute positively
    to the listed building’s significance.



1
    List entry number: 1374500


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6011714 & 6011717


13. The listed building is within the Tenterden Conservation Area (CA). The CA
    encompasses much of Tenterden’s built area and areas of open parkland and
    farmland. The High Street forms a central spine, and the area has a rich variety of
    building styles. The CA’s significance is derived from its many listed buildings
    particularly along the High Street, and from the way buildings and spaces relate to
    create places of visual and functional interest with attractive vistas and views.
14. The submitted Heritage Statements (HS) identify the appeal property as being of
    historic significance because of the role it plays in the historic commercial core of
    Tenterden. The CA appraisal notes the use of distinctive and traditional materials,
    particularly white-painted weatherboarding which creates a sense of homogeneity
    within the CA. Nos 4-6 therefore possess characteristic features of the CA and
    make a positive contribution to the CA’s character and appearance.
15. Appeal A relates to a rectangular sign of modest size, positioned on the front
    elevation between the bow windows. Appeal B concerns a larger, rectangular sign
    on the front elevation at the first-floor storey, situated between the sash windows.
16. Both signs (Appeal A & Appeal B) are light green, overlaid with white and black
    text. The signage colour does not reflect the organic colour palette of the building
    nor exhibit the subtle variation in tone and texture found in its external surfaces,
    such as its stock brick and painted timber weatherboarding and window frames.
    The light green signage fails to take design cues from the listed building or wider
    street scene. Through its colour choice, each sign appears bright and bold against
    the building’s front elevation and of contemporary appearance, out of keeping with
    the characteristic features of the building.
17. The ground floor sign (Appeal A) is broadly identical in size, scale and placement
    to a former sign of a previous commercial tenant. However, the HS indicates the
    former ground-floor sign was white, maintaining the building’s colour palette.
    Consequently, by virtue of its colour, the Appeal A sign significantly differs in visual
    impact from the signage it replaces, and is visually prominent, detracting from the
    character, appearance and special interest of the listed building.
18. The first-floor sign (Appeal B) also replaces a previous sign. However, the former
    sign was modest in scale and hung perpendicular to the front elevation from a
    simple iron bracket and thus differed significantly in design from the appeal works.
    The Appeal B sign is prominent in its placement, affixed directly to the first-floor
    weatherboarding. It appears large and out of proportion within the context of the
    front elevation, concealing a significant area of weatherboarding and interrupting
    the horizontal lines formed by the individual timber planks.
19. Whilst the HS identifies other flat signs in the CA, these are not attached to
    weatherboarding and are not comparable in visual impact to the Appeal B
    proposal. Furthermore, through its considerable depth the Appeal B sign projects
    forward from the front elevation, increasing its visual prominence.
20. Therefore, in addition to its unsympathetic colour, through its size, scale and
    design, the Appeal B sign appears as an incongruous and visually dominant
    feature. For these reasons, the Appeal B sign detracts from the character,
    appearance and special interest of the listed building.
21. The estate agent firm is well-established, and the signage reflects the business’
    corporate branding and is consistent the business’ other branches. However, its

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6011714 & 6011717


         other offices are not listed buildings and therefore are not subject to the same
         statutory tests. Whilst the CA appraisal does not directly address advertisement
         colour, it identifies changes in materials to listed buildings as a threat to the CA.
22. The appellant identifies other advertisements in the area and asserts that limiting
    advertisements and signage could stifle business activity, leading to vacancy and
    disrepair. However, the planning history confirms the Council previously granted
    consent for commercial signage at the building2 and I have no compelling reason
    to consider a suitable design solution could not be found.
23. For the reasons set out above, Appeal A and Appeal B fail to preserve the special
    architectural and historic interest of the Grade II listed building. Since I have found
    the listed building makes a positive contribution to the character and appearance
    of the CA, it follows that the works individually and cumulatively, fail to preserve
    the character and appearance of the CA.
24. When considering impacts on the significance of designated heritage assets,
    Framework Policy HE6(1) requires substantial weight be given to their
    conservation. Since the signage is affixed to a listed building in a visually
    prominent location within the CA, each sign gives rise to a moderate degree of
    harm. Nonetheless, I give these harms considerable importance and weight.
25. Framework Policy HE6(4) requires harm to the significance of designated heritage
    assets be weighed against any public benefits of the proposal. The appellant
    considers the proposals would be beneficial because the works facilitate the
    continued use of the building as a Class E unit within Ashford Road’s frontage,
    enabling the long-term preservation of the building and supporting Tenterden’s role
    as a historic shopping environment and tourist destination. However, it is unclear
    why these benefits could not be achieved through signage which is sensitive to the
    building’s special interest. Therefore, these benefits are not sufficient to outweigh
    the harms that I have identified for both the signs under Appeal A and Appeal B.
26. Together Policies SP1, SP6 and ENV13 of the Ashford Local Plan 2019, and
    Policy TEN NP4 of the Tenterden Neighbourhood Plan, require proposals respond
    positively to character, distinctiveness and sense of place, conserve and enhance
    heritage assets, and harms be weighed against public benefits, thereby reflecting
    the requirements of the Framework.
27. Given the above, I conclude that each sign fails to preserve the special historic
    interest of the Grade II listed building and the character and appearance of the
    Tenterden Conservation Area, thus failing to satisfy the requirements of the Act,
    Framework Policy HE6 and development plan policies insofar as relevant.
Conclusion
28. For the above reasons and having regard to all other matters raised I conclude
    that Appeal A and Appeal B should be dismissed.



Edward Dade
INSPECTOR

2
    LPA refs: 10/00566/AS & 10/00568/AS


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    4
