Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 1 September 2026
by H Miles BA (hons), MA, MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22nd September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011736
Land adjacent to Oaklands Drive, Copthorne Bank, Copthorne RH10 3JD
    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    The appeal is made by H Evans of Asprey Homes Southern Ltd against the decision of Tandridge
     District Council.
    The application Ref is TA/2025/1318.
    The development proposed is erection of seven dwellings with access, associated garaging and
     parking.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    A planning obligation has been submitted which seeks to provide mechanisms
      relating to matters including travel vouchers and biodiversity net gain. I will return
      to these later in the decision.
Main Issues
3.    The main issues are:
           Whether the site would be a suitable location for the proposed development
            with particular regard to accessibility by sustainable transport modes.
           Whether the proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt
            having regard to the National Planning Policy Framework 2026 (the
            Framework) and any relevant development plan policies.
           The effect of the proposal on the openness of the Green Belt.
           Whether any harm by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm, would
            be clearly outweighed by other considerations, so as to amount to the very
            special circumstances required to justify the proposal.
Reasons
Sustainable Transport Modes
4.    The site is located close to Copthorne Bank, which, in the vicinity, has 30mph-
      40mph speed limits, recently reduced from 50mph. There is a pub close by with
      access via a footpath. Copthorne Bank then leads to the services and facilities at
      Copthorne with a shop, school and village hall around 1km away. To access these
      on foot occupants would have around a 15 minute walk along a mainly unlit road.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011736


       There are footpaths along the part of the road close to the site, however there is a
       section where pedestrians would need to walk in the road and, even though the
       route is straight, this would not be attractive to occupants walking from the site.
       Particularly in hours of darkness, for children and those with mobility issues. There
       would be space for occupants to store cycles, however the road is mainly unlit and
       combined with the traffic flows it would not be an attractive cycling route for the
       majority of occupiers, particularly vulnerable road users.
5.    There is also a bus stop nearby, it operates school services and an hourly service
      between Crawley and Redhill Monday-Sunday. They would be supplemented by
      the Surrey Connect on demand bus service. Whilst the bus stops do not have
      facilities such as shelters, they are close to the site and accessed via a footpath.
      This would enable certain journeys from the site to be taken by bus.
6.    The appeal scheme would secure a residential travel information statement which
      would include up to a £250 contribution towards bus or cycle travel for new
      occupiers. However, a financial incentive would not alter the features of the site
      above. Nor would it apply to future occupiers if houses were sold. The appellant
      has also suggested an extension to the 30mph zone in this location. However no
      evidence has been provided with regard to the acceptability of such an alteration
      by the highway authority or other relevant body. As such, the evidence does not
      indicate that it would occur, consequently a Grampian condition would not be
      reasonable.
7.    This is a rural area, however taking all the above into account, opportunities to
      improve sustainable transport have not been shown to exist. The Department for
      Transport Connectivity Tool rates give the site an overall score of 52 out of 100
      and due to the nearby bus route, some limited journeys to and from the site could
      be taken by bus. However, for the reasons above, journeys on foot and bike would
      not be attractive to the majority of occupants. As such, there is not a genuine
      choice of transport modes for residents, the location would not limit the need to
      travel by private car and it would not be a sustainable location.
8.    The Council reached a different conclusion at the nearby Nyahlands Farm (LPA ref
      2025/499) to their decision on the current application. I have taken both of these
      into account. Nevertheless, for the detailed reasons set out above, it can be seen
      that I agree with the Council’s conclusions in the specific circumstances of this
      case. The appeal decision at Woodside House (APP/M3645/W/24/3347328) also
      concluded in that location future occupants would be dependent on the use of a
      private car, however the scale of the proposed development was notably different
      to that before me now, and as such it is not directly comparable. The decision at
      Antlands Lane, Shipley Bridge (2024/332) was also for a smaller development,
      and I do not have detail that the circumstances are clearly similar to this appeal.
9.    Therefore, the site would not be a suitable location for the proposed development
      with particular regard to accessibility by sustainable transport modes. As such, it
      would be contrary to policy DP5 of the Tandridge Local Plan Part 2: Detailed
      Policies (2014) (DP). It seeks to provide safe and suitable access to the site,
      achievable by all and promote access by public transport, foot and bicycle where
      appropriate, amongst other things.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011736


Whether Inappropriate Development
10. The Framework states that inappropriate development is, by definition, harmful to
    the Green Belt. Development in the Green Belt is inappropriate and thus should be
    approved only if very special circumstances exist, unless it falls within one of the
    exceptions in the Framework. This is broadly echoed by Policies DP10 and DP13
    of the DP. Policy DP13 does not provide a specific exception relating to grey belt
    land, however it does include ‘any other form of development as listed under
    paragraph 90 of the Framework.’ Although the paragraph/policy number has been
    updated, it is generally in accordance with the Framework.
11. Of relevance to the appeal, Policy GB7 (1) (g) of the Framework provides an
    exception relating to grey belt land. In order to benefit from this, the proposed
    development must satisfy all the criteria of the policy. These include that the
    development would be in a sustainable location, with particular reference to Policy
    TR3 of the Framework. For the reasons set out above, the proposed development
    would not be in a sustainable location and would not satisfy this criterion. There is
    no dispute between the parties in relation to points GB7 (1) (g) (i, ii and iv).
    However, due to the conflict with Policy GB7 (1) (g) (iii) identified, it would not fall
    under this exception.
12. Therefore, the appeal scheme would be inappropriate development in terms of the
    Framework and Policy DP10 and DP13 of the DP, the aims of which are set out
    above.
Openness
13. Openness has both spatial and visual dimensions. The proposed development
    would introduce seven permanent two storey houses with associated access,
    parking, domestic gardens and residential paraphernalia to the site. They would be
    similar to the existing properties along Oaklands Drive. Nevertheless, the appeal
    scheme introduces substantial bulk, massing and activity from seven dwellings to
    what is currently an open, undeveloped site. The houses would be clearly seen
    from the nearby properties and although planting which could be provided or
    retained along Copthorne Bank would provide some screening, the properties
    would be likely to be seen from the road, particularly from the entrance to the site
    and when trees were not in leaf. As such, taken together there would be clear
    harm to openness as a result of the appeal scheme.
14. Consequently, for the reasons above, the proposed development would result in
    harm to the openness of the Green Belt and would be contrary to the Framework
    in this regard.
Other Considerations
15. During the course of the appeal the Council stated that it is no longer pursuing
    reasons for refusal relating to visibility onto Copthorne Bank and the effect on the
    Priority Habitat. Based on the evidence before me now, I agree with these
    conclusions.
16. The Council cannot demonstrate a 5 year supply of deliverable housing sites. The
    appellant states that there is a 2.17 year supply which is not disputed by the
    Council and the latest Housing Delivery Test figures show a measurement of 38%.
    The proposed development would provide the social and economic benefits of


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011736


       seven houses in an area where there is a clear shortfall and I afford substantial
       weight to the benefits of providing these homes. I have also taken into account the
       scale of the development proposed. Overall, the benefits would be moderate in
       this case.
Green Belt Balance
17. The proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt which is, by
    definition, harmful. There is also harm to the Green Belt due to the effect on
    openness. In addition, there are unacceptable effects with regard to sustainable
    transport. Substantial weight should be given to the harm to the Green Belt. Very
    special circumstances will not exist unless the harm to the Green Belt and any
    other harm is clearly outweighed by other considerations.
18. On the other hand, the proposed development results in the moderate benefits
    identified above. Consequently, the considerations advanced by the appellant,
    even when considered together, do not clearly outweigh the totality of the harm.
    The very special circumstances necessary to justify the development therefore do
    not exist. As such the proposal conflicts with the Framework and DP10 and DP13
    of the DP, the aims of which are set out above.
Planning Balance
19. The development would be outside a settlement, However Policy S5 (5) of the
    Framework states that it does not apply to development proposals in the Green
    Belt which, in these circumstances, should be determined in accordance with
    policies GB6 and GB7. The development proposals do not accord with an up-to-
    date development plan or the decision-making policies in the Framework.
    Consequently, the presumption in favour of sustainable development does not
    apply in this case.
Conclusion
20. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    Therefore, for the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

H Miles
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
