Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 29 September 2026
by R Gee BA (Hons) Dip TP PGCert UD MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011584
Eastlyn, Fengate, Moulton Chapel, Spalding PE12 0XL
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mrs Gemma Toms against the decision of South Holland District Council.
•    The application Ref is H13-0359-26.
•    The development proposed is existing rear extension to be demolished and replaced with proposed
     rear extension.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     On 17 August 2026 a new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework)
       was published. Having regard to the nature of the changes and the issues in
       dispute I have not gone back to the parties regarding the revised Framework. I am
       satisfied that no party would be prejudiced by my taking this approach.
Main Issue
3.     The main issue is the effect of the proposal on character and appearance.
Reasons
4.     The appeal site lies in the countryside. The existing dwelling comprises a detached
       two-storey dwelling that has been extended to the rear. The site occupies a
       prominent corner position at the junction of Fengate and West Gate. Owing to the
       low boundary treatments and the dwelling's proximity to the site boundaries, the
       rear of the property is readily visible from the surrounding public realm.
5.     Whilst the proposed extension would sit below the ridge line of the existing
       dwelling and would therefore appear subservient in height, this factor alone is not
       determinative. The overall scale, footprint and massing of the development would
       be substantial and would not appear subordinate to the host dwelling when viewed
       as a whole. This impression would be reinforced by the single-storey linking
       elements, which would visually extend the built form between the two-storey
       components and increase its overall presence.
6.     Given the site's prominent corner location and the close proximity of the building to
       the site boundaries, the extension would be highly visible within the street scene,
       further emphasising its substantial presence. Whilst some filtering of views may be
       provided by existing landscaping in the locality, this cannot be relied upon as a


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011584


       permanent means of screening. The development would remain readily
       perceptible, and its impact derives primarily from its physical form and presence.
7.     It is indicated that the proposal would be constructed in black weatherboard
       cladding with a standing seam metal roof. Whilst this contemporary palette of
       materials would contrast with those of the existing dwelling, I do not concur with
       the Council that this would be inappropriate given the rural context of the site’s
       surroundings. Nevertheless, the use of high-quality materials would not overcome
       the harms identified.
8.     For the reasons stated, I conclude that the proposal would be materially harmful to
       the character and appearance of the area. This draws it into conflict with Policies 2
       and 3 of the South East Lincolnshire Local Plan (2019) insofar as they require
       development to be of an appropriate size, scale layout, having regard to the
       character and appearance of the area and the relationship to existing development
       and land uses.
Other Matters
9.     The Appellant raises concerns regarding the processing of the application by the
       Council. However, such matters are not within the remit of my decision.
Conclusion
10. The appeal is dismissed.

     R Gee
     INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
