Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by S McIntyre BSc (Hons), CEng, MICE, MCIHT
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011148
148 Longdon Road, Knowle B93 9HU
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•      The appeal is made by Mr N Whitehurst against the decision of Solihull Metropolitan Borough
       Council.
•      The application Ref is PL/2026/00023/PIP.
•      The development proposed is permission in principle for the erection of one dwelling.

Decision
1.       The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for permission in
         principle for the erection of a minimum and maximum of one dwelling at 148
         Longdon Road, Knowle, B93 9HU in accordance with the terms of the application,
         Ref PL/2026/00023/PIP, and the plans submitted with it.
Preliminary Matters
2.       The description of development in the banner has been revised from that set out in
         the planning application form to reflect the matters that can be considered for
         permission in principle.
3.       The postcode in the address of the appeal site in the heading above has been
         amended from that provided on the application form as it was incorrect.
4.       The proposal is for permission in principle. The Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
         advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
         housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has two
         stages. The first stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site
         is suitable in-principle, and the second ‘technical details consent’ stage is when the
         detailed development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first of
         these two stages.
5.       As set out in the PPG1, the scope of the considerations for permission in principle
         is limited to location, land use and the amount of development permitted. All other
         matters are considered as part of a subsequent Technical Details Consent (TDC)
         application if permission in principle is granted. I have determined the appeal
         accordingly and have treated the indicative layout of the site as indicative only.
6.       A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
         17 August 2026, and the appellant and Council were invited to consider whether



1
    Paragraph: 012 Reference ID: 58-012-20180615

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011148


       the revised Framework had relevance to their case. I have had regard to
       submissions received on this matter.
Main Issue
7.     The main issue is whether the site is suitable for residential development having
       regard to its location, the proposed land use and the amount of development with
       particular regard to effect of the development on the character and appearance of
       the area.
Reasons
Character and appearance
8.     The appeal site is within the rear garden of 148 Longdon Road which has a
       boundary with Shortland Close, a residential cul-de-sac. It is within the settlement
       of Knowle which benefits from a good range of services and facilities within
       walking distance.
9.     The development would front, and be accessed from, Shortland Close. It would not
       be readily visible from Longdon Road and therefore would not harm the character
       and appearance of the street scene on Longdon Road.
10. Shortland Close is part of a residential estate, and dwellings on it comprise two-
    storey detached houses set back from the road. Open frontages, green verges and
    street trees result in a spacious and verdant street scene. The end of the cul-de-
    sac corresponds with the end of rear gardens of properties at Longdon Road and a
    close boarded fence forms the boundary between highway and rear gardens. The
    appeal site contributes neutrally to the character and appearance of Shortland
    Close.
11. The proposal is development of a house at the end of Shortland Close, and while
    the site is existing garden, it would be accessed directly from Shortland Close. I
    am satisfied that, in principle, a single dwelling could be developed on the site that
    would be setback from the highway and respect the scale, massing, density,
    layout, materials and landscape of Shortland Close.
12. The proposal would reduce the length of the garden at 148 Longdon Road, such
    that it would not be consistent in length with gardens of adjacent properties on
    Longdon Road. This, combined with construction of a dwelling, will change the
    view from the rear of adjacent properties on Longdon Road and from some
    properties on Shortland Close. However, there is no consistent character to the
    rear gardens on Longdon Road which contain a variety of dwelling extensions,
    outbuildings and landscaping such that the length of the garden is not always a
    prominent feature. There are also varying views beyond the rear garden boundary
    of properties on Longdon Road. Consequently, I conclude that the proposal would
    not be harmful to the character and appearance of the area when viewed from
    gardens on Longdon Road.
13. The effect of the development on the outlook from nearby properties would be a
    matter for consideration at TDC stage. Concerns have been raised regarding the
    distance between potential windows of a new dwelling and existing windows of
    neighbouring properties and consequential privacy issues. The layout plan is
    indicative and again this matter is primarily an issue for TDC, but there is nothing


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011148


       before me to indicate that a dwelling within the appeal site would inevitably result
       in an adverse harm to privacy for occupants of neighbouring properties.
14. The Council has raised concerns that allowing the development would set a
    precedent for allowing similar development that would erode the area’s character
    and distinctiveness. No examples have been provided of potential sites to which
    this might apply or an assessment of the impact on character and appearance
    should they come forward. Each planning application needs to be assessed on its
    individual merits. In this instance the appeal proposal would not have a harmful
    impact on the character and appearance of the area.
15. Consequently, the proposal would comply with Policy P15 of the Solihull Local
    Plan (2013) which requires development conserves and enhances local character,
    distinctiveness and streetscape quality and respect the scale, massing, density
    and layout of the surrounding area.
Other Matters
16. Representations have been made that the appeal site is not in a sustainable and
    accessible location, but it is located within a settlement and within walking
    distance, for those without mobility issues, of a good range of shops and services
    within the local centre and of a bus stop on Longdon Road where I was able to
    view buses stopping during my site visit. While it was noted in the officer’s report
    that the site was not within 800m of a rail station it otherwise met the accessibility
    criteria of Policy P7 of the Solihull Local Plan. The Council consider the location to
    be sustainable, and I have not reached an alternative conclusion regarding this
    matter. Additional vehicle movements that would be generated from one dwelling
    would be low and would not have a significant impact on traffic conditions or safety
    on the local highway network. Consideration of car parking, which has been raised
    as an issue by neighbours, is a matter for TDC.
17. Representations have been made that the development would be inappropriate
    development of a residential back garden but, for the reasons set out above, that
    is not the conclusion I have reached. Concerns have also been raised regarding
    the scale and design of the proposed dwelling, noise, construction matters,
    drainage, effect on trees, outlook and loss of light but these are matters for
    consideration for TDC.
18. Other representations have raised concerns that the development would result in
    the loss of habitat for local wildlife. The Council state that there is no landscape,
    heritage, ecological or other protective designations affecting the site, nor are
    there any known physical or environmental constraints that would render the
    principle of development unacceptable. There is no evidence before me which
    leads me to conclude that the development would have an impact on a habitats
    site of international importance, as set out in Section 19 of the Framework, such
    that permission in principle could not be granted.
19. The appellant provides evidence that the Council cannot demonstrate a 5-year
    supply of deliverable housing sites, with a significant shortfall. This position has not
    been contested by the Council, and the proposal would help increase the supply of
    housing.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011148


Conditions
20. The PPG states that it is not possible to impose conditions as the terms of any
    permission in principle must only include site location, type of development and
    amount2.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
21. Policy S3 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development and for development within settlements, Policy S4 of the Framework
    should be applied. Policy S4 of the Framework states that development proposals
    within settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against the
    national decision- making policies in the Framework.
22. Policy H07 of the Framework states that substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community. The Council cannot demonstrate a 5-
    year supply of deliverable housing sites, and I afford the proposal substantial
    weight in this regard.
23. Policy L2 of the Framework states that substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits where a development would create additional homes within existing plots,
    providing they are consistent with the overall street scene, maintain safe access,
    provide acceptable living standards for residents and neighbours, in terms of
    access to daylight, sunlight, privacy and external amenity space and where the
    development would not occupy more than twice the footprint of the existing
    building and retain at least 50% of the non- developed area. While matters relating
    to living standards outlined in Policy L2 relate to TDC matters, the proposal
    otherwise accords with this policy, and I therefore afford it substantial weight in this
    regard.
24. There are substantial benefits of the proposal, and I have not concluded that there
    would be any substantial adverse effects when assessed against the national
    decision-making policies in the Framework. As the proposal is also compliant with
    the development plan, when read as a whole, the appeal should be allowed.




S McIntyre
INSPECTOR




2
    Paragraph: 020 Reference ID: 58-020-20180615


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           4
