Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 14 August 2026 by A Conteh
Decision by L McKay MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 04 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011417
37 Church Way, Whetstone, Barnet, London N20 0JZ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Ben and Emma Jacobs against the decision of the Council of the
    London Borough of Barnet.
•   The application Ref is 26/0659/HSE.
•   The development proposed is described as part single storey, first floor rear extension with pitched
    roof following the reduction in depth of the existing rear extension. Roof extension with 1no. rear
    dormer windows and 1no. front facing rooflight. Change to ground level façade and existing rear
    extension from render to brick finish. Changes to fenestration; reduction of window size to front
    elevation, new windows to side elevations.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for part single storey, first
   floor rear extension with pitched roof following the reduction in depth of the existing
   rear extension. Roof extension with 1no. rear dormer windows and 1no. front facing
   rooflight. Change to ground level façade and existing rear extension from render to
   brick finish. Changes to fenestration; reduction of window size to front elevation,
   new windows to side elevations at 37 Church Way, Whetstone, Barnet, London,
   N20 0JZ in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 26/0659/HSE, and the
   plans submitted with it, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: PA-001, PA-002, PA-003, PA-004, PA-005,
              PA-006, PA-007, PA-008, PA-009, PA-010
     3)       The materials used in the external surfaces of the development hereby
              approved shall match those used on the existing dwelling.
     4)       The new first-floor side window hereby permitted shall be installed with
              obscure glazing and no part of that window that is less than 1.7 metres above
              the floor of the room in which it is installed shall be capable of being opened.
              The obscure glazing, fixed and opening sections of the window shall
              thereafter be retained in that form.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011417


Preliminary Matters
3. Correspondence has been submitted showing a change to the appellants’
   description of development at application stage. I have therefore used that revised
   description in the header and decision above.
4. The Council has provided comments at appeal stage setting out discrepancies
   between the development described in submissions and that shown on the plans.
   For the avoidance of doubt, I have considered the appeal on the basis of the
   submitted plans.
Main Issue
5. The effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the site and
   surrounding area.
Reasons for the Recommendation
6. The appeal property is a detached two-storey dwellinghouse rendered mostly white
   with accents of red brick. It is situated on a relatively wide plot with a walkway along
   one side and a rear garden of significant length. The appeal property has
   previously been extended, and these additions make up a major part of the existing
   scale of the house. Trees line the front boundary of the appeal site with openings
   large enough for vehicular entry and exit.
7. Church Way contains sizeable detached and semi-detached dwellings, many of
   which have been substantially enlarged. Houses vary in appearance but use of
   materials including render and dark coloured brick are common. Partial views of the
   staggered and projecting rear profiles of surrounding dwellings can be seen from
   the rear garden of the appeal site, despite fencing and greenery providing some
   screening.
8. Previous extensions have changed the nature of the appeal property significantly
   from its original more modest scale. The proposed single storey rear extension
   would extend the existing kitchen area to the depth of the living room, right up to
   the existing building line and the edge of the walkway. Within the same footprint,
   the proposed first floor rear extension would result in a substantial increase in
   height and bulk in this area.
9. Nevertheless, although overall the scale of the dwelling would increase, these
   extensions together would merely infill an empty space created by the set-in nature
   of previous extensions. Furthermore, both walkway and garden provide enough
   distance between the building line and site boundary that the plot would continue to
   feel spacious even with these additions.
10. The proposed reduction of the depth of the existing first floor rear extension would
    however allow the rear profile of the appeal site to follow the staggered pattern
    common to other dwellings in the surrounding area. This would reduce the visual
    bulk of the proposal. The proposed rear window design would also help to break up
    the mass of the wall on this elevation. In this regard, the proposal would be
    sympathetic to the character and appearance of rear elevations on Church Way.
    These details would allow the proposed rear extensions to remain subordinate to
    the existing already enlarged building.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011417


11. The ridge of the proposed additional roof would be set below that of the main
    dwelling. While an area of crown roof would be created, this would not be readily
    visible from the public realm due to its height and modest depth. The set down of
    the additional roof and the articulation afforded by the staggered first floor below
    would ensure that the roof would appear subordinate to the main roof and not top-
    heavy. Consequently, it would create a roof profile sympathetic to the existing
    property.
12. The space between the roof of the ground floor rear extension and the proposed
    dormers would offset the typical bulkiness that might present with cumulative
    development. Moreover, I observed a number of rear dormers as well as variety in
    extension and roof design and scale across the rear elevations of dwellings
    neighbouring the appeal site. In this context and given their flat roof design lower
    than the ridge, the dormers would appear subordinate to the roof profile and would
    not appear as a discordant or jarring feature to the appeal property or surrounding
    area.
13. Accordingly, within the context of the area where dwellings are of a substantial size
    and have relatively large roof forms to match, the proposed roof would not be an
    unsympathetic addition to the scale, form and massing of development in the area.
14. Direct views of the site’s rear elevation are limited given the substantial length of
    gardens. From the street, the gap between the appeal property and 39 Church Way
    would allow a glimpse of the proposed rear extensions and enlarged roof, however,
    visibility is limited so the increased bulk would not be overly obvious from the public
    realm. Having observed the scale of the existing dwelling and neighbouring houses,
    the visual impact would not be substantially different from what can be seen at
    present.
15. The proposed change in material from render to brick finish of the rear ground floor
    elevation would complement the existing design characteristics of the dwelling and
    respond to the local context where similar materials and colours are in use.
    Likewise, the proposed reduction of window sizes on the front elevation would not
    be out of character with the appeal property itself and window designs found in the
    street scene.
16. Overall, therefore, the proposal would not harm the character and appearance of
    the site or surrounding area. The proposed development would not therefore
    conflict with Policies CDH01 and CDH05 of the Barnet Local Plan 2021-2036 or
    Policy D3 of the London Plan 2021, which support high quality design that
    responds to local character, including extensions. The proposal also complies with
    the Council’s Residential Design Guidance Supplementary Planning Document
    (2016).
Conditions
17. Conditions relating to time limits on commencement and carrying out development
    in accordance with plans are necessary in the interest of certainty.
18. Use of matching materials is necessary to safeguard the character and appearance
    of the area. Obscure glazing and fixing of the new first-floor side window facing the
    neighbouring dwelling is necessary to mitigate against overlooking and consequent
    harm to the living conditions of the neighbouring occupiers. However as only one
    side window is proposed at this level, and the dwelling is already occupied, I have

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011417


     amended the Council’s suggested wording for this condition to ensure it meets the
     relevant tests for conditions.
19. The Council suggests restricting use of the roof as a balcony or sitting out area.
    However, the proposed flat roof over the rear extension would be much smaller
    than the existing flat roof in that area. The crown roof section would not be readily
    or safely accessible. Therefore, there is very little likelihood that either roof would
    ever be used for sitting out in a way that would overlook neighbours. Consequently,
    the suggested condition is not necessary.
20. New side windows and doors at ground floor level would face the side of
    neighbouring properties or boundary treatments so would not overlook neighbours.
    Permitted development legislation requires that new first-floor side windows are
    obscure glazed and fixed shut. Therefore, there would be no harmful overlooking of
    neighbours if new side windows or doors were installed using permitted
    development rights, and the suggested condition is not necessary.
Conclusion and Recommendation
21. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I
    recommend that the appeal should be allowed subject to conditions.

A Conteh
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
22. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed subject to conditions.

L McKay
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
