Appeal Decision
by L Clark BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 14 September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6011401
1 Rothbury, Sunderland SR2 0BE
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Ms Tendayi Nyatsambo against the decision of Sunderland City Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/02619/FUL.
•    The development proposed is change of use from dwelling house (C3) to children's home (C2).

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The description in the banner heading above was taken from the Decision Notice
       as it is clearer and more succinct than that on the planning application form.
3.     The proposed development is for the use of the property as accommodation for
       care for children or young persons. Children are a group sharing a protected
       characteristic arising from their age and therefore the Public Sector Equality Duty
       (PSED) applies1.
4.     The appellant has requested that I consider amended plans which were not before
       the Council when it took its Decision. These relate to an updated parking plan and
       updated management information. The appellant describes these as clarifying the
       arrangements for parking, access, manoeuvring and operational management in
       response to the Council’s reasons for refusal. While the updated parking plan
       shows a different layout with regard to the parking spaces and cycle storage, it still
       retains five spaces and relocates the proposed cycle storage from the front to the
       rear.
5.     I have considered the proposed changes, taking into consideration the tests on
       Holborn Studios Ltd2. Given the extent of the changes proposed, together with the
       Council’s updated Transport comments alongside the appeal3, I am satisfied that
       whilst the layout is different, the amendment would not lead to the scheme being
       substantially different to that considered at the application stage. It would not be
       unfair not to reconsult on the changes, or that my acceptance of the revisions
       would deprive those who were entitled to be consulted on the changes of that
       opportunity. Moreover, interested parties have also had an opportunity to submit
       comments on the amended plans during the course of the appeal. I have therefore
       determined the appeal on the basis of the updated plan SC482_P1.
6.     During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
       (the Framework) was published. The main parties were provided with an

1
  Section 149 of the Equality Act 2010.
2
  Holborn Studios Ltd v The Council of the London Borough of Hackney [2017] EWHC 2823 (Admin)
3
  Comments dated 15 July 2026. Appendix A of the Council’s statement.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011401


       opportunity to comment and I have had regard to the 2026 version of the
       Framework in my decision.
Main Issues
7.     The main issues in this appeal are:
           •    the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of
                neighbouring occupiers having particular regard to noise and disturbance;
                and,
           •    highway safety with particular regard to parking.
Reasons
8.     The appeal property (No 1) is a four-bedroom semi-detached dwelling which
       occupies a corner plot on Rothbury and Ramilies and is located within an
       established residential area. It has a private front amenity space, currently used
       partly for parking with approximately two off street parking spaces and a garden. I
       saw that not all properties on Rothbury have off-street parking. While the majority
       of them did and the frontages of several homes were predominantly hard
       landscaped, there were a number of cars parked on the street. At the time of my
       site visit (mid-morning), there was little activity within Rothbury or the surrounding
       nearby streets with fairly low noise levels.

Living Conditions
9.     Policy EN10 of City of Sunderland Unitary Development Plan 1998 (UDP), seeks
       to ensure that any new development including changes of use are compatible with
       the existing pattern of land use. Policy H1 of Sunderland City Council Core
       Strategy and Development Plan 2015-2033 (Core Strategy) relates to housing mix,
       and seeks to ensure that all new housing is appropriate for its location. Policy BH1
       of the Core Strategy seeks to ensure, amongst other matters, a good standard of
       amenity for all existing occupiers, and Policies HS1 and SP7 collectively seek,
       amongst other matters, that development must not result in unacceptable adverse
       impacts with regard to, amongst other things, noise, which cannot be addressed
       through appropriate mitigation.
10. It is proposed to use the property as a children’s home for the care of up to three
    children, aged from infant to 17 years old. The appellant describes themselves as
    operating an established domiciliary care company which provides care services
    across large areas of the Northeast. They set out that this facility would typically
    have six care staff working on a rota basis, with typically two care staff present
    during normal daytime operation and, at night, usually one waking night or sleep-in
    member of staff. The appellant also sets out that there may be periods of overlap
    in staffing during handovers and there would also be on occasion attendance by
    additional staff and professionals such as emergency services or operational
    support.
11. Their Management Plan, however, sets out that staffing levels may be subject to
    change depending on, amongst other things, the needs of the children, the agreed
    care arrangements, safeguarding profile, educational arrangements and any
    relevant local authority requirements. As such, there would likely be more than two
    care staff present during normal daytime operations and at night.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011401


12. I acknowledge that it is not uncommon for a family with three children to occupy a
    single dwellinghouse and for occupants, as well as friends and visitors, to move to
    and from the property several times a day. However, even if the likelihood of all
    three children having additional needs would be small, and staffing levels
    remaining typically at two, I have no mechanisms before me to control it or that it
    could be enforced. I also have nothing before me to demonstrate from those 32
    carers who currently live in Sunderland, that this would be their place of work, or
    that their means of travelling to work would be by sustainable modes. Therefore, I
    am not persuaded that the level of staffing or number of vehicles parked at the
    premises would be as low as the appellant contends the majority of the time. An
    increase in staffing would in my mind, have the potential to create noise and
    disturbance to those nearest occupants above and beyond that of a large family,
    through additional comings and goings during both the day and the night.
13. I have nevertheless considered whether otherwise unacceptable development
    proposals could be made acceptable through the use of planning conditions.
    However, given the appellant specifically refers to three children within both their
    planning application and appeal, I have little before me to demonstrate that a
    reduction would be suitable to their business model. I am therefore not satisfied
    that the use of a condition would be reasonable in this case.
14. Taking together the above, I find that the use of No 1 as a care home for the use
    as set out by the appellant, would more than likely result in a significant difference
    in the level of activity than that of a single family, and that this would result in
    significantly higher noise and disturbances.
15. In reaching my conclusion, I have been mindful that neither Northumbria Police nor
    the Council’s Environmental Health team objected to the planning application.
    However, from the evidence before me, I find that it would likely result in harmful
    effects upon the living conditions of occupiers of neighbouring properties with
    regard to noise and disturbance. It follows that the proposal conflicts with Policy
    EN10 of the UDP, and Policies H1, BH1, SP7 and HS1 of the Core Strategy which
    collectively seek to ensure that new housing is appropriate for its location, that a
    good standard of amenity for all existing occupiers is retained, and development
    does not result in unacceptable adverse impacts with regard to noise.

Highway safety and parking
16. Five off street parking spaces would be provided to the front of No 1, accessed
    directly from the street via the existing 4.8m dropped kerb. The appellant describes
    that one space would be dedicated for use by a van which would be used for
    school transport. This would leave four parking spaces for staff and visitors. The
    appellant also sets out, amongst other things, that staff would attend at agreed rota
    times, would be instructed not to arrive excessively early before their shift, and that
    outgoing staff would leave the property promptly following handover to ensure shift
    changes do not create short-term peaks in traffic, vehicle movements or on-street-
    parking.
17. Notwithstanding the above, the revised parking plan fails to show turning
    manoeuvres for each parking space. Without this, I cannot be certain that vehicles
    could access each space independently. This is particularly important for those
    spaces closer to the building frontage where the parking space overlaps the
    building line of No 1. Therefore, without independent access to all spaces, it is

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011401


     highly likely the off-street parking spaces would not be used, which would likely
     lead to vehicles parking on the street.
18. Whilst I am mindful that there were no vehicles parked within the immediate vicinity
    of No 1 at the time of my site visit, this is a snapshot in time and does not reflect
    evenings or weekends whereby parking levels maybe higher. Additional parking
    could therefore give rise to indiscriminate parking close to the junction within the
    estate, which could result in an unacceptable effect on the local road network as
    sightlines become restricted and pedestrian safety is compromised. Conditions
    would therefore not only compromise the pedestrian safety of nearby residents but
    also the children who would live in the appeal property.
19. I have considered whether the imposition of conditions suggested by the appellant
    would be suitable to mitigate parking pressure and indiscriminate parking.
    However, even if there would be limited overlap between rota changes, given
    staffing levels would be proportionate to the care needs of each child, and the
    limited evidence before me to demonstrate that No 1 is within a sustainable location
    and that all spaces are independently accessible, I am not persuaded that the four
    remaining spaces would be sufficient to accommodate staffing for three children
    and visitors in this case.
20. I conclude that from the evidence before me and, without anything to the contrary,
    the proposed development fails to demonstrate adequate provision for parking
    within the site. This would have an unacceptably adverse effect on highway safety
    and accordingly, conflict with Policies ST2 and ST3 of the Core Strategy which
    collectively seek to ensure, amongst other matters, that proposals have safe and
    adequate means of access, egress and internal circulation/turning arrangements
    for all modes of transport.

Other Matters
21. The appellant has drawn my attention to a number of appeal decisions4 in support
    of their proposal. With regard to 43 Prospect Lane, this appeal came about due to
    the Council’s failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision. The
    Decision sets out that had the Council considered the additional information
    provided in the appeal process, it would have granted planning permission.
    Notwithstanding this, the Decision also describes the proposed care home as
    having no more than two staff present on site at any one time and it being within a
    reasonable walking distance to bus stops. This is different to the appeal before me,
    in that the Council refused planning permission and staffing levels would depend on
    the needs of each child and as such it would be likely that more than two staff
    would be on site on regular occasions. It is also different in that in the appeal before
    me there is no dispute that the site is not close to a metro station. This example is
    therefore not comparable to the appeal before me.
22. With regard to 75 Sarehole Road, the Decision sets out that the proposed
    development would have one or two members of staff, and some movements to
    and from the property would likely be undertaken by foot or public transport given
    its proximity to bus services. I have found above, that the appeal before me
    describes the staffing level would be changeable depending upon the care needs

4
 APP/X1735/W/25/3367889 – 43 Prospect Lane, APP/P4605/W/25/3371002 - 75 Sarehole Road, and APP/A1530/W/25/3374737 -
1 Harsnett Road.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          4
Appeal Decision 6011401


        of each child and there is no dispute that the site is not close to a metro station. I
        therefore find that this example is not comparable to the appeal before me.
23. With regard to 1 Harsnett Road, I acknowledge that in this case there would be a
    minimum of two staff plus site manager present during weekdays and that the
    Inspector found the proposal would likely result in some increase in activity
    compared with a typical dwelling. However, the Inspector also sets out that the
    appeal site, is located adjacent to a Methodist Church and close to a junction.
    Given the appeal before me is situated within what I saw was a fairly quiet
    residential estate, I am not persuaded that the location of this example is directly
    comparable to the appeal before me with regard to on-street activity and
    background noise levels.
Conclusion
24. I have had due regard to the PSED which requires me to consider the need to
    eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and foster
    good relations between people who share a protected characteristic and people
    who do not share it. In this context, the best interests of the child are a primary
    consideration, and no other issue is intrinsically more important.
25. I acknowledge that the proposed home would provide a stable, supervised and
    domestic residential setting for three children whereby activities would at times be
    comparable to those associated with ordinary domestic living. However, even if the
    home would be subject to Ofsted inspections and with no objections from either
    Northumbria Police or the Council’s Environmental Health team5, this does not
    address the harm I have identified above. The displacement of parked vehicles
    around the entrance to No 1 and on surrounding roads would likely have an
    unacceptably adverse impact on highway safety, detrimental to not only local
    amenity but it would also create an unsafe environment for the children in care.
26. Accordingly, the proposal conflicts with the development plan and would not be in
    the best interests of the children in care. There are no other material considerations
    that lead me to conclude that a decision should be taken other than in accordance
    with the development plan. Consequently, the appeal is dismissed.

L Clark
INSPECTOR




5
    subject to conditions.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    5
