Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 September 2026
by Laura Cuthbert BA(Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 01 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011062
Thamesfield Retirement Village, Wargrave Road, Remenham RG9 2LX
   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
   The appeal is made by Retirement Villages Development Limited against the decision of Wokingham
    Borough Council.
   The application Ref is 243125.
   The development proposed is Part demolition of existing building and replacement with a three-
    storey extension to provide extra-care units (Use Class C2), with associated soft and hard
    landscaping works; provision of additional vehicle parking, bin stores and ancillary structures; and
    alterations to existing basement.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published in
   August 2026. Comments were sought from the main parties on the implications of
   the revised Framework for the determination of the appeal, and I have taken those
   comments into account. Accordingly, I have determined the appeal having regard
   to the policies of the revised Framework.
3. Reasons for refusal 3, 4 and 5 related to the absence of a planning obligation.
   However, a signed Section 106 Agreement dated 9 June 2026 has since been
   submitted. The Agreement secures:
               an Employment and Skills Plan, or an agreed financial contribution in lieu;
               the implementation and monitoring of the approved Habitat Management
                and Monitoring Plan to secure Biodiversity Net Gain objectives for a period
                of 30 years; and
               a financial contribution of £15,405 towards local NHS infrastructure.
4. The Council has confirmed that it is not pursuing reasons for refusal 3, 4 and 5 in
   light of the completed Agreement. Accordingly, I am content that these matters
   have now been satisfactorily addressed and do not form part of my main issues.
Main Issues
5. The main issues are the effect of the proposal on:
               the living conditions of the existing occupants at Remenham Row, in
                particular regard to privacy and outlook; and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011062


               the character and appearance of the area, notably on the significance of the
                designated heritage assets of Remenham and Henley Bridge Conservation
                Area, by development within it, and the effect on the significance of the
                designated heritage asset of Henley on Thames Conservation Area, by
                development within its setting.
Reasons
Living Conditions
6. The appeal site comprises an existing retirement home and lies adjacent to the
   residential properties known as Remenham Row to the north-west. The proposal
   would replace a lower built form on the northern part of the site with a larger three-
   storey extension. The nearest properties at Remenham Row comprise a short
   terrace (Nos 1 to 5) within a private gated development, set slightly below the level
   of the appeal site. The dwellings have front-facing living room windows at ground-
   floor level and bedroom and bathroom windows at first-floor level that look towards
   the proposed extension. The properties also benefit from front and communal
   garden areas from which the development would be experienced.
7. In regard to outlook, the proposed extension would present a substantially more
   prominent and dominant built form than presently exists. I acknowledge that the
   proposed extension would be set further from the boundary than the building it
   would replace and that a degree of openness would remain between the
   development and Remenham Row. Nevertheless, the proposal would replace a
   largely single-storey building with a substantially taller and bulkier three-storey
   structure. As a result, it would become a considerably more dominant feature in
   views from the neighbouring dwellings and communal residential areas. Taking
   account of its increased height, massing and elevated position relative to
   Remenham Row, I find that the proposal would appear unduly prominent and would
   result in a materially greater sense of enclosure than exists at present.
8. The increased scale and visual presence of the development would materially alter
   and harm the outlook currently experienced by the neighbouring occupants at
   Remenham Row. Although landscaping may soften some views over time, it would
   not adequately mitigate the scale, massing and prominence of the extension.
   Consequently, I find that the proposal would have an unacceptable overbearing
   effect on the outlook from the front-facing windows, front gardens and communal
   garden areas serving 1 to 5 Remenham Row.
9. The appellant places considerable reliance on the separation distances between
   the proposed extension and the properties at Remenham Row, which would range
   from approximately 21.4m to 26m. Reference is also made to the removal of
   projecting balconies in favour of Juliet balconies, the oblique angle between the
   buildings and the submitted daylight and sunlight assessment, which identifies no
   significant adverse impacts in terms of daylight or sunlight.
10. Whilst I have had regard to these matters, I do not find the relationship between the
    proposal and Remenham Row to be readily comparable to either a conventional
    front-to-front or back-to-back arrangement. Notably, the Borough Design Guide
    Supplementary Planning Document (the Design Guide SPD) (June 2012) makes
    clear that character and context are important considerations and that separation
    distances are guidelines rather than absolute standards. Consequently, compliance


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011062


     with those guidelines does not, in itself, demonstrate that a proposal would
     preserve neighbouring living conditions.
11. Of particular relevance is the fact that Remenham Row forms part of a private
    gated residential development. The areas between the dwellings and the appeal
    site are not public highway or a typical street frontage but comprise part of the
    residential environment enjoyed by occupiers, albeit on a communal basis.
    Consequently, residents can reasonably expect a greater degree of privacy than
    may be the case in a more conventional street setting.
12. I have also taken account of the fact that Remenham Row is situated at a slightly
    lower level than the appeal site. Accordingly, the relationship between the
    development and neighbouring dwellings is influenced not only by the horizontal
    separation distances but also by the relative levels between them. This would
    increase the prominence of the proposed extension when viewed from
    neighbouring properties and garden areas.
13. I acknowledge that the existing outlook from Remenham Row already includes built
    development associated with Thamesfield. However, the proposal would replace a
    largely single-storey element of development with a substantially taller and bulkier
    building. Whilst the submitted daylight and sunlight assessment indicates that the
    proposal would not result in significant losses of daylight or sunlight to neighbouring
    occupiers, the absence of such effects does not necessarily mean that the
    development would preserve outlook.
14. In relation to privacy, the elevation facing Remenham Row would contain numerous
    upper-floor windows serving habitable accommodation, including living, dining and
    kitchen areas as well as bedrooms. Whilst the buildings would not directly face one
    another in a parallel arrangement and the outlook would be experienced at an
    oblique angle, occupants of the proposed extension would nevertheless be able to
    look towards the dwellings and residential areas associated with Remenham Row.
    Consequently, the proposal would increase opportunities for overlooking when
    compared with the existing situation.
15. R15 of the Design Guide SPD states that the appropriate degree of privacy varies,
    with less distance being reasonable on the street-facing side of development and
    more on private elevations, and that privacy depends upon how rooms relate to one
    another. In this case, the affected frontage at Remenham Row is private rather than
    public. Moreover, the relationship would be between proposed habitable room
    windows, including living accommodation, and existing habitable room windows
    serving the principal living areas of the properties at Remenham Row. This is
    therefore not a relationship in which reduced expectations of privacy would
    ordinarily apply.
16. Whilst the separation distance between the buildings is not insignificant and the
    relationship would be experienced at an angle, the proposal would introduce a
    substantial number of additional upper-floor habitable room windows facing towards
    Remenham Row. Having regard to the guidance in R15, the private nature of the
    affected elevation and the relationship between habitable rooms, reinforced by the
    appeal site's higher ground level relative to Remenham Row, I find that the
    proposal would result in a materially greater perception of overlooking and an
    unacceptable effect on the privacy of occupiers of Remenham Row.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011062


17. Taking these matters together, I find that the proposal would result in both an
    overbearing relationship and a harmful loss of privacy for the existing occupants of
    Remenham Row. Consequently, I conclude that the development would have an
    unacceptable effect on the living conditions of existing occupants of Remenham
    Row, with particular regard to outlook and privacy. It would conflict with Policy CP3
    of the Wokingham Core Strategy (Core Strategy) (2010), which requires
    development to be of an appropriate scale, mass, layout, built form and height and
    to avoid detriment to the amenities of adjoining occupiers and their quality of life. It
    would also conflict with the Design Guide SPD insofar as it seeks to secure
    appropriate standards of residential amenity. Furthermore, it would conflict with
    Policy DP3 of the Framework, which requires development to respond positively to
    its context so that it integrates with and enhances its surroundings, which the
    proposal would fail to achieve.
18. The Council also refers to Policy P3 of the Framework. However, that policy is
    principally concerned with living conditions in relation to matters such as daylight
    and sunlight, together with air, noise, light, water and other forms of pollution. The
    evidence before me does not indicate material concerns in respect of those
    matters. Accordingly, whilst I have had regard to Policy P3, I do not find it to be
    determinative in this case.
Heritage Assets
19. The appeal site occupies a prominent position on the Berkshire bank of the
    Thames and forms part of a highly visible stretch of river corridor experienced from
    public rights of way, the river itself, Henley Bridge and the Oxfordshire bank. It
    forms part of the wider Thamesfield retirement village complex, centred on a mid-
    19th century riverside mansion, with grounds running around the building and down
    to the riverbank. Whilst the building has been altered and extended over time, the
    original Victorian element remains readily identifiable and retains a prominent
    presence in views from across the river and within the surrounding riverside
    townscape. The grounds along the riverbank allow for open views of the building
    from the opposite side of the river. Consequently, despite the alterations and
    extensions, the appeal site contributes positively to the character and appearance
    of the area.
20. The site lies within the Remenham Henley Bridge Conservation Area (CA) and
    contributes to the setting of the Henley-on-Thames CA, which lies on the western
    side of the River Thames opposite the appeal site. It also lies within the setting of a
    number of listed buildings, including the Grade I listed Henley Bridge and other
    designated heritage assets associated with the historic riverside environment.
21. I note the Council's view that the original mansion building should be regarded as a
    non-designated heritage asset by virtue of its architectural and historic interest and
    its contribution to the character and appearance of the area, albeit it has not been
    formally identified as such through the development plan process nor is it on a local
    heritage list. However, the principal heritage issue before me concerns the effect of
    the proposal on the significance of the Remenham Henley Bridge CA and the
    setting of the Henley-on-Thames CA.
22. The significance of these CA’s for the purposes of this appeal derives not only from
    their collection of historic buildings, but also from the distinctive character of the
    River Thames corridor. This includes the strong visual relationship between built


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6011062


     form on either side of the river, the prominence of landmark buildings set within
     landscaped grounds, the spacious and verdant quality of the riverbanks and
     important views both across and along the river. Thamesfield contributes positively
     to that significance through the prominence of the original Victorian building within
     generous landscaped grounds, the visual separation between the riverside
     mansion and surrounding built form, and the attractive landscaped backdrop
     provided in views from the river, and the Oxfordshire bank.
23. The appellant's heritage evidence concludes that the proposal would cause no
    harm to either CA and no harm to nearby listed buildings. However, the Council
    and Historic England consider the proposed extension to be excessively large and
    bulky within its sensitive riverside setting, with Historic England identifying the
    proposed third floor as the principal source of harm.
24. Although visibility of development from public viewpoints is not, in itself, harmful, in
    this case harm would arise from the scale, bulk, height and massing of the
    proposed extension. In this regard, the proposal would replace a relatively modest
    building on the northern part of the site with a substantially larger three-storey
    extension. Whilst I acknowledge the design amendments made during the
    application process, including revisions to the roof form, the proposed extension
    would nevertheless appear substantially larger than the building it would replace.
25. I find that the additional height, particularly at third-floor level, together with the
    increased bulk and massing of the extension, would compete visually with the
    original Victorian mansion and diminish its prominence as the principal historic
    component of the Thamesfield complex. The proposal would also introduce a more
    dominant and urbanising form of development into a riverside setting whose
    character is derived in part from the balance between substantial historic buildings,
    generous landscaped grounds and relatively open views.
26. As a consequence, the proposal would erode the spacious and verdant qualities
    that contribute positively to the significance of the CA’s. It would reduce the visual
    separation presently experienced between the historic mansion and surrounding
    development and alter the established relationship between the building and its
    landscaped setting. In doing so, it would diminish the contribution that the site
    presently makes to the character and appearance of the riverside townscape.
27. These effects would be apparent in views from the River Thames, the Oxfordshire
    bank and other publicly accessible locations within and around the CA’s. Whilst the
    proposal would not prevent appreciation of the heritage assets, it would detract
    from the way in which the historic mansion is experienced within its riverside setting
    and would thereby harm the significance of both CA’s.
28. I have also considered the effect of the proposal on the setting of nearby listed
    buildings, including the Grade I listed Henley Bridge. Notably, the Council has not
    identified any harm to the significance of those assets arising from changes to their
    settings. Having regard to the intervening distance, existing vegetation and built
    form, together with the nature of the views available, I am not persuaded that the
    proposal would result in any separate harm to the significance of nearby listed
    buildings. The principal heritage effects arise in relation to the CA’s.
29. Consequently, I find that the proposal would fail to preserve the character and
    appearance of the area harming the significance of the Remenham and Henley
    Bridge CA through development within it. It would also harm the significance of the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6011062


     Henley-on-Thames CA through development within its setting. Accordingly, I find
     that the proposal would give rise to heritage harm that engages the heritage
     objectives of Policy TB24 of the Managing Development Delivery Local Plan (2014)
     and Policy CP3 of the Core Strategy, together with the heritage provisions of
     Policies HE4, HE5, HE6, HE7 and HE9 of the Framework.
30. The proposal would harm the significance of designated heritage assets. However,
    having regard to the asset's significance and the nature and extent of the effects
    identified, I find that the degree of harm would be limited. Nevertheless, Policy
    HE6.1 of the Framework states that substantial weight should be given to the
    conservation of designated heritage assets. I have therefore attached considerable
    importance and weight to that harm. Policy HE6.4 of the Framework states that
    where a development proposal would harm the significance of a designated
    heritage asset, the effect on the asset and its significance should be weighed
    against any public benefits resulting from the proposal.
31. The Council is unable to demonstrate a five-year supply of deliverable housing
    sites. The proposal would redevelop the existing building to provide 17 C2
    apartments. Taking account of the existing accommodation, the proposal would
    provide a net increase of 13 units. In the context of the Council's housing land
    supply shortfall, I attach significant weight to this benefit.
32. I also acknowledge the identified need for specialist accommodation for older
    persons. The evidence before me indicates a substantial unmet need for such
    accommodation within the borough. Whilst an interested party disputes the extent
    of that need and the weight that should be attributed to the additional units
    proposed, I nevertheless attach significant weight to the contribution the proposal
    would make towards meeting the needs of older persons.
33. I attach moderate weight to the efficient use of previously developed land and the
    contribution that the proposal would make towards the continued provision of
    specialist accommodation at Thamesfield.
34. The appellant contends that the expansion of Thamesfield is important to the long-
    term viability of the retirement community, arguing that rising operating costs have
    placed increasing pressure on the existing facility and that additional units would
    assist in spreading those costs across a larger resident base. Whilst I have taken
    this evidence into account, I attach only limited weight to this benefit given that it is
    based principally on the appellant's own assessment of the operation and financial
    performance of the facility.
35. The proposal would also deliver environmental benefits. These include biodiversity
    net gain in excess of 10%, additional landscaping, the creation of a woodland walk
    and sustainability measures anticipated to significantly reduce operational carbon
    emissions compared with baseline building regulations requirements. The site is
    also located adjacent to existing built development and services. These matters
    attract moderate weight in favour of the proposal.
36. There would also be economic benefits through construction activity, investment in
    the site, employment opportunities and expenditure within the local economy.
    Social benefits would arise through the provision of additional specialist
    accommodation for older persons, supporting independent living, health and
    wellbeing, and reducing social isolation. The proposal may also assist in releasing


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6011062


     larger homes back into the wider housing market through downsizing. I attach
     moderate weight to these benefits.
37. Drawing these matters together, I find that the proposal would deliver substantial
    public benefits. Having attached considerable importance and weight to the
    identified heritage harm, I nevertheless find that these substantial public benefits
    outweigh that harm. Accordingly, I find that the identified heritage harm is
    outweighed by the public benefits.
38. Furthermore, even if I were to accept the Council's contention that the original
    Thamesfield building constitutes a non-designated heritage asset, I would not find
    the proposal would cause any greater heritage harm than that already identified in
    relation to the CA’s. In any event, having regard to the public benefits set out
    above, I would find that any harm to the significance of a non-designated heritage
    asset would also be outweighed by those benefits.
Other Matters
39. The appeal site lies within the Green Belt. However, I am satisfied that the proposal
    would constitute not inappropriate development in the Green Belt, comprising the
    partial redevelopment of previously developed land and satisfying the relevant
    provisions of national Green Belt policy. In addition, the proposal would meet the
    Framework's grey belt provisions. However, these matters do not alter my findings
    on the main issues or the overall outcome of the appeal.
40. Interested parties raise concerns regarding the effect of the proposal on existing
    residents of Thamesfield. In particular, concerns are expressed regarding the loss
    of the existing lounge, the removal of a covered walkway linking parts of the
    retirement village and the effect of the proposal on the outlook and daylight
    available to some existing apartments. Whilst I have taken these matters into
    account, replacement communal facilities would be provided as part of the wider
    redevelopment proposals, and I have insufficient evidence before me to conclude
    that the proposal would result in unacceptable living conditions for existing
    Thamesfield residents. Consequently, whilst I have had regard to these concerns,
    they do not materially affect my findings on the main issues.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
41. Policy S5 of the Framework identifies certain forms of development that may be
    appropriate outside settlement boundaries. Criterion d) includes the redevelopment
    of previously developed land such as that proposed here. Policy S5 further requires
    decision-makers to assess whether the benefits of such development would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies of the Framework.
42. I have found that the proposal would cause unacceptable harm to the living
    conditions of existing occupants at Remenham Row, with particular regard to
    outlook and privacy contrary to Policy DP3 of the Framework.
43. Criterion 3 of Policy DP3 states that development proposals should be refused if,
    without clear justification, they conflict with paragraph 1 of the policy, relevant
    aspects of the principles in paragraph 2, or any explicit design standards set out in
    the development plan. The policy further states that substantial weight should be



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6011062


     given to compliance with relevant development plan policies when assessing the
     design quality of proposals.
44. While the benefits I outline above are significant, they do not in my view, provide
    clear justification to allow development that would harm the living conditions of the
    existing residents in the manner I have described. Accordingly, I find that the
    proposal conflicts with Policy DP3.
45. Policy S5(2) states that circumstances in which the benefits of approving
    development proposals are likely to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects
    include where a proposal fails to comply with a national decision-making policy that
    states development should be refused in specific circumstances. As I have found
    that the proposal conflicts with Policy DP3, I consider this to be such a case.
    Accordingly, I find that the benefits of the proposal would be substantially
    outweighed by the adverse effects. The proposal therefore conflicts with Policy S5
    of the Framework.
46. I have had regard to the Council officer's original assessment, which concluded that
    the proposal would result in only limited harm to neighbouring living conditions and
    that such harm would be outweighed by the benefits of the scheme. However, as
    decision-maker, I am required to undertake my own assessment of the evidence
    before me. For the reasons set out above, I find that the proposal would cause
    unacceptable harm to occupiers at Remenham Row through its overbearing effect
    and loss of privacy, resulting in significant harm to their living conditions. I attach
    substantial weight to that harm.
47. Consequently, I conclude that the proposal conflicts with the development plan
    when read as a whole. There are no material considerations, including the
    Framework, which would outweigh that conflict. For the reasons given above, the
    appeal is dismissed.

Laura Cuthbert
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
