Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by Andrew Fuller BSc (Hons), Dip TP, MA, MRTPI, IHBC
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1st October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011652
21 Marlin Road, Luton, LU4 0SH
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Mohammed Aqeb Hussain Ali against the decision of the Borough of
     Luton.
•    The application Ref is 26/00065/FULHH.
•    The development proposed is for the erection of a single storey ground floor rear/side extension and
     first floor rear extension.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Background and Main Issue
2.     The description of development in the banner above is taken from the application
       form and the appellant has continued to use this description in the appeal. Whilst
       the Council amended the wording, it did so without altering the scope of the
       proposal.
3.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published on 17 August 2026. The changes to the Framework do not affect the
       merits of this case in a material way and I, therefore, have not consulted the
       parties with regard to these changes.
4.     The Council and the Local Highway Authority do not object to the side and rear
       extensions to the property. From my site visit these principal components of the
       development would assimilate to an acceptable standard with the surrounding
       area, where side and rear alterations to properties of varying types are not
       prominent from public areas.
5.     In addition to the proposed extension to the property, a parking provision plan was
       also submitted with the application. It indicates three car parking spaces on the
       hardstanding in the front garden area but notes that only one car is parked there.
       Irrespective of the number of parking spaces this existing hardstanding can
       accommodate, the appeal site is absent of a vehicular access connecting it to the
       road.
6.     The appellant has stated that they would agree to changing the parking
       arrangement to the front of the property to accommodate fewer spaces. However,
       an appeal should not be used to amend or evolve a scheme. In the interests of
       fairness, I am considering the plans before me, as submitted to and considered by
       the Council.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011652


7.     The main issue, therefore, is the effect of the development on parking, with
       particular reference to highway safety on Marlin Road.
Reasons
8.     The appeal site lies in a busy residential neighbourhood with significant on-street
       parking. The public pavement runs adjacent to the front boundary of the appeal
       property, separating it from a deep verge and the road beyond, but is not
       connected to the road by a vehicular crossover. A layby extends across the road
       frontage forwards of the appeal site and its neighbours. This affords limited off-
       road parking for these houses and is depleted by a number of driveway crossovers
       that access the road through it. The immediate neighbouring property at No 23
       Marlin Road has such a driveway crossing through the deep verge from this layby.
9.     The proposed development would see the house increased from a two to a three-
       bedroomed property. In doing so, it proposes to form three car parking spaces on
       the existing hardstanding across the front garden. The plans indicate that these
       spaces would be accessed via No 23’s driveway. The Council’s parking standards
       are set out as a maximum, and in the case of a three bedroomed property would
       be for two spaces. Although the proposal involves an extension to an existing
       dwelling rather than a new residential unit, there would be a material increase in
       the level of parking demand. Therefore, it is necessary to consider the effects on
       parking provision and highway safety.
10. The provision of parking on the existing hardstanding within the appeal site is
    constrained by access. Despite the openness of the garden and frontage, no
    visibility splays have been undertaken in conjunction with an independent
    crossover layout leading to the road. As such, the absence of an appropriate
    vehicular crossover to this proposed parking area would present a significant risk
    to pedestrians and other highway users of the pavement and verge beyond.
    Whilst the provision of a vehicle crossover is controlled via section 184 of the
    Highways Act, it remains necessary to consider the highway safety effects of not
    having a suitable crossover as part of this appeal.
11. For a vehicle to enter any part of this hardstanding, it would need to access the
    drive of No 23, cross the verge, and manoeuvre along part of the pedestrian
    pavement before entering the site. Should an existing vehicle be parked on the
    hardstanding close to the boundary with No 23, there is insufficient room to
    manoeuvre other vehicles around it within the site. In such an event a second or
    third vehicle would need to cross further areas of the verge and footpath to
    manoeuvre around this vehicle to either access or egress these other parts of the
    hardstanding.
12. Irrespective of a legal agreement to secure the appellant’s lawful use of the
    driveway to No 23, a neighbour or third party may be parked on it. This would
    result in possible vehicular manoeuvres across an even greater extent of the verge
    and pavement to access the site. In all cases, the absence of a properly formed
    access and crossover with assessed visibility splays, forms a significant risk to the
    safety of pedestrians and other road users passing the front of the appeal site.
    With up to three vehicles able to be parked on the hardstanding, there are
    constraints in terms of access and movement. Even with a revised parking
    arrangement providing fewer than three spaces, there would still be difficulties and
    risks with vehicles entering and exiting the site.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011652


13. In the absence of suitable on-site parking, there is nothing in the evidence before
    me to demonstrate how the proposal would not worsen the congestion evident to
    me on my site visit along Marlin Road. Despite it being a weekday morning, I found
    there to be very limited on-street parking available. Most spaces between
    crossovers were utilised, including the layby in front of the appeal site. Parking
    was also taking place on verges and other open green spaces in front of properties
    in the local area. As such, should no on-site parking be provided, the proposed
    development would generate further pressure on on-road parking. This would
    result in greater risk of conflict between road users to the detriment of highway
    safety.
14. Overall, I conclude that the proposed development would harm highway safety on
    Marlin Road. As such, it conflicts with Policies LLP1 and LLP32 of the Luton Local
    Plan 2011-2031. These policies, along with other matters, seek to promote and
    deliver sustainable development through the creation of a network of connected,
    high quality, locally distinctive, and healthy places and require sufficient parking to
    be provided to help ensure that adverse effects on highway safety are avoided.
Other Matters
15. The appellant sets out that there would be no harm in respect of design and
    appearance on the street scene, or to neighbouring living conditions by reason of
    daylight, outlook or privacy. I have no reason to disagree and there would be no
    conflict with relevant policies or objectives of the Local Plan or the Framework.
    Nevertheless, a lack of harm is effectively neutral in my determination of the
    appeal.
Conclusion
16. Having regard to Policy S3 and S4 of the Framework, the benefits of the proposed
    development in terms of increased living space would be substantially outweighed
    by the harm to highway safety. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the
    proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations do
    not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.

Andrew Fuller
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
