 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 17 August 2026
 by Chris Couper BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 1 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011645
 Land north west of Sackville Cottage, High Street, Riseley, Bedford MK44 1BS
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Joe Rooney and Luke Mulvenna against the decision of Bedford Borough
      Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00199/S73A.
 •    The development is described as ‘retrospective application for the temporary siting of a static
      caravan for non-residential purposes for a period of 18 months’.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. The static caravan is already in place. I have therefore dealt with the appeal on the
   basis of its retention.
3. The revised National Planning Policy Framework was published in August 2026
   (‘the Framework’). Having regard to the submitted evidence, and the main issue in
   this appeal, I am satisfied that its relevant policies are not significantly different from
   those now superceded policies that were in place at the time of the Council’s
   decision.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the static caravan on the character and appearance
   of the area.
Reasons
5. The site is located in open countryside, some distance from the settlement
   boundary of Riseley, as depicted in the Bedford Borough Local Plan 2030 (‘BLP’).
   The landscape generally comprises large, flat fields, some with hedgerows around
   their boundaries, woodland, and scattered groups of agricultural, commercial or
   equestrian buildings, and houses. Those structures tend to be clustered together,
   often around a principal building or a dwelling, such as at Sackville Cottage, and
   around Sackville House and other properties broadly to the south of the site.
6. The static caravan has a rectilinear form, and a utilitarian, functional appearance. It
   is set in from the corner of a large field, close to a hedgerow on the north-eastern
   boundary, and some distance from the nearest buildings to the south.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision: 6011645


7. I observed that it is prominent in the landscape, particularly when looking across
   the level, open field from the public footpath close to Sackville Cottage. Whilst it is
   partially screened by the hedgerow on the field boundary, it is also visible to users
   of the bridleway immediately to the north-east, particularly through gaps in the
   vegetation. Moreover, that hedgerow may have less of a screening affect at other
   times of the year.
8. In those views, given the static caravan’s design and form, and that it is relatively
   remote from any structures or buildings, it appears as an isolated, stark and
   incongruous feature, which is significantly at odds with the rural character and
   appearance of the area.
9. The appellants state that the land has historically been used for equestrian
   purposes, and that although there are no horses on it at present, it remains a
   paddock. They continue that the caravan is required for land management and
   maintenance, including for the storage of equipment and materials, and for the
   provision of welfare accommodation.
10. However, I have very few details of those requirements, or how they relate to the
    use of this small parcel of land; and as it is unclear what longer term options are
    being considered, I am unable to properly assess whether they could justify the
    grant of a temporary permission.
11. The scheme does not constitute any of the forms of development listed in BLP
    Policy 7S parts i) to v) which may be permitted in the countryside. Given that it is
    not well-related to a settlement, it also fails to comply with parts vi) to x) of that
    policy. It also conflicts with its stance at part xi) that development should recognise
    the intrinsic character and beauty of the countryside; and, to a more a limited
    degree, with part xii) that development should not adversely affect the use and
    enjoyment of the countryside by others.
12. It also conflicts with BLP Policies 28S, 29 and 30, and Riseley Neighbourhood Plan
    2022 - 2030 (2023) Policies RC1 and D1. Collectively, and in general terms, these
    set out the need for high quality design which promotes local distinctiveness,
    integrates with, respects or maintains the character and context of the area, and
    enhances the landscape. It also fails to comply with the Framework’s requirement
    in Section 14 for high quality design, and in Section 4 to safeguard the intrinsic
    character and beauty of the countryside.
13. Whilst I am told that the caravan was present when the appellants purchased the
    land, I have dealt with the scheme before me, under S78 of the Act on its planning
    merits. Upon its removal, I do not doubt that the land could be restored to its
    previous condition. However, I have been provided with very little in the way of
    explanation or justification for the grant of a temporary permission.
14. Summing up, I have found that the scheme causes significant harm to the rural
    character and appearance of the area. For these reasons, and having regard to all
    other matters raised, including representations by interested parties, the appeal is
    dismissed.

Chris Couper
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
