Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 27 August 2026
by Alexander O’Doherty LLB (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 9 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011886
Land south of The Rancher, Manor Farm Lane, Reading RG8 8EX
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission under section 73 of the Town and Country Planning Act
       1990 (as amended) for the development of land without complying with conditions subject to which a
       previous planning permission was granted.
•      The appeal is made by Manor Farm Tidmarsh Ltd against the decision of West Berkshire District
       Council.
•      The application Ref is 26/00191/FUL.
•      The application sought planning permission for erection of agricultural barn and adjacent access track
       without complying with a condition attached to planning permission Ref 25/00234/FUL, dated 17
       December 2025.
•      The condition in dispute is No 2 which states that: The development hereby permitted shall be carried
       out in accordance with the approved plans and documents listed below: job number 1091-02-10. 03-
       10 , 04-10 and 05-10 .Location plan, floor plans and elevations. Plus section. All dated June 2025.
•      The reason given for the condition is: For the avoidance of doubt and in the interest of proper
       planning.

Decision
1.       The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for erection of agricultural
         barn and adjacent access track at land south of The Rancher, Manor Farm Lane,
         Reading, RG8 8EX in accordance with the application Ref 26/00191/FUL, without
         compliance with condition number 2 previously imposed on planning permission
         Ref 25/00234/FUL dated 17 December 2025, and subject to the conditions set out
         in the attached schedule.
Application for costs
2.       The appellant made an application for costs. This application for costs has been
         dealt with in a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.       At the appeal stage, the appellant submitted an Agricultural Appraisal Addendum
         Statement1 (Addendum Statement). Paragraph 9.5.2.4. of the relevant Procedural
         Guide2 provides that, amongst other things, the appellant’s submissions, including
         the statement of case, should not normally include new evidence or additional
         technical data not previously seen by the Local Planning Authority and interested
         parties at the application stage. Nevertheless, this new information is directly
         relevant to the reasons for refusal as set out in the Council’s decision notice. The
         Council has had an opportunity to comment on the Addendum Statement through
         its full statement of case. As no prejudice has been caused to the Council’s

1
    Letter from Reading Agricultural Consultants dated 18 June 2026.
2
    Procedural Guide: Planning appeals – England. For appeals relating to applications dated on or before 31 March 2026.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011886


      interests, the Addendum Statement has been accepted as part of the appeals
      process.
4.    A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published in
      August 2026. Having regard to the main issues in this appeal as set out below, the
      Framework does not raise any new matters which are determinative to the outcome
      of this appeal.
Background and Main Issues
5.    Planning permission was granted in December 2025 for the erection of an
      agricultural barn and an adjacent access track. The appellant is seeking to vary
      condition No 2, which would have the effect of altering the internal layout and
      external appearance of the agricultural barn.
6.    Therefore, the main issues in this appeal are whether or not the disputed condition
      is necessary and reasonable, having regard to the agricultural need for the barn
      and the effect of the proposed alterations on the character and appearance of the
      area.
Reasons
Agricultural need
7.    Planning permission for the agricultural barn was granted on the basis that an
      agricultural need had been demonstrated. The Addendum Statement confirms that
      there would be no change to the hay storage area, and that the proposed
      alterations would provide a greater overall area available for the storage of
      agricultural machinery, equipment, and associated items.
8.    The Addendum Statement highlights that the proposed revised arrangement
      provides an operational advantage by locating the workshop and tool storage areas
      adjacent to one another, thereby creating a more practical working layout. Similarly,
      the Addendum Statement notes that the proposed revised layout consolidates the
      office, welfare, kitchen and WC facilities within a single part of the building rather
      than dispersing them throughout the structure, which represents a more practical
      arrangement from an operational perspective.
9.    The opinion put forward in the Addendum Statement that the amended internal
      layout remains capable of meeting the agricultural requirements identified within the
      June 2025 Agricultural Appraisal has not been specifically disputed by the Council.
      Nor has the Council sought to rebut the reasoning within the Addendum Statement.
      On this basis, although the size of the ancillary accommodation would be increased
      and a kitchen area and a new independent access would be introduced, the
      proposed alterations would be justified in terms of agricultural need.
10. I therefore find that the disputed condition is not necessary and reasonable, having
    regard to the agricultural need for the barn. No conflict would arise with Policy
    DM35 of the West Berkshire Local Plan Review 2023 – 2041 (adopted 2025) (Local
    Plan), which provides that, amongst other things, development proposals that
    contribute to sustaining a prosperous rural economy will be encouraged.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011886


Character and appearance
11. The appeal site principally comprises an existing area of agricultural land and an
    access route leading to that area. The site is located outside of the settlement
    boundary of Tidmarsh. It is in the open countryside in planning policy terms. The
    site is situated to the south of residential dwellings on Manor Farm Lane and Manor
    Farm Mews. The wider field upon which the agricultural barn would be sited is
    enclosed on its southern and eastern sides by trees. The presence of nearby
    residential development and the abundance of modestly-sized and fragmented
    fields in the vicinity of the site contribute to the area’s rural fringe character.
12. The proposed alterations to the external appearance of the approved barn include
    an external staircase (leading to a door at first-floor level), an area of glazing at
    ground-floor level on the western elevation, and new windows. The overall scale
    and siting of the building would remain the same. Materials commonly seen for
    agricultural structures would be used. Additionally, the large hay store would
    remain, as would the sizeable door serving a tractor storage area.
13. The glazed area and the door on the western elevation beneath the balcony would
    be set-back from the frontage of the barn, as would the external staircase, thereby
    reducing the prominence of these features. This would ensure that this area would
    not read separately from the remainder of the barn. The vertical windows either side
    of the central timber door on the western elevation would not be so wide as to
    detract from the utilitarian form of the building as a whole.
14. Hence, the alterations would be visually congruent with the hybrid function of the
    barn in terms of its use not only for agricultural storage but also for associated
    purposes (including the maintenance of machinery via the workshop, and estate
    management via the office). The aesthetic of the barn would not be altered to such
    a degree that it would have domesticated appearance. Harm to the character and
    appearance of the area would not result.
15. I therefore find that the disputed condition is not necessary and reasonable, having
    regard to the effect of the proposed alterations on the character and appearance of
    the area. No conflict would arise with Policies SP7, SP8, and DM35 of the Local
    Plan which collectively seek to, amongst other things, strengthen a sense of place
    through high quality locally distinctive design and place shaping.
Other Matters
16. This appeal decision solely relates to proposed alterations to the internal layout and
    external appearance of the agricultural barn. Matters relating to traffic and highway
    safety are not directly relevant to these issues. The submitted representations in
    relation to these issues do not alter my findings on the main issues above.
17. In line with policy N4(1) of the Framework, I have given substantial weight to the
    importance of conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of the North Wessex
    Downs National Landscape3. As, due to the size and siting of the barn, the
    proposed alterations to its external appearance would only be experienced in the
    immediate vicinity of the site, with the dense areas of trees to the southern and
    eastern boundaries of the wider field further limiting the visual association of the site
    with the wider landscape, the proposed alterations would have a neutral effect on

3
    Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty are now known as National Landscapes.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                3
Appeal Decision 6011886


        the landscape. As the natural beauty of the National Landscape would be
        conserved, no conflict would arise with the Framework, or with Policy SP2 of the
        Local Plan, which provides that, amongst other things, development will be required
        to respond positively to the local context, conserving and enhancing local
        distinctiveness, sense of place and setting of the National Landscape.
18. This is a neutral matter, which does not weigh in favour of the proposal. In reaching
    this finding, I have had regard to s85(A1) of the Countryside and Rights of Way Act
    2000 (as amended), which provides that, amongst other things, a relevant authority
    must seek to further the purpose of conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of
    the Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty.
Conditions
19. The Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) provides that decision notices for the grant
    of planning permission under section 73 should set out all of the conditions imposed
    on the new permission, and restate the conditions imposed on earlier permissions
    that continue to have effect4. As I have no information before me about the status of
    the other conditions imposed on the original planning permission, I shall impose all
    those that I consider remain relevant. In the event that some have in fact been
    discharged, that is a matter which can be addressed by the main parties.
20. A condition is necessary requiring that the development is undertaken in
    accordance with the approved plans to provide certainty, and in accordance with
    this appeal proposal, condition No 2 of the original grant of planning permission is
    to be substituted with the proposed condition (condition No 2 in the attached
    schedule).
21. The Council has suggested a minor amendment to condition No 10 as imposed on
    the original planning permission, to require the removal of paraphernalia associated
    with the existing portacabin on site. As this amendment would not materially alter
    the development that was subject to the original permission and such a condition
    could have been imposed on the earlier permission, the Council’s suggested
    condition has been imposed (condition No 10 in the attached schedule).
Conclusion
22. For the reasons given above, having considered the development plan as a whole,
    the approach in the Framework, and all other relevant material considerations, I
    conclude that the appeal should be allowed.

Alexander O’Doherty
INSPECTOR




4
    Paragraph 21a-040-20190723


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6011886


Conditions Schedule
1) The development hereby permitted shall be begun before 17th December 2028.

2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
   approved plans and documents listed below: 1091-04-10 A – proposed section
   (submitted February 2026), 1091-05-10 – proposed elevations (submitted February
   2026), 1091-03-10 A – proposed floor plans (submitted February 2026), 1091-02-10
   (Dated June 2025), Location Plan (Dated July 2025).

3) No development shall take place until details of sustainable drainage measures to
   manage surface water within the site have been submitted to and approved in
   writing by the Local Planning Authority.

     These details shall:

     a) Include full information of catchments and flows discharging into and across the
        site and how these flows will be managed and routed through the development
        and, where the flows exit the site, both pre-development and post-development
        information must be provided;

     b) Include and be informed by a ground investigation survey which establishes the
        soil characteristics, infiltration rate and groundwater levels. Soakage testing shall
        be undertaken in accordance with BRE365 methodology;

     c) Include run-off calculations based on current rainfall data models, discharge
        rates, and infiltration and storage capacity calculations for the proposed SuDS
        measures based on a 1 in 100 year storm +40% for climate change;

     d) Include pre-treatment methods to prevent any pollution or silt entering SuDS
        features or causing any contamination to the soil, groundwater, watercourse or
        drain;

     e) Include a management and maintenance plan showing how the SuDS measures
        will be maintained and managed after completion for the lifetime of the
        development. This plan shall incorporate arrangements for adoption by the
        Council, Water and Sewage Undertaker, Maintenance or Management Company
        (private company or Trust) or individual property owners, or any other
        arrangements, including maintenance responsibilities resting with individual
        property owners, to secure the operation of the sustainable drainage scheme
        throughout its lifetime. These details shall be provided as part of a handover
        pack for subsequent purchasers and owners of the property/premises; The
        above sustainable drainage measures shall be implemented in accordance with
        the approved details before the use hereby permitted is commenced in
        accordance with a timetable to be submitted and agreed in writing with the Local
        Planning Authority as part of the details submitted for this condition. The
        sustainable drainage measures shall be maintained in the approved condition
        thereafter/The sustainable drainage measures shall be maintained and managed
        in accordance with the approved details thereafter.

4) Prior to commencement of works, a lighting design strategy for biodiversity shall be
   submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The strategy

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6011886


     shall; Identify those areas/features on site that are particularly sensitive for bats and
     that are likely to cause disturbance in or around their breeding sites and resting
     places or along important routes used to access key areas of their territory, for
     example, for foraging; and show how and where external lighting will be installed
     (through the provision of appropriate Isolux contour plans and technical specification
     sheets) so that it can be clearly demonstrated that areas to be lit will not disturb or
     prevent the above species using their territory or having access to their breeding
     sites and resting places.

     All external lighting shall be installed in accordance with the specifications and
     locations set out in the strategy, and these shall be maintained thereafter in
     accordance with the strategy. Under no circumstances should any other external
     lighting be installed without prior consent from the local planning authority.

5) All the ecological enhancement recommendations in the Preliminary Ecological
   Assessment and Roost Assessment (December 2024, Arbtech Limited), shall be
   implemented and the enhancements should be evidenced by means of photographs
   of the features in-situ submitted to the local planning authority. All ecological
   measures and/or works shall be carried out in accordance with the details contained
   in the Preliminary Ecological Assessment and Roost Assessment (December 2024,
   Arbtech Limited), as already submitted with the planning application and agreed in
   principle with the Local Planning Authority prior to determination.

6) The barn shall not be used until the parking and turning space have been surfaced,
   marked out and provided in accordance with the approved plan. The parking and/or
   turning space shall thereafter be kept available for parking (of private motor cars
   and/or light goods vehicles) at all times. Plus agricultural vehicles.

7) The materials to be used in the development hereby permitted shall be as specified
   on the plans and/or the application forms. Where stated that materials shall match
   the existing, those materials shall match those on the existing development in
   colour, size and texture.

8) No development shall take place until a Construction Method Statement (CMS) has
   been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
   Thereafter the demolition and construction works shall incorporate and be
   undertaken in accordance with the approved CMS. The CMS shall include measures
   for:

    (a) A site set-up plan during the works;

    (b) Parking of vehicles of site operatives and visitors;

    (c) Loading and unloading of plant and materials;

    (d) Storage of plant and materials used in constructing the development;

    (e) Erection and maintenance of security hoarding including any decorative displays
        and/or facilities for public viewing;

    (f) Temporary access arrangements to the site, and any temporary hard-standing;


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
 Appeal Decision 6011886




     (g) Wheel washing facilities;

     (h) Measures to control dust, dirt, noise, vibrations, odours, surface water run-off,
         and pests/vermin during construction;

     (i) A scheme for recycling/disposing of waste resulting from demolition and
         construction works;

     (j) Hours of construction and demolition work;

     (k) Hours of deliveries and preferred haulage routes.

 9) No residential use as habitable accommodation of the barn hereby permitted shall
    occur at any time in the future.

10) The existing portacabin on site shall be removed in its entirety along with any
    associated paraphernalia within one month of the barn hereby approved being first
    taken into use and the site shall be left in a neat and tidy condition.
 End of Conditions Schedule




 https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
