Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 2 September 2026
by H Marriott MPlan MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011235
132 Cock Bank, Turves, Cambridgeshire PE7 2HN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Robert Dempsey against the decision of Fenland District Council.
•    The application Ref is F/YR25/0968/F.
•    The development proposed is described as ‘demolition of existing barn and erection of 1 new
     self-build bungalow to be used as part of the equine facility on site’.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2. On 17 August 2026, the Government published a revised National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework). This latest version of the Framework has introduced
   plan-making and national decision-making policies. It is effective from the day of
   publication. The main parties were given the opportunity to comment on the revised
   Framework, and any comments received have been taken into consideration.
Main Issues
3. The main issues are:
           •    whether or not the site is a suitable location for the proposed development,
                having regard to the development plan;
           •    whether or not the proposed development would meet the sequential and
                exception test as appropriate, which seek to steer new development away
                from areas at the highest risk of flooding; and
           •    the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of
                the area.
Reasons
Location
4.     Policy LP3 of the Fenland Local Plan (2014) (FLP) sets out the District’s spatial
       strategy, directing growth to its four market towns. The supporting text explains the
       aim is to steer most new development to those larger places that offer the best
       access to services and facilities to reduce the need to travel, as well as making
       best use of existing infrastructure and previously developed land in built-up areas.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011235


5.     The appeal site is primarily surrounded by agricultural land and is physically and
       visually detached from the nearest settlement, the small village of Turves. It
       therefore lies within an 'Elsewhere' location, where development is restricted to
       that which is demonstrably essential for local agriculture, horticulture, forestry,
       outdoor recreation, transport or utility services or minerals and waste development.
       Although the site adjoins other dwellings and is therefore not isolated for the
       purposes of the Framework, it occupies a remote position on Cock Bank, a rural
       road without footways and street lighting, with access to services and facilities
       largely reliant on private vehicles.
6.     The proposed development falls to be assessed against Part D of Policy LP12 of
       the FLP. For new dwellings, this policy requires evidence of an existing functional
       need, the number of workers to live in the dwelling, the length of time the activity
       has been established, the enterprise’s financial viability, the availability of
       alternative accommodation and how the proposed size of the dwelling relates to
       the viability of the enterprise.
7.     While there are currently two horses on the site, the facility has capacity for up to
       six. The horses require daily care, feeding, exercise, supervision and welfare
       monitoring. However, I observed during my site visit that they are stabled within
       the barn and, as no replacement stabling is proposed, it is uncertain how they
       would be accommodated or how the equestrian use would continue if the barn
       were demolished. The use does not appear to operate on a commercial basis and
       planning permission granted in 20221 restricts the equestrian use to domestic
       purposes, preventing its use as a riding establishment or commercial livery.
8.     Horses have been kept on the site since at least 2022, and it is therefore unclear
       as to why a permanent on-site residential presence is now necessary or why
       welfare needs arising at unsociable hours or in emergencies could not continue to
       be addressed as they have previously. During my site visit, I observed a mobile
       home on the appeal site which appeared to be occupied for residential purposes.
       However, there is no substantive evidence before me to indicate that the mobile
       home benefits from planning permission, or otherwise constitutes a lawful
       residential use. Consequently, its presence does not justify, nor does it
       demonstrate the need for, a permanent residential presence on the site in
       connection with the equestrian use.
9.     While I acknowledge the potential for theft and other rural crime, there is no
       substantive evidence before me to demonstrate that alternative security measures,
       such as locked gates, a secure building or CCTV, would be ineffective.
       Consequently, the evidence does not demonstrate an essential need for a rural
       worker to live permanently at the site, how the proposed size of the dwelling
       relates to the needs of the enterprise, the enterprise’s financial viability, or that
       suitable alternative accommodation is unavailable.
10. The appellant contends that the proposal is not advanced solely as a rural
    worker’s dwelling and that other material considerations, including the provision of
    a self-build dwelling2, should be taken into account. While the main parties dispute
    whether the Council has granted sufficient permissions to meet the demand for
    self-build housing, even if the proposal would contribute towards an unmet need,

1
  Council ref: F/YR22/0029/F Change of use of existing barn (B2/B8) and associated land to equestrian use (retrospective) –
granted 2022.
2
  under the Self-Build and Custom Housebuilding Act 2015 (or such other replacement or successor legislation).


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 2
Appeal Decision 6011235


       this is not an exception listed under Policy LP12. Moreover, notwithstanding the
       appellant’s willingness to provide one, there is currently no mechanism before me
       such as a legal agreement, to secure this in any event.
11. I conclude that the proposed development is not a suitable location for the
    proposed development having regard to the development plan. In this regard, it
    would be contrary to Policy LP12 of the FLP for the aforementioned reasons.
Flood risk
12. The appeal site lies within Flood Zone 3 and is therefore at higher risk of fluvial
    flooding. Policy LP14 of the FLP requires development in areas at risk of flooding to
    satisfy the sequential and exception tests.
13. The appellant contends that the sequential test should be considered in the context
    of the claimed functional and locational requirements for a dwelling on the site.
    However, for the reasons given above, I am not satisfied that an essential need for
    a rural worker to live on the site has been demonstrated or that the appeal site is
    otherwise a suitable location for the proposed development. Accordingly, I am not
    satisfied that the area of search should be limited to the appeal site and the
    sequential test needs to be assess on the basis of whether or not there are
    reasonably available sites in areas of lower flood risk capable of accommodating
    the proposed dwelling in the surrounding area.
14. While the appellant contends that much of surrounding area also lies in Flood Zone
    3, this area has not been defined and does not remove the requirement to apply the
    sequential test. Nor is the assessment limited to land within the appellant’s
    ownership or control. Although the Environment Agency raises no objection,
    responsibility for applying the sequential and exceptions tests rests ultimately rests
    with the decision-maker. On the basis of the limited evidence before me, I cannot
    therefore conclude that there are no reasonably available sites at a lower risk of
    flooding capable of accommodating the development. Accordingly, the proposal
    fails the sequential test.
15. Given this, it is unnecessary for me to determine whether the proposal would
    satisfy the exception test. Nevertheless, the evidence before me indicates that it is
    unlikely that the development would provide wider sustainability benefits to the
    community sufficient to outweigh flood risk, and this part of the exception test may
    not be met in any event. The appellant’s mitigation measures identified in the Flood
    Risk Assessment intended to satisfy the remaining parts of the exception test and
    Policy LP14 of the FLP, do not overcome the proposal’s failure to pass the
    sequential test.
16. I conclude that the proposed development would not meet the sequential test,
    which seeks to steer new development away from areas at the highest risk of
    flooding. In this regard, it would be contrary to Policy LP14 of the FLP for the
    aforementioned reasons.
Character and appearance
17. The surrounding rural area is characterised by sporadic development, including
    occasional dwellinghouses and farm buildings. Whittlessey Dike runs alongside
    the opposite side of Cock Bank to the appeal site, and longer-distance views are
    available across the flat agricultural landscape. Grass verges, together with


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011235


         occasional trees and hedges reinforce the area’s rural character. Despite the
         presence of occasional detracting features, such as wind turbines, pylons and
         close-boarded fencing, the landscape retains a spacious and cohesive countryside
         appearance.
18. The appeal site is located to the rear of three recently converted barns3 (the
    converted barns). The appeal barn is partially visible from Cock Bank.
    Nevertheless, notwithstanding its previous commercial use, its simple agricultural
    form and appearance are characteristic of the area and allow it to integrate
    comfortably within its rural surroundings.
19. While the site already exhibits a degree of backland development arising from the
    barn conversions, the proposed dwelling would extend residential presence further
    into the site and replace a former agricultural building with a distinctly domestic
    form of development. Although it would occupy a broadly similar footprint to the
    barn and be lower in height, its ‘U’ shaped plan form, domestic design and
    residential appearance would fail to reflect the simple agricultural character of the
    building it would replace. Instead, it would introduce a suburban style bungalow in
    a location where such a form of development would not ordinarily be expected.
20. In addition, the proposal would further erode the site’s remaining agricultural
    character through the demolition of the barn and erection of a fourth dwelling in a
    location where such a concentration of residential development would not
    ordinarily be anticipated. Consequently, despite its limited public visibility, the
    proposal would appear incongruous within its rural setting, particularly when
    viewed on entering the site. In any event, the limited visibility of the proposed
    development does not diminish the importance of achieving a high-quality design
    that responds appropriately to its context. The imposition of conditions, including in
    relation to materials, landscaping and boundary treatments would not overcome
    the harm identified.
21. I conclude that the proposed development would result in harm to the character
    and appearance of the area. In this regard, it would be contrary to Policy LP16 of
    the FLP which requires proposals to make a positive contribution to the local
    distinctiveness and character of the area and to not adversely impact, either in
    design or scale terms, on the street scene, settlement pattern or the landscape
    character of the surrounding area.
22. While the Council refer to Policy LP12 of the FLP in its decision, the part of this
    policy relevant to character and appearance considerations relates to development
    for villages only. On this basis, this policy has not been determinative in this main
    issue.
Other Considerations
23. The revised Framework introduces Policies S3-S5 which are material
    considerations. There is no dispute between the main parties that the proposed
    development would represent the redevelopment of previously developed land. As
    such, and notwithstanding that it would not comprise limited infilling within a group
    of houses, it falls within one of the forms of development identified by Policy S5 as
    being acceptable in the countryside, subject to the application of the balance


3
    Council ref: F/YR22/0557/F.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6011235


     required by that policy. I return to this matter in my Planning Balance and
     Conclusion section below.
24. The Council indicates it can demonstrate a five-year supply of housing and I am not
    satisfied that the proposed development would meet any specific evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community, including as a self-build dwelling.
    Nevertheless, in terms of benefits, the proposal would make a small yet positive
    contribution to local housing delivery. Its construction would likely utilise modern
    construction and energy saving techniques and would generate some temporary
    construction employment. The provision of a dwelling would also be a private
    benefit to the appellant, and additional support for local services and facilities would
    likely arise despite the likely reliance on private vehicles. The appellant also
    contends that co-locating the dwelling with the equestrian use would reduce vehicle
    movements. Taken together, the benefits of the proposal are modest and attract
    only limited weight.
25. I have limited information on the circumstances of planning permission being
    granted for the converted barns. However, what is evident is that this development
    related to conversions rather than new build. As such, their acceptability would
    have relied on a different development plan policy. As such, these schemes are not
    comparable and do not justify the proposed development.
26. The appellant raises concerns with the Council’s handling of the application. In
    particular, they indicate that they were informed the application would likely be
    determined by planning committee, but the decision was unexpectedly made
    sooner under delegated powers with any opportunity to discuss the decision.
    However, such matters are not determinative in this case, which has been
    considered on the basis of the relevant legislation and the evidence before me. The
    appellant also highlight errors within the Council’s evidence, which when read
    alongside the decision notice and case made, are clearly typographical in nature,
    and have not precluded my thorough assessment of the case.
27. The Council has identified no other harm including in relation to living conditions,
    ecology parking or highway safety. The lack of objection from interest parties and
    consultees is also noted. However, these are neutral factors and do not alter my
    findings on the main issues.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
28. Policy S3 of the Framework requires a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development in line with Policy S5 which relates to development outside
    settlements. This policy states that certain forms of development, which include the
    appeal proposal, should be approved outside settlements, unless the benefits of
    doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed
    against the national-decision making policies in the Framework.
29. In the particular circumstances of this case, I have concluded that the site is not a
    suitable location for the proposed development having regard to the development
    plan and has failed the flood risk sequential test. I have also found that there would
    be harm to the character and appearance of the area. These are matters that result
    in conflict with the development plan as whole.
30. The Framework sets out strict tests to protect people and property from flooding,
    including steering new development away from areas at the highest risk of flooding.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6011235


        The application of policies in the Framework relating to areas at risk of flooding can
        provide a strong reason for refusing the development4. In this regard, even though
        the dwelling could be safe for its lifetime without increasing flood risk elsewhere, I am
        not satisfied that the proposal would result in any benefits in flood risk terms to
        overcome the failure to satisfy the sequential test and resultant conflict with Policies
        F5 and F6 of the Framework. There would also be conflict with Policies TR3 and DP3
        of the Framework that seeks to locate development in sustainable locations and to
        respond to their context and integrate with and enhance their surroundings, matters
        which attracts considerable weight. Overall, there is conflict with national
        decision-making policies which state that development proposal should be refused in
        specific circumstances.
31. The proposed development would give rise to some benefits, including those set out
    in other considerations above. These are matters that gain Framework support.
    Nevertheless, taking into account the above conclusions, I find that the benefits of
    approving the development would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects,
    when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
    Accordingly, the proposed development would not be sustainable development.
32. Drawing the above together, the development conflicts with the development plan
    and the material considerations, including the Framework, do not indicate that the
    appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it. For the reasons given
    above the appeal should be dismissed.

H Marriott
INSPECTOR




4
    Paragraph S1 and footnote 24 of the Framework.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             6
