Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 September 2026
by C Walker BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011786
Tylers Croft, Abbotswood Close, Guildford, Surrey, GU1 1XA
   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
    planning permission
   The appeal is made by Gavin Khedun against Guildford Borough Council.
   The application Ref is 25/P/01230.
   The development proposed is described in the application form as ‘erection of new detached self-
    build dwelling, garage and access, following demolition of existing garage’.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the erection of new
   detached self-build dwelling, garage and access, following demolition of existing
   garage at Tylers Croft, Abbotswood Close, Guildford, Surrey, GU1 1XA in
   accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 25/P/01230, and the plans
   submitted with it, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2. This appeal arises from the Council's failure to determine the application within the
   statutory time limit. However, the Council has confirmed that, had it determined the
   application, planning permission would have been refused for the reasons set out in
   the Officer's Report provided. In these circumstances, I have framed the main
   issues having regard to those putative reasons for refusal.
3. A Unilateral Undertaking (UU) dated 30 June 2026 has been submitted with this
   appeal, along with a Deed of Variation (DOV) dated 8 September 2026. The
   original UU seeks to secure mitigation for the effects of the development on the
   Thames Basin Heaths Special Protection Area (SPA), while the DOV seeks to
   secure the development as a self-build dwelling. The Council has confirmed that
   the original UU negates its putative reason for refusal No. 3. Nevertheless, as
   competent authority I must therefore undertake an Appropriate Assessment under
   the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 as amended (the
   Habitats Regulations) and it is necessary to consider the likely effects on the SPA
   as a main issue.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are the effect of the proposal on:
             the character and appearance of the area, including the Abbotswood
              Conservation Area; and
             the integrity of the Thames Basin Heaths SPA.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011786


Reasons
Character and appearance (including heritage)
5. The appeal site comprises a detached two-storey dwelling and its associated
   single-storey, flat-roofed garage. It is located towards the end of a residential cul-
   de-sac and occupies a plot set at right angles to a neighbouring property known as
   Thistledown. The site is characterised by a comparatively large garden area to its
   northern side, which is appreciably more spacious than many of the surrounding
   residential plots.
6. Abbotswood Close is located within an established suburban residential area
   characterised predominantly by detached two-storey dwellings of varied
   architectural styles and designs. The properties are generally set within spacious
   plots, with generous separation distances between buildings, contributing to an
   open and verdant character. The topography rises from west to east and, along this
   side of Abbotswood Close, the dwellings are elevated above the level of the
   highway.
7. As a consequence, front gardens and driveways typically slope upwards towards
   the dwellings and their associated garages. Front boundaries are generally defined
   by soft landscaping and low-level treatments, resulting in a relatively informal and
   open-plan appearance to the street scene. Taken together, the spacious plots,
   generous building separation, varied architectural form and landscaped frontages
   create a residential environment with a distinctly open and spacious character, to
   which the appeal site makes a positive contribution.
8. Behind the appeal site to the east, are properties set at higher level that are located
   within the Abbotswood Conservation Area (CA). As the appeal site forms the
   boundary of the CA, it sits outside of but adjacent to it, and accordingly, forms part
   of its setting. Although there is no statutory protection afforded to such
   development, I have nevertheless had regard to its effect on the setting of the CA.
   From the evidence before me, its significance appears to derive from the quality of
   its architecture, its urban design and form comprising relatively large, detached
   properties set in generous grounds within a sylvan landscape. The part of
   Abbotswood Close that is outside of the CA, acts as an extension to it and largely
   reflects this layout albeit with a higher density.
9. The CA is surrounded by groups of trees noted in the Abbotswood Character
   Appraisal and Management Plan 2011 as being important. These are identified in
   the Townscape Appraisal Map and include trees that form the eastern boundary of
   the appeal site at the edge of the CA.
10. The proposed dwelling would be positioned between Tylers Croft, the host dwelling
    and Thistledown, the latter occupying a prominent position at the head of the cul-
    de-sac. The submitted plans indicate that the nearest corner of the proposed
    dwelling would be approximately 6.2 metres (m) from the host dwelling, with a
    replacement single-storey garage located between them. As a result, views through
    the site and separation between the principal two-storey built forms would be
    retained without it appearing as a continuous roofline.
11. On the opposite side, the proposed dwelling would be set approximately 7.5m from
    the boundary with Thistledown. This relationship would be comparable to the
    spacing between other dwellings in the vicinity, including that between Elisa and its

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011786


       neighbouring property to the south-west. Consequently, the proposed dwelling
       would not appear cramped or incongruous within the street scene.
12. The resultant plot sizes for both the proposed dwelling and that retained for the
    host dwelling would be on the smaller size of those at this end of the close.
    Nevertheless, having regard to the pattern of development in the surrounding area,
    I find that the proposed spacing between buildings would be sufficiently generous
    to maintain the spacious character of the cul-de-sac and preserve the character
    and appearance of the street scene. As such, the proposal would integrate
    satisfactorily with its surroundings.
13. Whilst the proposed dwelling would be situated between properties constructed
    predominantly of brick, pantile roofing and white uPVC fenestration, it would adopt
    a more contemporary architectural approach. The proposed materials palette would
    comprise slate hanging tiles, areas of white render, grey roof tiles, anthracite-
    coloured window frames and aluminium detailing. Nevertheless, I do not consider
    these materials or the overall design approach to be out of keeping with the
    character of the area. Indeed, similar contemporary materials are evident on
    dwellings opposite the site and elsewhere within the wider locality. Moreover, the
    area is characterised by a varied architectural style rather than a uniform or
    strongly consistent vernacular. Therefore, this proposal would remain compatible
    with the prevailing character and add to the architectural variety that already exists
    within this part of Abbotswood Close.
14. Like the surrounding properties, the new dwelling would be split level and work with
    the topography of the land. Although the Council suggest that the dwelling would be
    set at the same or similar level to the road, this is not what is shown on either the
    ‘Existing and Proposed Streetscene’ or Section drawings advanced. Rather they
    show the dwelling to be elevated on a similar finished floor level to the existing host
    dwelling, with a sloping driveway and with a comparable ridgeline. Furthermore,
    although it provides accommodation over three levels, visually it would be
    appreciated as a two-storey dwelling, matching the scale of its neighbours, with
    only rooflights serving the accommodation in the roof. As such it would not
    accentuate prominence or give rise to an incongruous appearance.
15. My attention is drawn to an appeal decision1 relating to a proposed new dwelling at
    8 Abbotswood Close. Limited information is before me, including the appeal
    decision or the plans upon which it is based. As such, I am unable to make a
    detailed meaningful comparison. However, the appeal site was not a corner plot
    such that the spacing between dwellings was likely to be considerably tighter than
    the appeal before me. It therefore does not alter my findings on this appeal.
16. The spacing between dwellings would allow for glimpses from the close and the
    appeal site up towards the CA, albeit the important planted boundary which
    contains established tall trees separating the appeal site and the CA, offers some
    screening and limits the effect on its setting. The roof pitch to the rear projection of
    the proposed dwelling would be slacker than is typical of most in the area owing to
    its massing. Whilst this would be visible from the gardens of a limited number of
    dwellings within the CA, owing to screening and topography changes, visibility from
    the CA would be limited and it would not be readily visible from the public realm. I
    find that this would cause a very low level of harm to the setting of the CA. In the

1
    Ref: APP/Y3615/W/20/3251096


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011786


     context of policy HE7(4) of the National Planning Policy Framework (the
     Framework), I am required to weigh this harm against the public benefits of the
     proposal, noting that any harm to a designated heritage asset is a matter of
     considerable importance and weight.
17. As set out above, the topography, built form and the screening along the boundary
    of the CA, means that opportunities to view the proposal alongside the CA would
    be minimal. Indeed, no important views are identified to or from the CA in the
    vicinity of the appeal site on the Townscape Appraisal Map. These factors limit the
    harm to the way in which the CA would be experienced to a very low level.
    Furthermore, the development retains the features, including the spacing and
    important trees, which make a positive contribution to the setting of the CA in
    accordance with the expectations of Framework policy HE9.
18. In this case, the public benefits of providing an additional modest sized home within
    a sustainable location, in an area where there is an urgent and pressing need for
    housing, would clearly outweigh the very limited harm to the setting and thus the
    character and appearance of the CA.
19. Bringing the above together, overall, I find that the proposal accords with the
    relevant parts of Policy B-FD 1 of the Burpham Neighbourhood Plan (made 2016),
    Policy D1 of the Guildford Local Plan: Strategies and Sites 2015-2034 (GLPSS)
    and Policies D4 and D8 of the Guildford Local Plan: Development Management
    Policies (2023) (GLPDMP), which expect development to be high-quality design
    that integrates well and responds to local character including with regard to
    landscaping, detailed design, layout, scale, proportion and form. Policies D18 and
    D20 of the GLPDMP require that harm to, or the loss of, the significance of a
    designated heritage asset will be considered in line with national policy and
    guidance. I have already concluded in my heritage balance that the limited harm is
    outweighed by public benefits. Therefore, I find no direct conflict with these policies.
Integrity of the Thames Basin Heaths SPA (including Appropriate Assessment)
20. The site lies within the 400m to 5km zone of influence of the Thames Basin Heaths
    Special Protection Area (SPA). This is a European designated site, afforded
    protection under the Habitat Regulations.
21. The SPA comprises heathland habitats that overlie sand and gravel sediments
    which give rise to sandy or peaty acid soils, supporting dry heathy vegetation on
    well-drained slopes, wet heath on low-lying shallow slopes and bogs in valleys. In
    turn this habitat supports important ground nesting birds, including the European
    nightjar, woodlark and Dartford warbler which are its qualifying features. The
    conservation objectives are to ensure the integrity of the site is maintained or
    restored as appropriate, and to ensure it contributes to achieving the aims of the
    Wild Bird Directive, by maintaining and restoring the extent, distribution, structure
    and function of the qualifying features.
22. The main threat to the SPA is through development pressures and additional
    recreational disturbance, resulting in damage and disturbance to the bird’s habitat.
    The proposal would create a net gain of four dwellings, and in combination with
    other developments permitted in the area, there would be a likely significant
    adverse effect on this habitat site.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6011786


23. The Thames Basin Heaths SPA Avoidance Strategy 2017 Supplementary Planning
    Document (SPD) sets out a strategic approach to mitigation by pooling tariff style
    financial contributions made per dwelling, towards a range of mitigation and
    avoidance measures. These include the provision of suitable alternative natural
    green space (SANG), strategic access management and monitoring (SAMM),
    signage and awareness raising. A contribution towards these avoidance and
    mitigation measures is necessary to mitigate adverse impacts.
24. A completed UU has been advanced which secures financial contributions towards
    SANG and SAMM in accordance with the SPD. Furthermore, direct payment to the
    Council has already been made. On this basis, the Council confirm they are
    satisfied that likely significant effects on the SPA would be avoided, a matter I note
    that Natural England as statutory consultee agree on. Given their expertise, this
    attracts substantial weight. As competent authority, I am also satisfied that the
    financial contributions would secure and ensure the delivery of mitigation sufficient
    to address the harm likely to be caused by the development.
25. I therefore find that the proposal, subject to mitigation, would not have an adverse
    effect on the integrity of the Thames Basin Heaths SPA. It follows that the proposal
    would not conflict with either the Habitat Regulations, the Framework, GLPSS
    Policy P5 or saved Policy NRM6 of the Southeast Plan 2009, the objectives of
    which are to avoid or mitigate potential adverse effects on the SPA.
Other Matters
26. I am mindful that interested parties have raised a number of other matters,
    including the effect on their living conditions, land instability and concerns relating
    on on-street parking and congestion. None of these issues have been raised as
    matters of concern by the Council in their statement of case or by statutory
    consultees. Without substantive evidence to the contrary, there is no reason for me
    to reach a different view to the Council on these matters.
27. Policy S3 of the Framework expects decisions on proposals to apply the
    presumption in favour of sustainable development. In this case, it means the
    application of the Framework policy S4 which makes clear that proposals within
    settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework.
28. I have identified no substantial adverse effects, nor a failure to comply with any one
    of the national decision-making policies which expect the refusal of planning
    permission in specific circumstances.
29. The Council are unable to demonstrate a five-year supply of housing land as
    required by the Framework. Consequently, the provision of even a single dwelling
    carries considerable positive weight. As a self-build home, it would also make a
    small, yet important contribution to boosting housing supply where there is an
    unmet need, in a sustainable location. Given that this is a matter secured through a
    DOV to the original Unilateral Undertaking, I attribute this moderate positive weight.
    There would also be economic and social benefits from the proposal such as the
    temporary construction jobs it would create. Collectively, these factors weigh
    heavily in favour of the scheme.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6011786


30. Whilst I am required to give considerable weight to any harm to a designated
    heritage asset, I have identified this harm to be at a very low level to the setting of
    the CA. In my judgement the adverse effects would not substantially outweigh the
    benefits when assessed against the decision-making policies in the Framework.
Conditions
31. The Council have suggested a number of conditions. I have considered these in
    relation to the necessary tests, made changes to some, and not included them all
    as set out below.
32. In addition to the standard time condition (No.1), I have imposed a condition
    requiring that the development is carried out in accordance with the approved plans
    (No. 2) for the avoidance of doubt and in the interests of certainty.
33. In the interests of protecting the environment from undue harm, conditions (No’s 3
    to 5) are imposed, and two of these are required to be pre-commencement
    conditions.
34. Insufficient details of external facing materials are provided. Therefore, a condition
    (No. 6) is necessary in the interests of the character and appearance of the area
    and sustainable development. To ensure that the development is sustainably
    constructed in accordance with GLPSS Policy D2 and GLPDMP Policy D14,
    conditions No’s 7 to 9 are also imposed.
35. To enhance the biodiversity value of the site, a condition (No. 10) is reasonable.
    For the same reason and in the interests of the character and appearance of the
    area, a condition (No. 11) to require both hard and soft landscape works is
    necessary. To ensure their timely implementation, condition No.12 is imposed,
    which also includes the requirement to provide details preventing surface water
    run-off, in the interests of highway safety. On-site infrastructure to promote
    sustainable transport is a requirement of condition No. 13.
36. Due to concerns relating to the enforceability of the suggested condition to secure
    the proposal as a self-build dwelling, I have not imposed this. Instead, it is a matter
    secured by a DOV to the original UU.
Conclusion
37. For the reasons set out above the appeal should be allowed.

C Walker
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6011786


                                           Schedule of Conditions

1. The development hereby permitted shall be begun before the expiration of three
   years from the date of this permission.

2. The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
   following approved plans: P1893.31 Rev A (Planning Layout), P1893.32 (Urban
   Grain Plan), P1893.PL.307 (Proposed Garage – Plans and Elevations),
   P1893.PL.305 (Basic Sections A-A & B-B), P1893.PL.303 (Front and Side
   Elevations), P1893.PL.304 (Rear and Side Elevations), P1893.PL.301 (Ground and
   First Floor Plans), P1893.PL.302 (Second Floor and Roof Plans), P1893.PL.308
   (Proposed Floor Plans – Space Standards) and P1893.PL.306 Rev A (Existing and
   Proposed Streetscenes).
3. No development shall take place until a Demolition and Construction Environmental
   Management Plan has been submitted to, and approved in writing by the Local
   Planning Authority. The approved Plan shall be adhered to throughout the
   construction period. The Plan shall provide for:
              a. An indicative programme for carrying out of the works;
              b. The arrangements for public consultation and liaison during the demolition
                 and construction works;
              c. Measures to minimise the noise (including vibration) generated by the
                 demolition and construction process to include hours of work, proposed
                 method of piling for foundations if applicable, the careful selection of plant
                 and machinery and use of noise mitigation barrier(s) where relevant;
              d. Details of any floodlighting, including location, height, type and direction of
                 light sources and intensity of illumination;
              e. the parking of vehicles of site operatives and visitors;
              f. loading and unloading of plant and materials;
              g. storage of plant and materials used in constructing the development; and
              h. measures to control the emission of dust and dirt (including onto the
                 highway) during demolition and construction.
4. No development (including demolition, groundworks and construction of the
   vehicular access(es)) shall commence until a Site Waste Management Plan
   (SWMP) has been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
   Authority. The SWMP shall make all reasonable attempts to accord with the
   DEFRA Non-statutory guidance for site waste management plans (2008). The
   details shall include:
         a) any waste generated by construction, demolition and excavation activities is
         limited to the minimum quantity necessary;
         b) opportunities for first, re-use and secondly, recycling of construction,
         demolition and excavation waste on the application site are maximised; and
         c) sufficient on-site facilities to manage waste (storage, reuse and recycling)
         arising during the operation of the development of an appropriate type and scale
         will be provided and maintained for the duration of the development.
     The Site Waste Management Plan will subsequently be kept up-to-date throughout
     the development process in accordance with established methodology. The SWMP


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         7
Appeal Decision 6011786


     measures shall be implemented and maintained for the course of the development
     works.
5. No development shall commence until the tree protection measures, and any other
   pre-commencement measures as set out in the Arboricultural Method Statement
   Report and Tree Protection Plan (TPP) by David Archer Associates dated July
   2025, have been installed and implemented in full. Within any area fenced in
   accordance with this condition, nothing shall be stored, placed or disposed of
   above or below ground, the ground level shall not be altered, no excavations shall
   be made, nor shall any fires be lit, without the prior written consent of the Local
   Planning Authority. The fencing shall be maintained in accordance with the
   approved details, until all equipment, machinery and surplus materials have been
   moved from the site.
6. Prior to the commencement of any development above slab level works, a written
   schedule with details of the source/ manufacturer, colour and finish, or samples on
   request of all external facing and roof materials shall be submitted to and approved
   in writing by the Local Planning Authority. This shall include details of reasonable
   efforts for all external materials to be locally sourced. The development shall be
   carried out using only those external materials detailed.
7. Prior to first occupation of the development hereby approved, a copy of the “water
   efficiency calculator for new dwellings” worksheet that accords with Part G of the
   Building Regulations’ Approved Documents, and the water consumption notice
   specified at regulation 37 of the Building Regulations, shall be submitted to and
   approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The dwelling hereby permitted,
   must achieve a water efficiency of 110 litres per occupant per day. The details set
   out in the worksheet and notice shall be implemented in the finished building.
8. Prior to installation, details of the solar panels for the development shall be
   submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The details
   shall set out:
         a) the total solar PV capacity (kilowatts peak);
         b) number of panels;
         c) orientation of panels;
         d) demonstrate that the capacity has been reasonably maximised;
         e) and provide a roof plan and elevations showing the panels.
     The development shall be implemented in accordance with the approved details
     and maintained as operational thereafter.
9. The development hereby permitted shall achieve or improve upon the values for
   building fabric energy efficiency and airtightness set out in the SAP report dated 4
   September 2025 by Elmhurst Energy. An air source heat pump shall be installed
   and made operational as the primary heating and hot water system prior to the first
   occupation of the development. The development shall be built in accordance with
   the approved details and thereafter maintained.
10. Prior to first occupation of the development hereby approved, a Biodiversity
    Enhancement Plan shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6011786


     Planning Authority. The scheme shall be implemented in full prior to the first
     occupation of the development hereby approved and shall be retained thereafter.
11. Prior to development above slab level, full details of both hard and soft landscape
    works shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
    Authority. These details shall include:
        a full specification of all proposed planting (which should be native) including the
         quantity, size, species, and positions or density of all planting, how they will be
         planted and protected and the proposed time of planting, plus a schedule of
         maintenance for a minimum period of 10 years;
        earthworks showing existing and proposed finished levels or contours;
        any retaining structures;
        boundary treatments;
        hard surfacing materials which shall include a permeable (or porous) surfacing
         treatment to the site frontage to allow water to drain through, or surface water
         shall be directed to a lawn, border or soakaway.
12. The approved soft landscape works (with the exception of planting, seeding and
    turfing) shall be implemented prior to the first occupation of the development hereby
    approved and retained thereafter. All planting, seeding or turfing approved shall be
    carried out in the first planting and seeding season following the occupation of the
    development or the completion of the development, whichever is the sooner. Any
    trees or plants which, within a period of five years after planting, are removed, die or
    become seriously damaged or diseased in the opinion of the Local Planning
    Authority, shall be replaced in the next available planting season with others of
    similar size, species and number, unless otherwise agreed in writing by the Local
    Planning Authority. The approved hard landscaping, including any drainage and
    boundary treatments, shall be provided on site prior to first occupation and shall be
    thereafter retained and maintained.
13. Prior to first occupation of the development hereby approved, a scheme shall be
    submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority detailing
    provision of the following:
         (i) High quality, secure, lit and covered cycle parking;
         (ii) Charging point with timer for e-bikes within said facilities; and
         (iii) Clear hardstanding routes between the cycle stores and the site access.
     The approved facilities shall be provided on site prior to first occupation and shall
     thereafter be retained and maintained.
                                           End of Conditions Schedule




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           9
