 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 17 August 2026
 by C J Leigh BSc(Hons) MPhil MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 02 October 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011489
 Lot B2a, Upper Bourne End Lane, Hemel Hempstead, HP1 2RR
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mrs Jeneve Clarke against the decision of Dacorum Borough Council.
 •   The application Ref is 26/00635/FUL.
 •   The development proposed is the change of use of land from agricultural pasture to an outdoor
     wellbeing/therapeutic recreation use (daytime, appointment-only), including the siting of one
     moveable ancillary consultation/office unit (Canopy ‘Aspen Office’), with no overnight
     accommodation, no hardstanding, no permanent service connections, and a sealed off-grid
     welfare/toilet arrangement with off-site disposal (no discharge to ground), and no client parking on
     the land (maximum one operator/volunteer vehicle on site at any time).

Procedural matters
1. A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published
   August 2026. The main parties were given the opportunity to comment on this.
Decision
2. The appeal is dismissed.
Main issues
3. The main issues are:
     •   whether the proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt
         having regard to the Framework and any relevant development plan policies
     •   the effect of the proposal on highway safety, and
     •   if the proposal is inappropriate development, whether the harm by reason of
         inappropriateness, and any other harm, would be clearly outweighed by other
         considerations so as to amount to the very special circumstances required to
         justify the proposal.
Reasons
Whether the proposal constitutes inappropriate development
4. The appeal site lies within the Metropolitan Green Belt. It is an open area of land
   where there are a number of buildings and small plots of land. Access is from a
   long shared access track to the highway. Policy GB6 of the Framework states that
   development in the Green Belt is inappropriate unless it is for one of the categories
   in Policy GB7. Paragraph 1.f. of Policy GB7 states that certain forms of
   development are not inappropriate provided the impact on the openness of the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6011489


     Green Belt is minimised, and there would not be a significant conflict with the
     Green Belt purposes. Part iii of that paragraph provides for material changes in the
     use of land, including outdoor sport and recreation, and part iv affords for the
     provision of appropriate facilities, including buildings, for outdoor sport or
     recreation, in connection with the existing use of land or a change of use. Policy
     CS5 of the Dacorum Core Strategy 2013 states that the Council will apply national
     Green Belt policy to protect the openness and character of the Green Belt.
5. The appellant states the proposed development would be an outdoor recreational
   use for visitors to the land. It is explained that the land would be used as a low-
   intensity outdoor wellbeing use, with mindfulness, relaxation, stretching, nature-
   based activity and therapeutic horticulture carried out on that land. The building is
   said to be an ancillary facility to support this outdoor use with it described as used
   for private consultation, welfare/privacy and administrative functions.
6. I accept that use of the land for the purposes stated would be recreational, and this
   would be consistent with part iii of Policy GB7.1.f of the Framework. However, I
   cannot see any reason why the provision of the proposed building is necessary to
   support those uses. I saw at my site visit that the area of land is very small, and the
   activities are explained as being low-key and nature based. There is very little
   evidence to explain why a building is needed to facilitate or assist in the safe or
   effective provision of the listed activities on such a small area of land. The appellant
   refers to the building providing ‘one-to-one consultations’, presumably with clients,
   but such activities do not depend on a Green Belt location and there is no robust
   evidence to explain how such consultations are connected to an outdoor recreation
   or sports use.
7. Furthermore, the proposed building has little clear physical relationship to the
   outdoor recreation activities proposed on the land. The size of the building would
   occupy a large area of this small site, so reducing even further the amount of land
   said to be used for such outdoor activities. The submitted information shows a
   sizeable pre-fabricated office building with large, glazed areas.
8. On the basis of what I have read and seen, I consider the proposed building would
   not represent an appropriate facility for the use of the land for outdoor recreation. I
   further consider the location and size of the building would harm the openness of
   the Green Belt, due to being a large structure on a currently undeveloped area of
   land which would have a harmful visual impact.
9. Accordingly, the development the subject of this appeal does not fall within a
   category set out in Policy GB7 of the Framework. The proposal would be
   inappropriate development that is, by definition under paragraph 2 of Policy GB6 of
   the Framework, harmful to the Green Belt. Thus, there would be conflict with those
   Policies and with Policy CS5 of the Core Strategy.
Effect on highway safety
10. The appellant states the proposed use would see visitors to the site. No parking is
    proposed in the application. The site is in a relatively remote area with poor
    connections other than by private car and I concur with the Council that visitors are
    most likely to access the site by car. The appellant says this matter can be the
    subject of a condition, and says such a condition would be able to cover both no
    parking on the land by clients and also parking on the site by an ‘operator/
    volunteer’ vehicle. However, no parking is shown to be proposed (nor existing) so I

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision 6011489


     cannot see how such a condition addresses this matter. I saw at my site visit that
     access and parking in the area is very constrained at present.
11. With there being no robust evidence that adequate parking can be provided, I
    consider the proposals would be harmful to highway safety due to conflict between
    vehicles looking to access the site and park in the area. This would be contrary to
    Policies CS8 and CS12 of the Core Strategy, which require new development to
    provide sufficient, safe and convenient parking and safe access. I attach significant
    weight to this matter.
Other considerations
12. The size of the proposed office building, and its glazed design which appears as a
    home-office style building, would be incongruous in the rural area, with a cramped
    appearance on the small plot. This would be harmful to the character and
    appearance of the area. I attach moderate weight to this matter.
13. The appellant has drawn my attention to the proposed limitations on the use of the
    building and the land, in terms of hours of use and number of visitors. However,
    such controls do not affect the earlier findings as to whether the proposed building
    is appropriate for the outdoor recreational use, and do not reduce the effect on
    openness. I therefore attach very little weight to this matter.
14. The appellant says that the proposed development is reversible, and has also
    accepted a temporary permission. Although the development could be removed,
    that does not make the proposed building appropriate to the use or remove the
    impact on openness. I attach very little weight to this matter.
15. I acknowledge the proposed therapeutic and welfare uses would provide a facility
    that can be of benefit to clients. However, for the reasons given I do not consider
    the proposed building is appropriate for the outdoor recreational use, and that one-
    to-one consultations depend on a Green Belt location. I attach little weight to this
    matter in favour of the proposal.
Whether very special circumstances exist
16. The proposal is inappropriate development in the Green Belt and would result in
    harm to highway safety and harm to character and appearance.
17. Policy GB6 of the Framework states that substantial weight should be given to any
    harm to the Green Belt, including harm to its openness, and should not be
    approved except in very special circumstances. The Framework further advises
    that ‘very special circumstances’ to justify inappropriate development will not exist
    unless the harm by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm, is clearly
    outweighed by other considerations.
18. I do not consider the matters raised in support of the proposal to clearly outweigh
    the harm identified. Consequently, the very special circumstances necessary to
    justify the development do not exist.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
 Appeal Decision 6011489


Conclusion
19. For the reasons given, the conflict with national and local planning policy means
    that the appeal should fail.

C J Leigh
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      4
