Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by Graham Wraight BA(Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011065
Rykneld, Main Road, Old Brampton, Derbyshire S42 7JG
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Smith against the decision of North East Derbyshire District
     Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/00930/FLH.
•    The development proposed is an extension over existing garage with balcony to rear.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     I have used the description of development stated on the decision notice in the
       banner header above. Although this differs from that stated on the application
       form, the appellant has confirmed that they have no objection to it.
3.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
       August 2026. The relevant Green Belt policy test has not materially changed, and I
       have therefore not referred back to the parties for comment.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are:
     (i)      Whether the proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt
              having regard to the Framework and relevant development plan policies;
     (ii)     The effect of the proposal on the openness and purposes of the Green Belt;
              and
     (iii)    Whether any harm by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm,
              would be clearly outweighed by other considerations, so as to amount to the
              very special circumstances required to justify the proposal.
Reasons
Whether inappropriate development
5.     Policy GB7 of the Framework sets out categories of development that are not
       inappropriate in the Green Belt. This includes the extension of an existing building,
       provided that the existing building is of permanent and substantial construction, is
       lawful in planning terms, and any extension will not result in a disproportionate
       increase in size compared to the original building. Policy SS10 of the North East

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011065


       Derbyshire Local Plan 2021 (LP) is broadly consistent with this, as it includes
       reference to an extension to a building that does not result in disproportionate
       additions over and above the size of the original building. There is no definition in
       either local or national planning policy as to what represents a disproportionate
       increase or addition.
6.     The appeal dwelling was extended following the granting of planning permission in
       1978 and then in 2017. The Council states that the previous extensions have
       resulted in an approximately 124% increase in the volume of the original dwelling.
       They calculate that there would be an increase in volume of approximately 143% if
       the appeal proposal were to be built in addition to what has already taken place.
       Those figures are not disputed by the appellant. An increase in volume of
       approximately 143% firmly supports a conclusion that what is proposed would be a
       disproportionate increase in size compared to the original building. This conclusion
       is not altered by there being no increase in footprint proposed or because the
       style, proportions and materials of the proposal would be consistent with the
       existing dwelling.
7.     The appellant’s case is predicated on the proposed extension being a minor
       increase in the scale of the existing dwelling, and this feeds into their conclusion of
       there being no disproportionality in their Statement of Case. But both the
       Framework and the LP are clear that the comparison is with the original building,
       not the existing one. This necessitates the consideration of all previous and
       proposed extensions on a cumulative basis.
8.     The appellant does anticipate my conclusion that the cumulative extensions would
       result in a conflict with Green Belt policy, and they refer to this as a ‘technical
       conflict’. This however downplays the significance of a proposed development
       being found to be inappropriate development in the Green Belt. The Framework is
       clear that inappropriate development is, by definition, harmful to the Green Belt
       and should not be approved except in very special circumstances. It also states
       that any harm to the Green Belt should be given substantial weight.
9.     In conclusion, the proposal would not fall into any of the exceptions listed in Policy
       SS10 of the LP or Policy GB7 of the Framework, and it would be inappropriate
       development in the Green Belt.
Openness and purposes
10. The objective of Green Belt policy, as set out by the Framework, is to prevent
    urban sprawl by keeping land permanently open. Openness is, in effect, the
    absence of development and it has both a spatial and visual aspect to it.
11. The proposal would result in some reduction in openness, in the area above the
    single storey flat roofed garage. This to my mind would be an impact on visual
    openness, as there would be no physical encroachment by reason of there being
    no increase in footprint. Whilst the appellant refers to matters relating to the
    boundary screening, the set back of the dwelling, the size of the plot and there
    being no harm to the character and appearance of the area, these factors do not
    mean that there is no impact on openness. There would be no conflict with the
    Green Belt purposes set out in Policy GB2 of the Framework.
12. For these reasons I conclude that there would be harm to Green Belt openness,
    but on consideration of the scale of the development taken by itself the harm

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011065


       would be limited. Nonetheless, the proposal would be contrary to the specific
       guidance within the Framework in this regard.
Other Considerations
13. The appellant wishes to install solar panels on their property to reduce its carbon
    footprint, and they state that the roof plane of the proposed development offers the
    only opportunity to do this. Whilst no technical evidence has been provided to that
    effect, the sloping roof plane would face south and the existing roofs facing that
    direction do appear constrained in both size and structure. This is a consideration
    which carries substantial weight in favour of the proposal.
14. The proposal would improve the appearance of the dwelling, but only in a very
    minor way, especially as flat roofs are present on other parts of the building to its
    front and rear. The dwelling is also set well back from the public domain and in a
    large plot. Views of the existing garage are mainly glimpsed from the pavement
    along Main Road and are from a distance. These factors mean that the visual
    benefits would be limited. There would be some short-term economic benefits
    during construction, but these too would be limited because of the scale of what is
    proposed.
15. The occupier of an adjoining property has made representations that the proposal
    would improve their privacy, but there is no specific explanation as to why that
    would be the case. Given this and the generous existing separation that exists
    between the two dwellings, this is a consideration which carries limited weight.
    That there would be no harm to the living conditions of the occupiers of adjacent
    dwellings nor harm to highway safety are considerations of neutral weight.
16. There is nothing before me to demonstrate that existing issues with the flat roof
    over the garage could only be rectified if the appeal proposal is constructed. This
    consideration therefore carries no weight in its favour. I acknowledge that the
    appellant has revised and resubmitted the scheme to reduce its scale and that
    they sought pre-application advice, but these too are not matters which weigh in
    favour of permitting the appeal development.
Planning Balance & Conclusion
17. The Framework at Policy GB6 paragraph 2 states that inappropriate development
    is, by definition, harmful to the Green Belt and should not be approved except in
    very special circumstances. Such circumstances will not exist unless the potential
    harm to the Green Belt by reason of inappropriateness and any other harm
    resulting from the proposed development, is clearly outweighed by other
    considerations. In making this assessment, substantial weight should be given to
    the harm to the Green Belt which would be caused, including harm to its
    openness.
18. The proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt and would
    result in harm to its openness, albeit limited. Whilst there are other considerations
    identified to which I have given substantial and limited weight in its favour, they do
    not individually or cumulatively cross the high threshold of clearly outweighing the
    harm to the Green Belt and to openness. Consequently, the very special
    circumstances necessary to justify the development do not exist.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011065


19. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the development conflicts with Policy
    SS10 of the LP and with the policies of the Framework where they seek to protect
    the Green Belt. Therefore, the appeal should be dismissed.

Graham Wraight
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
