Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 17 August 2026
by C Cooper-Young MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011131
46 The Finches, Weymouth, Dorset DT3 5QN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr N Richardson against the decision of Dorset Council.
•    The application Ref is P/FUL/2026/01270.
•    The development proposed is sever plot and erect 1no. dwelling.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published in August 2026. In the interest of natural justice and to ensure neither of
       the main parties were prejudiced by this matter, I consulted both parties on the
       changes to the Framework and any comments which I have received, have been
       considered in my determination of the appeal. Any reference to the Framework in
       this decision is to the most recent version.
Main Issues
3.     The main issues are:
       •   the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of the
           area;
       •   whether the proposed development would adversely impact the living
           conditions of neighbouring occupiers, with particular regard to outlook and
           enclosure;
       •   whether the proposed development would provide suitable living conditions for
           future occupiers, with particular regard to outlook; and
       •   whether the proposed development is required to deliver mandatory
           biodiversity net gain (BNG).
Reasons
Character and Appearance
4.     The area comprises relatively high-density, two-storey terraced and semi-detached
       dwellings. The appeal site (No 46) is an end of terrace property with modest front,
       side and rear garden areas. The topography of the area means that the appeal site


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011131


         is at a lower level than No 50 The Finches, but at a higher level than No 27
         Reedling Close (No 27) whose garden area sits adjacent to the gable end of
         No 46. The proposed dwelling would front the communal parking area, adjoining
         the gable of No 46 and extend to the side, forming a new end of terrace.
5.       The appellant has directed me to an earlier appeal decision1 at this site, where the
         Inspector found the proposal would not harm the character and appearance of the
         area. I have not been provided with sufficient detailed information of that
         submission to be able to conclude whether there are any inherent similarities with
         the appeal scheme before me. Notwithstanding this, all cases are assessed on
         their own merits.
6.       The evidence includes reference to examples of subservient and recessed
         rooflines across the wider locality. At my site visit I noted that the topography
         would have necessitated a design response to achieve a legible and well-
         proportioned form of development across the estate. In this context, the stepping
         down of rooflines reflects the natural changes in land levels, the short terraces
         assist in breaking up the overall mass and bulk of the buildings.
7.       When viewed from the access lane off Reedling Close toward the communal
         parking area, the proposed dwelling would be experienced within the context of the
         existing terrace. However, in ensuring the proposed dwelling is subordinate, whilst
         similar in style and appearance, the reduced height and depth of the proposed
         dwelling with a single-storey element would appear discordant with the terrace.
8.       When viewed from the public realm, alongside the existing consistent
         incrementally rising ridgelines of No 46 and of the wider terrace, the design of the
         new dwelling, with squat and purposefully narrowed proportions, would appear
         incongruous, and somewhat contrived, entirely at odds with the prevailing height,
         form and character of residential development in its immediate context.
9.       I therefore conclude that the proposed new dwelling would cause significant harm
         to the character and appearance of the surrounding area. It would be contrary to
         Policies ENV10 and 12 of the West Dorset and Weymouth & Portland Local Plan
         (2015)(LP); Policy W44 of the Weymouth Neighbourhood Plan (2026) and Policy
         DP3 of the Framework, which, amongst other things requires that the siting, design
         and scale of development should integrate with and enhance their surroundings.
Living Conditions - neighbouring occupiers
10. At present, the side elevation of No 46 is largely blank, with the exception of a
    modest ground floor window, and is set well within the boundary of the appeal site.
    The proposal seeks to extend this elevation toward No 27 and fill the intervening
    space. While a window is set within the side elevation of the proposal, it would be
    at ground floor level and would cause no loss of privacy to No 27.
11. The occupiers of No 27 will retain an element of outlook and openness due to the
    communal parking area behind its rear garden space. However, due to the position
    of the proposed dwelling, its height and depth and the topography of the area, the
    two-storey blank flank wall would present as a tall, dominant and oppressive
    elevation, the majority of which would be visible above the shared boundary. As a


1
    PINS ref: APP/D1265/W/21/3288630.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011131


         result, it would give rise to an overbearing visual sense of enclosure when viewed
         from the rear of No 27 and its private garden.
12. As such, the proposal is contrary to Policy ENV16 of the LP, which requires that
    development does not have a significant adverse effect on the amenity of
    occupiers of properties through overbearing impacts.
Living Conditions – future occupiers
13. Policy ENV16 of the LP is concerned with securing acceptable living conditions for
    existing and future occupiers, including in respect of outlook, privacy, daylight and
    general residential amenity. The policy does not require dwellings to provide dual-
    aspect fenestration. Rather, the relevant consideration is whether the
    accommodation would provide a satisfactory standard of amenity for its occupants.
14. In this case, despite the absence of dual-aspect windows, I have no substantive
    evidence before me that shows that the proposed dwelling would not retain
    adequate levels of natural light and outlook or would not provide acceptable living
    conditions for future occupiers. The lack of dual-aspect fenestration is therefore
    not, of itself, indicative of harm and would not conflict with the aims and objectives
    of Policy ENV16 of the LP.
BNG
15. LP Policy ENV2 seeks to protect biodiversity and wildlife habitats by ensuring that
    development avoids harm to ecological interests and, where impacts cannot be
    avoided, that appropriate mitigation and compensation measures are secured.
16. The appellant has directed me to an appeal decision2, I have not been provided
    with the full details of that submission so cannot be sure that the scheme was a
    similar proposal to that before me. Whilst there were changes to BNG exemptions
    introduced on 6 August 2026, relating to sites of less than 0.2ha, Planning Practice
    Guidance outlines that this exemption applies only where the application for
    planning permission was made on or after 6 August 2026.
17. At the time of the planning application subject of this appeal, it was the case that
    self/custom-build submissions for dwellings were exempt from BNG requirements.
    The application form states that the proposed dwelling would be self-build.
    However, there was no robust mechanism proposed (such as a S106 legal
    agreement) to secure it.
18. In the absence of a mechanism to secure the proposed biodiversity measures in
    perpetuity, or for an appropriate management period, there would be no certainty
    that the ecological enhancements relied upon would be delivered and maintained.
    Consequently, it would not be possible to conclude that the development would
    adequately protect or enhance biodiversity interests. As such the proposal would
    be contrary to the aims of Policy ENV2 of the LP.
Other Matters
19. I note that the Town Council support the proposal. However, support, or a lack of
    objection to a scheme is not, in itself, a reason to allow development. I have in any
    case, determined this appeal on its own particular merits.

2
    PINS ref: 6002858.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011131


Planning Balance
20. Section 38 (6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 (the Act) sets
    out that applications should be determined in accordance with the development
    plan unless material considerations indicate otherwise.
21. Policy S3 of the Framework sets out that decision on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development and goes on to
    state that in all locations proposals that accord with both an up-to-date
    development plan and the decision-making policies in the Framework should be
    approved without delay.
22. Policy S4 of the Framework states that development proposals within settlements
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in this Framework.
23. Both parties acknowledge that the Council cannot demonstrate a 5 year housing
    land supply (5YHLS). The proposal would provide one residential unit. Even as a
    windfall site or self-build dwelling, the proposal would make only a modest
    contribution towards addressing the shortfall. There would be some limited social
    and economic benefits arising from the construction phase and future occupiers
    would bring some trade and benefit to facilities and services to the wider area.
24. The appellant has drawn my attention to the extant permission and lawful
    development certificates3 for extensions to No 46 and an outbuilding, as a fallback
    position. For a fallback position to be a relevant material consideration, the basic
    principle is that it must be a real prospect. For the prospect to be real, there must
    be a greater than theoretical possibility that the development might take place.
25. I am satisfied there is a reasonable prospect that the fallback scheme would be
    implemented, given the reasoning outlined within the appeal submission.
    Consequently, the extant permissions represent a viable fallback position.
26. However, for significant weight to be afforded to a fallback position there needs not
    only to be a real possibility of it being carried out, but it would also need to be
    equally or more harmful than the scheme for which planning permission is being
    sought.
27. Whilst the two-storey extension of the fallback would be of a similar height and
    mass to the appeal scheme, the single-storey elements of the fallback would be
    set well back from the boundary. Whereas, the appeal scheme would present a
    large blank flank wall, up to the boundary of the plot, which for the reasons
    outlined above would result in harm. Hence the fallback scheme cannot be
    afforded significant weight.
28. Policies ENV10 and 12 of the LP are broadly consistent with the design aims of
    the Framework which seek to achieve well-designed places which make a positive
    contribution to the character and quality of an area. The Framework maintains the
    importance of a plan-led approach to growth, to which I attach substantial weight.
29. LP Policy ENV16 reflects the aims of the Framework in requiring development
    proposals to maintain acceptable living conditions for neighbours. LP Policy ENV2

3
    LPA refs: P/HOU/2023/05116; P/CLP/2025/03255; P/CLP/2025/03256.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             4
Appeal Decision 6011131


       seeks to conserve, restore and enhance biodiversity and secure measurable
       improvements for nature as required within the Framework. I attach substantial
       weight to these matters.
30. Taken together, the benefits of the proposal would be substantially outweighed by
    its adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-making policies of
    the Framework. As such, Policy S4 of the Framework does not point to permission
    being granted in this instance.
Conclusion
31. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
32. For the reasons given above the appeal is dismissed.



C Cooper-Young
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
