Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by J Buxton BA(Hons) DipArch ARB RIBA
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011093
Land adjacent to 7 & 8 Slade Close, Etwall DE65 6JH
Easting (x):427296 Northing (y):332013
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by George Tyler of Casamia Homes against the decision of South Derbyshire
    District Council.
•   The application reference is DMPA/2025/0530.
•   The development proposed is erection of 10 no. dwellings.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for erection of 10 no.
   dwellings at land adjacent to 7 & 8 Slade Close, Etwall DE65 6JH in accordance
   with the terms of the application, reference DMPA/2025/0530, and the plans
   submitted with it, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Applications for costs
2. An application for costs was made by George Tyler of Casamia Homes against
   South Derbyshire District Council. This application is the subject of a separate
   decision.
Background and Main Issue
3. During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
   (the Framework) was published. The main parties were provided with an
   opportunity to comment. I have had regard to the 2026 version of the Framework in
   my decision. References hereafter are to the August 2026 version.
4. The original application proposed 9 dwellings. However, following discussions with
   the Council amendments were made during the determination of the application,
   including revisions to the dwelling mix and the number of proposed units increased
   to 10. For the avoidance of doubt, I have amended the description of development
   to reflect the proposal as revised during the application and considered the appeal
   on this basis.
5. During the appeal process, the appellant confirmed that the red line boundary
   shown on Site Location Plan 4638-001 includes an area of land outside their
   ownership. The appellant confirmed that Certificate B has been completed and the
   requisite notice served on the relevant landowner. I am therefore satisfied that the
   statutory ownership requirements have been met and have considered the appeal
   on that basis.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011093


6. The main parties agree that the appeal site lies within the settlement boundary of
   Etwall, that the site occupies a sustainable location and that the principle of
   residential development is acceptable. It is also common ground that the Council
   can demonstrate a five-year supply of deliverable housing land and that no
   technical objections are maintained in relation to highway safety, drainage, flood
   risk, ecology or arboriculture. Furthermore, there is no dispute that biodiversity net
   gain can be secured through the proposed development.
7. In light of the above, the main issue is whether the proposal would provide an
   appropriate housing mix and whether, by reason of its scale, form and density, it
   would amount to an over-intensive form of development.
Reasons
8. The appeal site comprises an area of undeveloped land adjacent to Nos. 7 and 8
   Slade Close (Nos 7 & 8) within the settlement boundary of Etwall. The site forms
   part of the side gardens associated with those properties. Mature trees and
   ecological features are located across the site, including trees protected by a Tree
   Preservation Order. The surrounding area is predominantly residential in character
   and is characterised by detached family housing set within relatively spacious plots.
   Access would be taken from Slade Close via a new private drive.
9. The proposal would provide ten dwellings including four 3-bedroom semi-detached
   dwellings, one 4-bedroom detached dwelling, and five 5-bedroom detached
   dwellings.
10. Policy H20 of the South Derbyshire Local Plan (SDLP) seeks to secure an
    appropriate balance of housing having regard to identified housing needs, site
    characteristics and local context, whilst ensuring development makes efficient use
    of land and responds appropriately to the surrounding built and natural
    environment.
11. The Etwall Housing Needs Assessment (EHNA) identifies a need for smaller
    homes within the settlement and is a material consideration. However, it does not
    form part of the development plan and does not prescribe the housing mix
    expected on individual development sites. The assessment is one factor to be
    taken into account when considering whether a proposal provides an appropriate
    housing mix having regard to local circumstances.
12. The appeal proposal would provide four 3-bedroom dwellings, representing 40% of
    the development. These dwellings were introduced as part of revisions made
    during the application process in response to concerns regarding housing need.
    Whilst the majority of the proposed dwellings would comprise larger family housing,
    the surrounding area is characterised predominantly by detached family homes.
    The proposed mix would therefore reflect the established character of the locality
    whilst broadening housing choice within the settlement.
13. I acknowledge that the proposal would not provide bungalows, single-storey
    accommodation or meet every element of identified housing need. Nevertheless,
    the inclusion of four 3-bedroom dwellings demonstrates that the proposal has had
    regard to the findings of the EHNA. Policy H20 of the SDLP does not require every
    development proposal to accommodate all identified groups or deliver a prescribed
    housing mix. Rather, it seeks an appropriate balance having regard to housing
    need alongside site characteristics and local context. In my view, the proposed mix

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011093


     strikes an appropriate balance between responding to identified housing needs and
     reflecting the character of the surrounding area. As such, the appeal scheme
     satisfies the objectives of Policy H20.
14. The evidence indicates that the proposal would provide 10 dwellings on a site of
    approximately 0.6 hectares. However, whether a development amounts to an over-
    intensive form of development cannot be determined solely by reference to density
    figures. It was apparent on my site visit that the site contains a significant number
    of trees and ecological features which have influenced the design and layout of the
    development. In addition, the scale and form of the proposed dwellings must be
    considered in the context of the surrounding pattern of residential development, the
    site's topography and the relationship of the proposed buildings to existing
    properties.
15. The site layout has also been shaped by the need to provide a suitable access
    arrangement, turning space for service and emergency vehicles, parking provision,
    drainage infrastructure and private amenity areas. These constraints materially
    influence the amount of developable land available within the site. The resulting
    design provides adequate spacing between dwellings together with suitable parking
    and turning facilities, private amenity space and opportunities for landscaping.
    Having regard to the characteristics of the site and its surroundings, the
    development would not appear cramped, congested or overdeveloped.
16. Whilst some of the proposed dwellings would be taller than certain nearby
    properties and the site occupies slightly elevated ground, I am satisfied from the
    submitted plans and street scenes that the development would not appear unduly
    dominant or incongruous in the wider street scene. The separation distances
    proposed, together with the site's layout and retained landscaping, would ensure
    that the development would not appear cramped or overdeveloped.
17. Taking all of the above into account, I find that the proposal would provide an
    appropriate housing mix and, by reason of its scale, form and density, would not
    amount to an over-intensive form of development. The scheme responds
    appropriately to identified housing needs, makes efficient use of the site and would
    sit comfortably within its surroundings without appearing cramped or
    overdeveloped. It therefore accords with Policies H20 and BNE1 of the SDLP,
    which seek to secure an appropriate housing balance and high-quality
    development.
     Other Matters
18. I have considered the concerns raised by local residents and the Parish Council
    regarding traffic generation, parking provision, drainage, infrastructure capacity,
    construction impacts, the emerging Neighbourhood Plan and the loss of trees. I
    have also had regard to concerns regarding the height and appearance of the
    proposed dwellings. However, these matters were before the Council when it
    determined the planning application and did not feature in the reasons for refusal.
    Based on the evidence before me, and from my own observations, I have no
    reason to disagree with the Council’s assessment of these matters. Consequently,
    the other matters raised do not lead me to a different conclusion.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011093


19. No objections were maintained by the Highway Authority, the Lead Local Flood
    Authority, ecological consultees or the Council's Design Officer. Moreover, no
    technical evidence has been provided to demonstrate unacceptable harm in
    relation to highway safety, drainage, flooding, ecology, residential amenity or
    infrastructure capacity.
20. The proposal would not result in unacceptable harm to the living conditions of
    neighbouring occupiers.
21. The proposal would retain a substantial proportion of the site's trees and ecological
    features and would secure biodiversity net gain through on-site and off-site
    measures.
22. I have also considered the representations relating to restrictive covenants, land
    ownership matters, private rights, alleged procedural irregularities, the conduct of
    the applicant, deliverability concerns and other private legal disputes. Such matters
    are either not material planning considerations, are matters for other regimes, or do
    not alter my conclusions on the planning merits of the appeal.
     Planning Balance
23. For the reasons set out above, I have found that the proposal would provide an
    appropriate housing mix and would not amount to an over-intensive form of
    development. Accordingly, it would accord with Policies H20 and BNE1 of the
    South Derbyshire Local Plan.
24. Policy S4 of the Framework indicates that development proposals within
    settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against the
    Framework's national decision-making policies. In this case, the appeal site lies
    within the settlement boundary of Etwall in a sustainable location where the
    principle of residential development is accepted.
25. The proposal would deliver 10 dwellings and contribute towards both housing
    supply and housing choice within the settlement. It would also broaden the range of
    housing available through the provision of four 3-bedroom dwellings, secure
    biodiversity net gain, retain a substantial proportion of existing environmental
    features and provide benefits through the completed planning obligations.
26. Policy H07 of the Framework requires substantial weight to be given to the benefits
    of providing homes that contribute towards meeting evidenced accommodation
    needs. I therefore attach substantial weight to the delivery of 10 additional
    dwellings in this sustainable settlement location. Additional weight is also afforded
    to the contribution the scheme would make towards housing choice through the
    provision of four 3-bedroom dwellings.
27. Against those benefits, the proposal would result in the loss of some trees.
    However, having regard to the arboricultural evidence before me, the proposed
    retention measures, replacement planting and the conditions imposed, I find that
    the resulting effect on the character and environmental quality of the site would be
    neutral.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6011093


28. Taking these matters together, I find that the benefits of the proposal, would not be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies of the Framework. As such, the Framework
    indicates that planning permission should be granted.
Conditions
29. I have carefully considered the conditions suggested by the main parties in light of
    the National Planning Policy Framework and Planning Practice Guidance. In
    addition to the standard time limit and approved plans conditions which are
    necessary in the interests of certainty.
30. However, I have not imposed all of the conditions suggested by the parties and
    consultees. In some cases, the matters concerned are adequately addressed
    through other conditions attached to this decision or through the approved plans. I
    have also omitted conditions containing advisory, explanatory or technical guidance
    that would not constitute enforceable planning controls.
31. In addition, I have not imposed the suggested condition removing permitted
    development rights. Having regard to the evidence before me and the other
    conditions attached to this decision, including those relating to design, landscaping,
    biodiversity protection, tree retention and parking provision, I am not satisfied that
    such a broad restriction is necessary to make the development acceptable in
    planning terms.
32. Similarly, I have not imposed a separate condition controlling solar panels, as this
    matter is adequately addressed through the approved plans and the condition
    requiring approval of detailed architectural elements, including roof detailing and
    integrated solar panels.
33. A number of conditions are required to be discharged prior to the commencement
    of development. These are necessary because they relate either to the
    management and mitigation of impacts arising during the construction phase,
    including those affecting trees, biodiversity, drainage, residential amenity and
    highway safety, or to matters that must be resolved before development proceeds
    because they influence the layout, levels, engineering design and construction
    methodology of the development. Delaying consideration of these matters until
    after development has commenced could prejudice the effectiveness of the
    mitigation measures or result in harm that could not readily be remedied. The
    appellant has confirmed their agreement to the imposition of these pre-
    commencement conditions.
34. A number of conditions relate to highway matters. These secure the provision and
    retention of access arrangements, parking and turning facilities, construction
    management measures and appropriate refuse storage arrangements. They are
    necessary to ensure that safe and suitable access to the site is achieved and
    maintained during both the construction and operational phases of the
    development.
35. Several conditions cover biodiversity protection and enhancement. These require
    the implementation of measures to safeguard protected and priority species, secure
    habitat management and monitoring, and provide ecological enhancements within
    the development. Given the ecological interest of the site and the potential effects


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6011093


     arising from site preparation and construction works, these conditions are
     necessary to minimise harm and secure measurable biodiversity benefits.
36. Further conditions are required to ensure the retention and protection of existing
    trees, habitats and landscape features. These make an important contribution to
    the character of the area and the site's ecological value. Controls over site
    preparation, foundation design, landscaping and drainage infrastructure are
    therefore necessary to minimise adverse impacts and safeguard the environmental
    quality of the site.
37. Conditions relating to materials, architectural detailing and landscaping are
    necessary to ensure that the development achieves a high standard of design and
    integrates appropriately with its surroundings.
38. It would not be unreasonable to expect the construction phase of the development
    to be carried out at hours that are compatible with the residential location of the
    site. I have therefore imposed a condition controlling the hours during which
    construction activities, site operations and deliveries may take place. This is
    necessary to minimise disturbance to nearby occupiers and to safeguard residential
    amenity during the construction period. In addition, a condition relating to the
    discovery of unexpected contamination is necessary to ensure that any unforeseen
    land contamination is appropriately investigated and addressed, thereby protecting
    the health and safety of future occupiers and the wider environment.
39. Conditions relating to levels, construction impacts and implementation of the
    approved plans are necessary to ensure that the development does not result in
    unacceptable harm to the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers. These
    controls will assist in safeguarding residential amenity throughout both the
    construction and operational phases of the development.
40. Conditions relating to surface water drainage and construction-phase runoff are
    necessary to ensure that the development incorporates an appropriate drainage
    strategy and does not increase flood risk either on or off the site. They are also
    necessary to ensure that adequate provision is made for the long-term
    management and maintenance of drainage features.
41. Conditions requiring approval of detailed design features, materials, roof detailing
    and other architectural elements are necessary to secure a high-quality design
    outcome and to ensure that the development is implemented in a manner
    consistent with the approved plans. These controls will assist in preserving the
    character and appearance of the area and securing an attractive development.
Conclusion
42. Drawing these matters together, there are no material considerations of sufficient
    weight to indicate that a decision should be made other than in accordance with the
    development plan. I therefore conclude that the proposal accords with the
    development plan when read as a whole. For the reasons given above the appeal
    should be allowed.

J Buxton
INSPECTOR



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6011093


                                           Schedule of Conditions
1. The development hereby approved shall be begun before the expiration of three
   years from the date of this permission.
2. The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
   plans/drawings reference:-
     • Site Location Plan 4638-001 – REV A;
     • S106 Plan 4638-014 – REV -
     • Site Plan as existing 4638-002 – REV B;
     • Proposed Site Plan 4638-003 REV V;
     • House Type 1 Floor Plans 4638-004 REV F;
     • House Type 2 Floor Plans 4638-005 REV G;
     • House Type 3 Floor Plans 4638-006 REV B;
     • House Type 4 Floor Plans 4638-007 REV E;
     • House Type 5 Floor Plans 4638-008 REV E;
     • Proposed Garage Plan for 8 Slade Close 4638-010;
     • Garage Site Block Plan for 8 Slade Close 4638-011;
     • Garage A Plans 4638-012 REV A;
     • House Type 1 Elevations 4638-104 REV G;
     • House Type 2 Elevations 4638-105 REV F;
     • House Type 3 Elevations 4638-106 REV D;
     • House Type 4 Elevations 4638-107 REV G;
     • House Type 5 Elevations 4638-108 REV E;
     • Plot 1 and 2 Street Scene 4638-201 REV A;
     • Plot 6 7 and 8 Street Scene 4638-202 Rev B;
     • Plot 3 4 and 4 Street Scene 4638-203 REV A;
     • Plot 4 Tracking 4638 Rev A - 02 July 2025;
     • Plot 5 Tracking 4638 Rev A - 02 July 2025.
3. No development, including preparatory works, shall commence until protective
   fences have been erected around all trees and hedgerows shown to be retained on
   the approved plans. Such fencing shall conform to best practice as set out in British
   Standard 5837:2012 (or equivalent document which may update or supersede that
   Standard) and ensure that no vehicles can access, and no storage of materials or
   equipment can take place within, the root and canopy protection areas. The fences
   shall be retained in situ during the course of ground and construction works, with
   the protected areas kept clear of any building materials, plant, debris and trenching,
   and with existing ground levels maintained; and there shall be no entry to those
   areas except for approved arboricultural or landscape works.
     The development shall thereafter proceed in accordance with the recommendations
     contained within Appendix A of the Arboricultural Impact Assessment (ACS
     Consulting, March 2025).
4. Prior to commencement of the development hereby permitted details of a
   Construction Management Plan (CMP) shall be submitted to and approved in
   writing by the Local Planning Authority. The approved plan shall be adhered to
   throughout the construction period. The plan shall include but not be restricted to:



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         7
Appeal Decision 6011093


         a) Parking of vehicles of site operatives and visitors (including measures taken to
            ensure satisfactory access and movement for existing occupiers of
            neighbouring properties during construction);
         b) Advisory routes for construction traffic;
         c) Any temporary access to the site;
         d) Locations for loading/unloading and storage of plant, waste and construction
            materials;
         e) Method of preventing mud and dust being carried onto the highway;
         f) Arrangements for turning vehicles;
         g) Arrangements to receive abnormal loads or unusually large vehicles;
         h) Highway Condition survey (See Informative);
         i) Methods of communicating the Construction Management Plan to staff,
            visitors and neighbouring residents and businesses.
    5. No development shall take place until a scheme of dust and air quality mitigation
       measures emanating from the site during the construction period has been
       submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
       approved measures shall be implemented throughout the construction period.
    6. No development shall commence until details of the finished floor levels of the
       buildings hereby approved, and of the proposed ground levels of the site relative
       to the finished floor levels and adjoining land levels, has been submitted to and
       approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. Such details shall be
       supplemented with locations, cross-sections and appearance of any retaining
       features required to facilitate the proposed levels. The development shall be
       constructed in accordance with the approved details.
   7. No development shall take place (including demolition, ground works, vegetation
      clearance and movement of plant, machinery and materials) until a Construction
      Environmental Management Plan (CEMP: Biodiversity) has been submitted to
      and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
         The CEMP (Biodiversity) shall be produced by an ecologist and shall include the
         following.
         a) Risk assessment of potentially damaging construction activities.
         b) Identification of “biodiversity protection zones”.
         c) Practical measures (both physical measures and sensitive working practices)
         to avoid or reduce impacts during construction.
         d) The location and timing of sensitive works to avoid harm to biodiversity
         features.
         e) The times during construction when specialist ecologists need to be present
         on site to oversee works.
         f) Responsible persons and lines of communication.
         g) The role and responsibilities on site of an ecological clerk of works (ECoW) or
         similarly competent person.
         h) Use of protective fences, exclusion barriers and warning signs. The approved
         CEMP shall be adhered to and implemented throughout the construction period
         strictly in accordance with the approved details, unless otherwise agreed in
         writing by the Local Planning Authority.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6011093


   8. Prior to commencement of any landscaping works, a Habitat Management and
      Monitoring Plan (HMMP) shall be submitted to, and be approved in writing by,
      the Local Planning Authority. The HMMP shall identify the habitats to be
      retained, created and / or enhanced on the site and specify the appropriate
      management prescriptions to secure the predicted condition targets, as per the
      approved biodiversity metric for the application. The HMMP shall also set out a
      monitoring schedule to ensure targets are met and remedial actions to take if
      not.
   9. Prior to commencement of the development, the applicant shall submit for
      approval to the Local Planning Authority details indicating how additional surface
      water run-off from the site will be avoided during the construction phase. The
      applicant may be required to provide collection, balancing and/or settlement
      systems for these flows. The approved system shall be operating to the
      satisfaction of the Local Planning Authority, before the commencement of any
      works, which would lead to increased surface water run-off from the site during
      the construction phase.
   10. No development shall take place until a detailed assessment has been provided
       to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority, to demonstrate that
       the proposed destination for surface water accords with the drainage hierarchy
       as set out in the Planning Practice Guidance. The assessment should
       demonstrate with appropriate evidence that surface water runoff is discharged
       as high up as reasonably practicable in the following hierarchy: I. II. III. IV. into
       the ground (infiltration); to a surface water body; to a surface water sewer,
       highway drain, or another drainage system; to a combined sewer.
   11. No development, including preparatory works, shall commence until details of
       the foundation design minimising the impact on the roots of the mature trees
       shown to be affected by the development as illustrated with the submitted
       Arboricultural Impact Assessment (ACS Consulting, March 2025). The
       foundation design shall first be submitted to and approved in writing by the
       Local Planning Authority. The approved scheme shall be implemented in full and
       not altered for the life of the development.
   12. No development shall commence until detailed engineering drawings of the
       proposed access and associated highway works have been submitted to and
       approved in writing by the local planning authority. The details shall include the
       alignment, levels, construction methodology, drainage arrangements and details
       of any excavation within the root protection areas of retained trees. The
       submitted details shall demonstrate that the highway works can be carried out
       without unacceptable harm to retained trees. The development shall thereafter
       be carried out in accordance with the approved details.
   13. No development shall take place until a detailed design and associated
       management and maintenance plan for the surface water drainage system has
       been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The
       scheme shall be based on the principles set out within the Surface Water
       Drainage and SuDS Strategy Report, Revision B (JMS Group, October 2025)
       and the DEFRA Non-Statutory Technical Standards for Sustainable Drainage
       Systems (March 2015). The approved scheme shall thereafter be implemented
       in accordance with the approved details.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6011093


   14. Prior to the construction of buildings, enclosures or hard surfaces within the root
       protection area or under the canopy of any tree shown to be retained on the
       approved plans, details of the method of construction and root protection and
       load spreading measures to be installed shall be submitted to and approved in
       writing by the Local Planning Authority. Such details shall be based on best
       practice as set out in British Standard BS 5837:2012 (or equivalent document
       which may update or supersede that Standard). The development shall proceed
       in accordance with those approved details.
   15. Prior to building works commencing above foundation level, a Species
       Enhancement Plan shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
       Planning Authority. Approved measures shall be implemented in full and
       maintained thereafter. The Plan shall clearly show positions, specifications and
       numbers of features, which will include (but are not limited to) the following:
       • universal nest boxes at ratio of 1:1, in line with British Standard 42021:2022.
       • integrated bat boxes in 30% of dwellings.
       • insect bricks in 30% dwellings and / or towers in public open space.
       • fencing gaps 130 mm x 130 mm to maintain connectivity for hedgehogs in all
       gardens.
         A statement of good practice including photographs shall be submitted to the
         Local Planning Authority prior to the discharge of this condition, demonstrating
         that the enhancements have been selected and installed in accordance with the
         above.
   16. Prior to the installation of lighting fixtures, a detailed lighting strategy shall be
       submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority to
       safeguard bats and other nocturnal wildlife. This should provide details of the
       chosen luminaires, their locations and any mitigating features such as dimmers,
       PIR sensors and timers. Dependent on the scale of proposed lighting, a lux
       contour plan may be required to demonstrate acceptable levels of lightspill to
       any sensitive ecological zones/features. The Strategy should refer to Guidance
       Note 08/23 - Bats and Artificial Lighting at Night (BCT and ILP, 2023) and
       explain how proposals have been designed in compliance with this document.
       Such approved measures will be implemented in full.
   17. Notwithstanding the submitted details, prior to the construction of the above-
       ground elevations, further details of the following building elements shall be
       submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority:
         (a) the proposed facing materials;
         (b) the windows and doors including the reveal, material and finish;
         (c) the eaves, verges, headers and cills, soffits and fascia boards;
         (d) the roof tiles and integrated solar panels;
         (e) the proposed brick entrance pillars
         These elements shall be provided in accordance with the approved details and
         maintained as approved throughout the lifetime of the development.
   18. Prior to the construction of the dwellings a scheme of hard and soft landscaping
       shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
       Details of soft landscaping should evidence compliance with British Standard
       (BS) 3936: 'Part 1 - Specification for trees and shrubs', BS3969 -


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   10
Appeal Decision 6011093


         'Recommendations for turf for general purposes' and BS4428 - 'Code of practice
         for general landscape operations (excluding hard surfaces)'. Where areas of
         public open space are included in the proposals, the details shall be
         supplemented with details of play equipment, seating, litter and dog waste bins,
         signage, and other ancillary structures (as necessary). All hard landscaping shall
         be carried out in accordance with the approved details prior to occupation of
         each respective dwelling, whilst all planting, seeding or turfing comprised in the
         approved scheme shall be carried out in the first planting and seeding seasons
         following the first occupation of each respective dwelling or the completion of the
         development, whichever is the sooner; and any plants which within a period of
         five years (ten years in the case of trees) from the completion of the
         development die, are removed or become seriously damaged or diseased shall
         be replaced in the next planting season with others of similar size and species
         and thereafter retained for at least the same period.
    19. A refuse bin collection point shall be provided within private land at the
        entrance to the shared private access, sufficient to accommodate two bins per
        dwelling served, in accordance with a scheme to be first submitted to and
        approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The bin collection point shall
        be provided prior to the first occupation of a dwelling to which they serve and
        shall be retained thereafter free from any impediment to their designated use as
        such.
   20. The parking spaces and/or garages shown on the submitted plan shall be
       constructed and available for use prior to the occupation of the dwellings to
       which they relate, and thereafter the approved facilities together with the means
       of access thereto shall be maintained as approved and be reserved for the
       benefit of the development hereby permitted.
   21. If during the construction and/or demolition works associated with the
        development hereby approved any suspected areas of contamination are
        discovered, which have not previously been identified, then all works shall be
        suspended until the nature and extent of the contamination is assessed and a
        Phase I contaminated land assessment (desk-study) shall be undertaken and
        approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The Local Planning
        Authority shall be notified as soon as is reasonably practicable of the discovery
        of any suspected areas of contamination.
   22. Except in an emergency, no demolition, ground works, site clearance,
       construction, site deliveries, site works or fitting out shall take place other than
       between 08:00 hours and 18:00 hours Mondays to Fridays, and between 08:00
       hours and 13:00 hours on Saturdays. There shall be no such activities
       whatsoever on Sundays, public holidays and bank holidays.


                                           ** End of Schedule **




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         11
