Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 September 2026
by S Harrington MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011544
Crossroads Service Station, Upper New Road, Cheddar, Somerset BS27 3DA
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against conditions imposed when
     granting express consent.
•    The appeal is made by Wildstone Estates Limited against the decision of Somerset Council.
•    The application Ref 17/26/00010 was approved on 1 May 2026 and express consent was granted for
     the display of an advertisement subject to conditions.
•    The advertisement permitted is Erection of 1No. internally-illuminated freestanding digital
     advertisement display.
•    The condition in dispute is Nos 8 which state that: The hereby approved display shall only be
     illuminated during the business hours of the forecourt and not illuminated outside of those hours.
•    The reason given for the condition is: In the interest in minimising additional lightspill in a protected
     area, in accordance with D20 and D23 of the Sedgemoor Local Plan 2011-2032.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and the express consent Ref 17/26/00010 for Erection of a
       D6 Small Format Advertisement Display at Crossroads Service Station, Upper
       New Road, Cheddar, Somerset, BS27 3DA granted on 1 May 2026 by Somerset
       Council is varied by deleting condition 8.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements) (England)
       Regulations 2007 (the Regulations) require that decisions are made only in the
       interest of amenity and public safety. Therefore, whilst I have taken account of the
       policies that the Council refer to, these have not been decisive in my determination
       of this appeal.
3.     During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
       (the Framework) was published. There are no substantive changes relevant to the
       appeal before me and therefore no interested parties would be prejudiced by my
       consideration of the latest version of the Framework.
Background and Main Issue
4.     The Council approved an internally-illuminated freestanding digital advertisement,
       which is the subject of this appeal. I observed at my site visit that an illuminated
       advertisement has been installed of the same appearance and within the same
       general location as the appeal advertisement. However, the Council have stated
       that the advertisement has not been installed in accordance with the approved
       plans, although interested parties indicate it has now been re-positioned.
       Nevertheless, for the avoidance of doubt, I have assessed the appeal on the basis
       of the approved plans.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011544


5.     This advertisement consent was subject to 7 conditions. However, the list of
       conditions omits a condition labelled ‘5’, and therefore it is the condition labelled as
       ‘8’ on the decision notice that this appeal refers to.
6.     The appellant contends that the condition is not necessary in the interests of visual
       amenity and are seeking to appeal the imposition of the nighttime curfew.
       Consequently, the main issue is whether the disputed condition is necessary or
       reasonable in the interests of amenity and public safety.
Reasons
7.     The appeal advertisement is located within a petrol station forecourt in close
       proximity to the associated petrol station building. Whilst in a largely rural location
       and near the Mendip Hills National Landscape, the appeal site is close to other
       built form including residential development. Although an interested party has
       states that there are inaccuracies within the appellant’s evidence, I observed the
       appeal site has an overtly commercial character, due to petrol station buildings
       and paraphernalia including a large canopy, tall totem style sign and various other
       signage.
8.     Moreover, the adjoining area also features numerous sources of light not
       associated with the operating hours of the appeal site, including streetlighting and
       a plethora of road signage, some illuminated.
9.     As such, the advertisement is not out of character with the appeal site, and given
       sources of illumination nearby, as well as the relatively small scale of the
       advertisement, the illumination of the advertisement outside of business hours
       would not result in an overtly eye catching or incongruous feature.
10. Furthermore, due to the advertisement's setback from the highway, together with
    its scale and other consent conditions requiring ambient brightness controls and
    luminance levels, it would not generate such glare or distraction to road users that
    would result in harm to public safety.
11. The appeal site is also within the North Somerset and Mendip Bat Special Area of
    Conservation (SAC) which is a European Protected Site for Lesser Horseshoe
    Bats. The Council’s reason for imposing the condition refers to additional light-spill,
    with the Council’s Committee Report, as well as appeal statement (AS)
    highlighting that the condition was imposed in order to reduce any additional
    impact on the SAC.
12. However, as previously stated, the Regulations at 3(1) state that powers under
    these Regulations shall be exercised only in the interests of amenity and public
    safety. Moreover, whilst amenity can include visual and aural there is no indication
    within the Framework, or Planning Practice Guidance that impact on protected
    species including bats can be taken into account. Consequently, Policies D20 and
    D23 of the Sedgemoor Local Plan 2011-2032 which relate to biodiversity and bat
    consultation zones are therefore also not relevant.
13. The advertisement would be orientated so that it would not be facing dwellings
    next to the appeal site. Moreover, although visible from Cosy Nook, the
    advertisement would be separated from that property by the highway and viewed
    at an oblique angle. Consequently, while noticeable, particularly at night, the



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011544


       proposal would not result in significant harm to the occupiers living conditions, a
       view shared by the Council.
14. To conclude, the advertisement without an illumination time restriction would not
    harm amenity or public safety. Consequently, even if the main parties had agreed
    to such a condition during the application process, the originally imposed condition
    ‘8’ is unnecessary and unreasonable.
Conclusion
15. For the reasons given above, having regard to all matters raised, I conclude that
    the appeal is allowed and I vary the express consent by deleting condition ’8’.




S Harrington
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
