    Appeal Decision
    Site visit made on 31 August 2026

    by S Hartley BA (Hons) Dist.TP (Manc) DMS MRTPI MRICS
    an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State

    Decision date: 7 September 2026



Appeal Ref: 6011059
41 Springfield Road, Sheffield, S7 2GE
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal to
       grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by S. Malik against the decision of Sheffield City Council.
•      The application is reference 25/02046/FUL (formerly PP-14157739)
•      The development proposed is the use of a dwelling house (Use class C3) as a nursery/family centre
       (Use class E (f) and the erection of a single storey side extension and canopy to the front.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters

2. On 17 August 2026, the Government published a revised National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework). This is a relevant material planning consideration of
   ‘critical importance’ from a decision-making point of view. In respect of the main
   issue, the Framework has not materially changed the national planning policy
   position and therefore I have not found it necessary to consult the main parties
   upon it.

3. The applicant describes the proposed development as ‘the change of use of a
   residential property (Malik House. 41 Springfield Road, Sheffield) from a domestic
   dwelling (Use Class C3) to a commercial children’s nursery and family centre (Use
   class E(f): day nursery/centre).’ I have, however, used the local planning authority’s
   (LPA) description in the banner heading for its fuller description of the proposal.

4. The LPA notes that ‘the application and public comments make reference and
   comparison to an ongoing childcare use. It is understood that a childminding
   business has been operating from one room of the ground floor at the front of the
   property alongside play in the property gardens. The submitted noise survey
   indicates that there is capacity for up to 12 children at the child minder from 07:00 –
   18:30. It is not confirmed but it is assumed this is available on weekdays’. The LPA
   notes that no planning permission has been granted for this use, although the
   appellant considers that no planning permission is required as the main use of the
   building is for residential purposes.

5. There in an absence of precise and unambiguous evidence to demonstrate, on the
   balance of probability, that the application use is lawful. Given the description of the
   proposed development, it is reasonable that I determine this appeal based upon the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision Appeal Ref: 6011059


     existing lawful use being a dwelling. I have not determined this appeal on the basis
     of the use being retrospective as the evidence is uncertain in terms of whether the
     property has been, or is being, used in exact accordance with the proposal.

Main Issue

6. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development upon highway safety.

Reasons

7. The appeal property is a detached dwelling with a relatively large side area and a
   smaller rear area. The immediate area is predominantly residential, including
   bungalows and two storey dwellings, and including a two-storey block of
   apartments immediately to the west. Adjoining the appeal site to the south is a
   public house with little or no associated off-road parking provision.
8. The appeal proposal is to change the use of the building to a use including a day
   nursery and a before/after school facility and a school holiday club. It would also
   offer occasional parenting courses and similar services during evenings and
   weekends. The nursery would operate between the hours of 7am to 7pm during
   week days.
9. The proposed development includes a single storey side extension to the existing
   building for kitchen and reception facilities, and there would be constructed a
   canopy over the main entrance. The LPA makes no objection to these and I have
   no reason to disagree.
10. The appellant states that there would be a total capacity of 63 children but that the
    maximum on site at any one time would be 55 children. Staff numbers are
    estimated to be 12, working in shifts with a maximum of 12 staff on site at any one
    point in time. Staff shift changes would be scheduled such that arrivals and
    departures would take place outside of the main parent drop-off and pick up times.
11. No off-street parking would be provided for staff or parents, and those attending by
    car for drop offs and pick-ups would rely upon on-street parking provision.
    However, the appellant proposes to operate a 12-16 seat shuttle bus, which would
    collect children registered at the nursery from further afield. There is room on the
    existing driveway to the property to park it, possibly leaving one car parking space,
    according to the LPA.
12. The appellant has commissioned and submitted with the application, transport
    assessments taking into account staggered arrival and departures, staff travel
    arrangements, shuttle bus provision and a review of parking provision and
    conditions in the vicinity of the appeal site. The transport assessment also takes
    into account that staff would be employed from the local area and will be
    encouraged to car share or to use public transport. The assessment is that there
    would be a need for 2 or 3 parking spaces. The survey area includes Springfield
    Road, Millhouses Lane, Grove Road and nearby streets.
13. The assessment is that at no point was the road network or parking provision
    operating at close to capacity (between 17% and 37%) and that even at the busiest
    times during the survey, spaces remained available, sufficient where drop-offs and
    pick-ups are for very short periods.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
 Appeal Decision Appeal Ref: 6011059


14. The transport assessments include the results of a parent travel survey with
    families who have already secured a place at the nursery, involving 31 responses.
    It indicates 8 families (26%) would travel by car or taxi. However, the consultant
    report notes that ‘research indicates that 60–70% of trips to childcare sites are
    normally made by private car, with public transport and active modes accounting for
    a much smaller share (DfT / National Travel Survey context)’.
15. The conclusions of the parental survey are based upon a very small sample and
    relate to parents’ intentions, whereas the national figure of 60-70% is more likely to
    include a larger sample and be more based upon actual modes of travel.
16. However, while the submitted traffic and highway reports indicate a sufficient
    number of car parking spaces over the study area, this is not confined just to the
    very immediate area of the appeal site on Springfield Road, and in my judgement it
    is likely that drivers picking up, and more especially when dropping off children in
    the mornings, are likely to be short of time and will look to find a parking space as
    close as possible to the premises.
17. The evidence is that Springfield Road is a well-used route on which traffic tends to
    queue during peak times, which is when pick-ups and drop-offs are likely to be at
    their greatest. Parked cars can make it difficult for vehicles and buses to pass even
    where there is a tendency for drivers to park half on the pavements, to the
    detriment of highway safety to pedestrians, persons with prams and wheelchairs,
    and those with impaired visibility. On my site visit I was able to observe such
    parking, though I accept that this was only a snapshot of time.
18. While the traffic surveys conducted on behalf of the appellant show that there is a
    surplus of parking spaces in the area as a whole, the evidence is that actual
    parking along Springfield Road itself already causes highway safety difficulties, and
    which I consider the proposed development would exacerbate.
19. The appellant would aim to manage any parking issues for those travelling by car
    by the use of traffic marshalling, a booking system and directing parents to public
    car parking in Millhouses Park, though the latter is 200 metres away. However, it is
    uncertain as to the efficacy of such measures. I do not consider that the imposition
    of a condition to deal with these matters would be suitable in this case as I do not
    find that such proposals would be enforceable. My judgement, based upon the
    submitted evidence, is that the proposed development would have a significantly
    adverse effect upon highway safety.
20. Therefore, I conclude that the proposal fails to accord with the highway safety
    requirements of TR6 of the Framework and policy H14(c) of the Sheffield Unitary
    Development Plan (1998), in so far as the proposed development would have a
    significantly adverse impact upon the road network and highway safety.
Other Considerations
21. I appreciate that the proposed development would meet a need and would provide
    continuous care for babies and to the time of leaving primary school, as well as
    providing care for those children with special educational and disability needs.
    However, it might be that premises elsewhere could be considered and, in any
    event, these matters are not sufficient to outweigh my conclusion regarding the
    main issue.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
 Appeal Decision Appeal Ref: 6011059


22. I acknowledge that the proposal would have some economic benefits and would
    seek to utilise previously developed land. However, these are also not factors
    which are sufficiently weighty to overcome my conclusion upon the main issue.
Overall Conclusion

23. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the development would not accord
    with the development plan for the area taken as a whole, or the highway safety
    requirements of the Framework, and there are no material planning considerations
    that indicate that the application should be determined other than in accordance
    with the development plan. Therefore, the appeal should be dismissed.
 INSPECTOR

 S. Hartley




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     4
