 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 11 August 2026
 by P D Sedgwick BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 3 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011471
 3 High Street, South Norwood, Croydon, London SE25 6EP.
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mohamedbhai against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
     Croydon.
 •   The application Ref is 25/02346/FUL.
 •   The development proposed is First & Second floor rear extension (inc. Rear dormer) to provide 2no.
     1 bed flats + 1no. detached outbuilding for pharmacy storage.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2. Subsequent to the refusal of permission for the proposed development the
   Government published its revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) in August 2026. The wording of the relevant paragraphs of the new
   Framework are similar to that of the 2024 version. Therefore, I am satisfied that
   they do not affect the substantive matters of the appeal and that considering the
   development against the revised Framework without seeking further comments
   from the parties on it would not be prejudicial to their respective cases.
Main Issues
3. The main issues are:
     • whether the proposed development would preserve or enhance the character or
       appearance of the South Norwood Conservation Area;
     • the effect of the proposed development upon the living conditions of
        neighbouring occupiers, with particular regard to light and outlook; and,
     • the effect of the proposed development upon car parking and highway safety.
Reasons
Character and appearance
4. The appeal site relates to a 2-storey commercial property with a pharmacy on the
   ground floor and a 2-bedroom flat on the first floor and in the roof space. It is the
   end property in a small terrace of 4, sandwiched between more prominent 3 storey
   buildings on the High Street. The terrace is identified in the South Norwood

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision: 6011471


     Conservation Area Appraisal and Management Plan Supplementary Planning
     Document (2022) (CAAMP) as making a positive contribution to the CA and has
     several of the features identified in the CAAMP as contributing to the significance of
     the CA. They include prominent chimney stacks, sash windows, arched window
     openings with a decorative keystone and use of London Stock Brick in their
     construction. They also have distinctive arched dormers on the front and modest
     rear dormers on the back which contribute to their character.
5. The CAAMP advises that alterations and extensions should be carefully designed
   to preserve the uniformity of a group or terrace and that rear extensions should
   usually be one storey lower than the original building and extend no more than 3m
   beyond the rear wall of terraced properties. The proposed first and second floor
   extension would extend out over an existing flat roofed ground floor extension, and
   the roof would join the main roof slope below the ridge with lower eaves than on the
   main roof. It would have a crown roof with slightly angled sides and a dormer
   window in the centre of it.
6. Although the proposed extension would exceed the 3m depth guidelines in the
   CAAMP, it would be level with the rear wall of neighbouring extensions. However,
   they have flat roofs that sit below the eaves whereas the proposed extension roof
   would be above the eaves and project significantly beyond the roof plane. It would
   thus dominate the roof and be out of keeping with other properties within the
   terrace and therefore fail to preserve the uniformity of the group.
7. Given the small scale of the proposed development within the context of the CA as
   a whole, it would not harm its character. There would, however, be harm in terms of
   its appearance. The harm would be localised and less than substantial but would
   nevertheless be contrary to policies D3, D4 and HC1 of the London Plan (2021)
   (LP), and policies DM10, DM18 and SP4 of the Croydon Local Plan (2018) (CLP),
   and the CAAMP which require development to preserve or enhance the
   appearance of the CA.
Living conditions
8. The adjoining building has a first-floor kitchen window with a first-floor extension
   projecting back immediately to the side of it, attached to which is a large metal flue.
   The outlook from the window on this side is dominated by the side wall of the
   extension and the metal flue and consequently is already poor. The outlook to the
   other side is across the ground floor extension on the appeal property and remains
   unimpeded.
9. The proposed first-floor extension would be set in from the boundary with the
   adjoining neighbouring building by just over 1.5m but would project back
   approximately 5m. It would significantly reduce outlook to that side of the kitchen
   window and with the existing extension on the other side create a tunnelling effect
   and sense of enclosure. It would also exceed the height of the window and thus
   have an overbearing presence.
10. The orientation of the window is such that it is overshadowed in the mornings by
    the roof above it and existing extension to the side. Buildings next to the appeal site
    and extending along Olive Grove from the junction with the High Street will also
    cause some overshadowing in the afternoon. Nonetheless, the proposed extension
    would reduce the sky visible from the window and reduce light entering it in the
    afternoons and, in combination with the reduction in outlook, would be significant

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision: 6011471


     enough to cause harm to the living conditions of occupiers of the building and thus
     conflict with Policy D3 of the LP and policy DM10 of the CLP which seek to protect
     the amenity of adjoining occupiers.
Parking and highway safety
11. During my visit it was evident from the lack of available car parking spaces that
    demand for carparking in the area is high. To the front of the appeal property there
    is a cycle lane and parking and delivery time restrictions. The nearest residential
    street, Olive Grove, had permit parking bays with ticketed daytime parking for a
    maximum of 4 hours. All the bays were full at the time of my visit. The High Street
    in the vicinity of the site is relatively narrow such that at delivery times vehicles
    serving nearby shops will restrict the free flow of traffic. Additional vehicles seeking
    a parking space at such times would increase congestion and further impede traffic
    flows thus adversely effecting highway safety. Competition for parking spaces
    during the day on Olive Grove would similarly lead to congestion close to a sixth
    form college affecting highway and pedestrian safety.
12. The Officers Report notes that the appeal site has a ‘very good’ PTAL Rating of 5
    and that car free development is generally supported subject to a signed section
    106 planning obligation ensuring that the development would be car free. The
    appellant has confirmed a willingness to enter into a legal agreement, but no
    signed and dated agreement has been provided to me.
13. Therefore, in the absence of evidence of other measures that could restrict parking,
    the proposal would lead to unacceptable pressure on car parking within the area.
    This in turn would result in congestion and harm to highway safety. It would
    therefore conflict with Policy T4 and T6 of the LP and policies SP8, DM29 and
    DM30 of the CLP which seek to reduce the impact of car parking on traffic
    congestion in areas with good public transport provision.
Planning Balance
14. The proposal would harm the appearance of the South Norwood Conservation
    Area. Any harm to a designated heritage asset is a matter of considerable weight
    requiring justification and, in accordance with the Framework, I must weigh the
    harm against the public benefits of the proposal.
15. The proposal would provide benefits in terms of contributing towards the Council’s
    housing land supply in a sustainable location and make effective use of land. It
    would also provide jobs during construction and provide storage facilities to support
    the ground floor pharmacy. The proposed outbuilding would include biodiversity
    benefits from the inclusion of a sedum roof on a proposal that would otherwise be
    exempt from Biodiversity Net Gain requirements. I attach these collective benefits
    considerable weight. However, I consider the harm to the appearance of the CA,
    the living conditions of future occupants and to highway safety, would significantly
    and demonstrably outweigh the benefits, when assessed against the policies in the
    Framework taken as a whole. Thus, the proposal would not be sustainable
    development as defined by the Framework and this weighs heavily against the
    scheme.
Conclusion




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
 Appeal Decision: 6011471


16. For the reasons given above, and having regard to all matters raised, I conclude
    that the appeal should be dismissed.

P D Sedgwick
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      4
