Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026 by T Morris BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
Decision by B Plenty BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011066
Blackthorn Cottage, Congleton Road, Smallwood, Cheshire East CW11 2UZ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Alexander King Boote against the decision of Cheshire East Council.
•   The application Ref is 25/3721/HOUS.
•   The development proposed is addition of a single storey room to side of the house and extension of
    usable/liveable space upstairs to make use of wasted space created by the sloped roof.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed insofar as it relates to the proposed extension of
   usable/liveable space upstairs to make use of wasted space created by the sloped
   roof.
2. The appeal is allowed insofar as it relates to the proposed addition of a single
   storey room to side of the house. Planning permission is therefore granted for the
   addition of a single storey room to side of the house at Blackthorn Cottage,
   Congleton Road, Smallwood, Cheshire East CW11 2UZ, in accordance with the
   terms of the application, Ref 25/3721/HOUS, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following plans insofar as it relates to the addition of a single storey room
              to side of the house only: 00-001 (Site Location Plan), 00-003 Rev C
              (Proposed Site Plan) and 00-004 Rev E (Existing and Proposed Floor Plans
              and Elevations).
     3)       The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
              development hereby permitted shall match those used in the existing
              building.
Appeal Procedure
3. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
4. On 17 August 2026 the Government published a new National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework). Having reviewed the changes, they do not affect the



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011066


     substance of the main issue in the appeal. Since they would not therefore be
     prejudiced, I have proceeded without further consultation with the main parties.
5. Notwithstanding the description of the development in the banner heading above
   which is taken from the planning application form and was used by the Council in
   its decision notice, the development as described on drawing no 00-003 Rev C
   (Proposed Site Plan) comprises a proposed first floor extension and a proposed
   side extension. Therefore, this is the wording I have used to describe the proposal
   in the reasons for the recommendation below.
Main Issue
6. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
   appearance of the host dwelling and the surrounding area.
Reasons for the Recommendation
7. The appeal site comprises a semi-detached two-storey dwelling which is situated in
   a rural area. The dwelling is part of a group of converted barns which are setback
   from Congleton Road via a private access track. The appeal site and its immediate
   surroundings include the converted barns, their gardens and a courtyard parking
   area to the front, some outbuildings, and there is also a separate two-storey
   detached dwelling nearby. The wider area surrounding the site comprises fields.
8. When viewed from the courtyard area to the front of the buildings, the simple
   horizontal form and the consistent materials of the converted barns signify the rural
   character of the group of buildings including the appeal dwelling. This includes their
   simple gable roof forms and their plain roof slopes. Even though the building’s rear
   roof section includes a catslide element, rooflights and flues, the majority of the rear
   roofslope is also plain and clutter free. Overall, the simple roof form with generally
   plain roofslopes contributes positively to the rural character of the host dwelling. It
   also helps to unify the appearance of Blackthorn Cottage and Mulberry Cottage as
   a pair, as well as the unified appearance of the converted barns as a whole.
     Proposed First Floor Extension
9. The proposed first floor extension would be set in from the extremities of the
   original roof. Even so, due to its notable depth and width, it would appear as a
   bulky and prominent addition which would detract from the simple roof form of the
   host dwelling. Although its design including mansard walls and feature canopy is
   intended to have a barn-like appearance, this would still contrast with the mostly
   plain rear roofslope of this particular converted barn. Furthermore, due to its size
   and position, the window in the extension would not correspond with the windows
   at the ground floor level below. Consequently, the first-floor extension would be an
   incongruous addition to the host dwelling which would erode the simple form and
   rural character of the converted barn, as well as the visual unity of the pair.
10. In drawing these conclusions, I acknowledge that the first floor extension would be
    located on the rear roof slope and would have limited public visibility given the site’s
    location down a private access track. Even so, it would still be visible from vantage
    points including from neighbouring gardens and the surrounding fields. In any case,
    a lack of public visibility does not override the need to create well-designed places.
    Indeed, policy DP3 of the Framework advises that developments should respond to



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011066


     their context so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings, including
     through architectural features.
11. Aside from the plans, I do not have the full planning background of the various
    developments relating to first floor extensions which are referred to by the appellant
    in order to give them significant weight in the appeal. From the evidence before me,
    the development shown in application reference 24/0894N is a more
    comprehensive extension to a dwelling which includes dormer windows which are
    smaller in scale and simpler in design than the appeal proposal. The development
    shown in application reference 24/0710M is also different because it does not
    appear to propose a single dormer window set within a roofslope. Overall, the
    schemes do not appear to be directly comparable and in any event, they do not
    alter my conclusions on the proposed first floor extension.
12. For the above reasons, the proposed first floor extension would be harmful to the
    character and appearance of the host dwelling and the surrounding area. It would
    conflict with policies SE1 and SD2 of the Cheshire East Local Plan Strategy 2010 –
    2030 (2017) (LPS) and policy GEN1 of the Cheshire East Site Allocations and
    Development Policies Document (2022) (SADPD). Amongst other matters, these
    require that development proposals are high-quality and make a positive
    contribution to their surroundings and the area’s character and identity including in
    terms of external design features. It would also be contrary to the objectives of the
    Framework in terms of providing high-quality places.
     Proposed Side Extension
13. Although the proposed side extension would occupy an off-centre position on the
    side elevation of the building, this would allow it to be setback from the front
    elevation of the host dwelling. The mono-pitched roof form would also deviate from
    the main roof form; however, this would not be prominent given its discreet location
    on the side and that the height of the extension would be limited to single storey. It
    would therefore be viewed as a subservient addition. Moreover, the window on the
    front of the extension would align with the windows on the ground floor of the front
    elevation. The materials to be used in the extension would also generally match
    those used at the host building. Accordingly, the side extension would be a
    sympathetic addition to the host dwelling which would not erode the simple form
    and rural character of the converted barns.
14. For the above reasons, the proposed side extension would not be harmful to the
    character and appearance of the host dwelling and the surrounding area. It would
    comply with the design objectives of policies SE1 and SD2 of the LPS and policy
    GEN1 of the SADPD, as well as the Framework. As the proposed side extension is
    clearly severable from the proposed first floor extension on the plans, a split
    decision would be a reasonable outcome for the appeal.
Other Matters
15. I am aware that the scheme has evolved and that the first floor extension has been
    redesigned following a previous application and discussion with the Council.
    However, although the efforts to secure a suitable scheme are recognised, this
    does not change my recommendation which is ultimately based on the plans on
    which the Council made its decision.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011066


16. I sympathise with the appellant in terms of their desire to provide additional space
    to meet their family’s needs and to stay in an area where the family are settled and
    have connections. However, personal circumstances such as this seldom outweigh
    general planning considerations and they do not in this case. I also note the
    benefits of the proposal in terms of improving the property, but there is little to
    suggest that without the first floor extension, the long-term use and efficiency of the
    building would be compromised.
17. Even if the appellant considers that the Council’s assessment in its officer report is
    contradictory, the Council’s reason in its decision notice is unambiguous in that it
    considers the proposal to be harmful in terms of character and appearance. In any
    event, it is clear to me that Green Belt considerations are starkly different to matters
    concerning good design. I have dealt with this as a main issue accordingly.
18. I also note that the proposal would not be inappropriate development in the Green
    Belt, that the Council identified no harm other than to character and appearance,
    and that no objections were received from neighbours. However, these are all
    neutral factors which do not weigh in favour of the appeal.
19. Finally, although the Parish Council support the proposal, albeit its support is not
    substantiated by any reasons, this does not outweigh the harm I have identified in
    terms of character and appearance.
Conditions
20. With regards to the part of the scheme that I have recommended should be
    allowed, the standard time limit and approved plans conditions are necessary in the
    interests of clarity and certainty. A materials condition is also necessary in the
    interests of the character and appearance of the area.
Conclusion and Recommendation
21. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I
    recommend that the appeal should be allowed in part and dismissed in part.

T Morris
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
22. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is subject to a split decision.

B Plenty
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
