Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 September 2026
by J Heppell BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011893
25 Essex Road, Dartford, Kent DA1 2AU
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of
     the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as
     amended).
•    The appeal is made by Mr Daniel Wardale against the decision of Dartford Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is DA/26/00001/PMA.
•    The development proposed is to change current day nursery space back to 1 x 4/5 bedroom house.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     Under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of the Town and Country
       Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended)
       (GPDO), planning permission is granted for development consisting of a change of
       use of a building and any land within its curtilage from a use falling within Class E
       (commercial, business and service) of Schedule 2 to the Use Classes Order to a
       use falling within Class C3 (dwellinghouses) of Schedule 1 to that Order.
       Limitations to the development permitted under Class MA are set out in GPDO
       paragraph MA.1. The Council found, and I have no reason to disagree, that the
       limitations in paragraph MA.1 were satisfied.
3.     The procedure for applications for prior approval under Part 3 is set out in GPDO
       paragraph W. Paragraph W(10)(b) requires that regard to be had to the National
       Planning Policy Framework (the Framework), so far as relevant to the subject
       matter of the prior approval, as if the application were a planning application.
       Following the submission of the appeal, the revised National Planning Policy
       Framework (Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. The main parties
       were afforded the opportunity to comment on the implications of the new
       Framework for the proposal.
Main Issues
4.     The Council refused prior approval because it considered that the impact of noise
       from commercial premises on the intended occupiers of the development had not
       been fully considered, and therefore it had not been demonstrated that living
       conditions for future occupiers would be acceptable. The Council further
       considered that the loss of the nursery and its impact on the local provision of
       registered nurseries had not been justified.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011893


5.     Consequently, the main issue in this appeal is whether the proposal would be
       granted planning permission by Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of
       the GPDO, with particular reference to the conditions at paragraphs MA.2(2)(d)
       and MA.2(2)(h).
Reasons
Noise from commercial premises
6.     The site is located in a mixed use area. The properties on the same side of the
       road appear to be mainly residential, but Dartford Working Men’s Club is located
       opposite the site, whilst Enterprise House diagonally opposite is used as offices. At
       the end of Essex Road there is a vacant nightclub.
7.     The appeal was accompanied by an external building fabric report which included
       noise readings taken over a three day period during the summer. The
       measurements were taken when the commercial premises were in operation and
       were used to devise noise mitigation measures. To achieve the required internal
       noise levels for bedrooms on affected facades, the report recommended the
       installation of glazing to a minimum specification in accordance with BS
       8233:2014, along with trickle ventilation. The report found that with the
       recommended mitigation measures installed, the required internal noise levels for
       a dwelling could be achieved.
8.     The Council did not query the report’s findings, and I am likewise satisfied that the
       report is robust and reliable. The Council questioned whether the required glazing
       and ventilation amounted to operational development which went beyond the
       scope of a prior approval application. However, as the affected facades have
       already had UPVC windows installed, upgrading the specification of the windows
       as proposed is unlikely to necessitate operational development.
9.     I conclude that noise from commercial premises would not have an unacceptable
       effect on the intended occupiers of the development, and the proposal therefore
       accords with paragraph MA.2(2)(d) of the GPDO. The proposal would moreover
       satisfy the requirement of Policy P3(2)(a) of the Framework to provide healthy
       living conditions for occupiers by avoiding exposure to levels of noise which could
       have an unacceptable adverse effect on health and the quality of life.
10. The Council referred in its reason for refusal to Policy M2 of The Dartford Plan:
    Dartford Borough Council’s Local Plan to 2037 Adopted April 2024 (DP). Whilst not
    determinative, I am satisfied that the requirements of the policy in relation to noise
    disturbance would be met.
Loss of nursery
11. Paragraph MA.2(2)(h) of the GPDO requires that where a registered nursery would
    be lost, the impact on the local provision of nurseries must be considered. This is
    reinforced by Policy HC6(1) of the Framework, which requires the loss of key
    community facilities to be avoided unless it can be demonstrated that there is no
    reasonable prospect of the use being retained, either due to insufficient community
    support or because it is no longer viable or feasible, or that there is sufficient
    alternative provision in the local area so that access to such facilities will not be
    diminished.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011893


12. The appellant highlighted that day nurseries fall within Class E (commercial,
    business and service) of the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order
    1997, which includes retail, food and drink, financial and professional services,
    indoor sport, medical services and offices. As such, the use of the building could
    change to any of these uses with no requirement to seek planning permission. I
    recognise that in such circumstances there would be no protection for a nursery.
    However, the proposal is to change the use to Class C3 (dwellinghouses) for
    which prior approval is required, and it is therefore necessary to consider the
    implications of the nursery’s loss in accordance with the GPDO’s provisions.
13. The Council referred to Policy M17 of the DP, which sets out the criteria to be
    applied when assessing the loss of community facilities. The policy requires clear
    evidence that the facility is not needed by the existing and future community, and
    that all reasonable efforts have been made to preserve the use, including exploring
    with operators and the local community whether the facility could be retained.
    Because development plan policies can be relevant as evidence insofar as they
    relate to the matter under appeal, it seems to me that meeting these policy
    requirements would be enough to satisfy Paragraph MA.2(2)(h) of the GPDO.
14. The appellant indicated that the nursery closed in March 2025 following the
    retirement of the owner, with limited demand, rising costs and increased
    competition from larger operators in the area all being factors in preventing it from
    reopening, and that residential use would prevent further deterioration of the
    building and secure its future with no adverse impacts on neighbours. Whilst I
    recognise that the nursery is no longer operating and therefore a new operator
    would need to be found, I have not been provided with a clear picture of nursery
    provision in the local area to allow a judgement to be made as to whether sufficient
    nursery provision remains. In the absence of such data, I cannot conclude that the
    loss of the facility would not impact adversely on nursery provision in the area.
15. I therefore conclude that the proposal would have a potentially harmful effect on
    nursery provision locally, contrary to paragraph MA.2(2)(h) of the GPDO. It would
    conflict with Policy HC6(1) of the Framework for the same reasons.
Other matters
16. The appellant referred to the benefits of providing additional housing on a
    brownfield site in a sustainable location, by reference to national and local
    planning policies. However, paragraph W(10)(b) of the GPDO requires regard to
    be had to the Framework only insofar as relevant to the subject matter of the prior
    approval, and the benefits of additional housing do not fall within the scope of the
    limitations and conditions set out in paragraphs MA.1 and MA.2 of the GPDO.
    Furthermore, the principle of development is established through the grant of
    permission by the Order and, whilst I have noted that development plan policies
    can be relevant as evidence insofar as they relate to the matter under appeal, local
    housing policies fall outside this scope.
Conclusion
17. For the reasons given above, the appeal should therefore be dismissed.

J Heppell
INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
