Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by E Heron MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011037
Marton House, 31 West Street, Padiham, Lancashire BB12 8JD
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Charles Riley against the decision of Burnley Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is PA/2026/0065.
•    The development proposed is Erection of new detached dwelling.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     In determining this appeal I have had regard to section 72(1) of the Planning
       (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) ACT 1990. This requires special regard
       to be paid to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or
       appearance of a conservation area.
3.     Since the determination of the application an updated and revised National
       Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026.
       The main parties have had the opportunity to provide comments on it in relation to
       these appeals. I have therefore considered the proposal against the relevant
       policies in the Framework.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are:
           •    The effect of the development on the character and appearance of the area,
                including whether the development would preserve or enhance the
                character or appearance of Padiham Conservation Area (the CA), and the
                effect on the significance of the non-designated heritage asset (NDHA); and
           •    The effect of the development on the living conditions of neighbouring
                occupiers with particular regard to outlook and light.
Reasons
Character and Appearance
Significance of Heritage Assets
5.     The appeal site is the garden of 31 West Street and occupies a corner position
       between West Street and Double Row. A high stone wall encloses the site and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011037


       directly fronts the aforementioned streets. It is within Character Area 7, “Back
       Streets”, of the CA, a designated heritage asset.
6.     The CA derives much of its significance from its irregular pre-industrial street
       pattern, later intensified through nineteenth-century development. “The scale,
       massing and strong building lines, enclose and emphasize the intimate winding
       street pattern and enrich the visual interest of the townscape”1. Nearby bungalows,
       and the more recently constructed dwelling (circa 2000), are largely in keeping
       with other parts of the CA2.
7.     31 West Street is an exception due to its scale, massing and orientation. However
       its size, and space around it, is reflective of the site’s historic function as a chapel
       with burial ground. The boundary wall remains a prominent and cohesive feature,
       regardless of whether sections along it have previously been rebuilt or repaired.
       Although the garage colony on Double Row contrasts with the harmonious
       features of the street scene, their small scale and loose arrangement emphasize
       the strongly cohesive qualities of the boundary wall and the space within the site.
8.     As a non-designated heritage asset, the wall reflects the historic pattern of
       development and forms an important part of the CA's established character. The
       garden is not designated as a ‘significant areas of open space/green space’3
       However, it is nonetheless enclosed by the wall and preserves a sense of
       spaciousness associated with the site's former use as a burial ground. These
       characteristics further enhance the NDHA’s heritage significance.
Effect of the proposal
9.     The side elevation of the dwelling would be built into the boundary wall along
       Double Row. It would be approximately 9.3 metres in length, extend significantly
       above the height of the adjoining sections of wall, and be topped by projecting
       eaves and a roof slope. From sweeping views around the site, it would be seen
       alongside the upper level of the entire dwelling, which would occupy a substantial
       proportion of the presently spacious site.
10. The dwelling's scale, siting and form would disrupt and dominate the simple form
    and continuity of the boundary wall, eroding the cohesive character of this part of
    West Street. Furthermore, the loss of spaciousness within the site would diminish
    its historic interest as a former burial ground.
11. The dwelling would be constructed in sympathetic walling and roofing materials.
    However, and despite being 1.5 storeys high and set on lowered ground, its
    elevated corner position adjacent to No 31 would result in a harmfully conspicuous
    presence. Its relationship with No 31 would emphasise the misalignment between
    the dwellings, creating a discordant pattern of development within an otherwise
    harmonious street scene. In addition, the extent of glazing associated with the
    Juliet balcony, positioned prominently within the rear gable, would accentuate the
    dwelling's visual prominence.
12. Whilst materials and detailing could be controlled by planning conditions and the
    access widening would not itself harm significance, these matters would not


1
  Padiham Conservation Area Appraisal June 2020.
2
  Para 4.2 Heritage Statement (February 2026)
3
  Townscape Analysis Map


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           2
Appeal Decision 6011037


         overcome the identified harm arising from the scale, siting and form of the
         dwelling.
    13. The proposal would be a conspicuous and harmful addition to the street scene and
        would result in a low level of harm to the significance of the CA. This takes account
        of the small scale of the development relative to the CA’s extent. It also takes
        account of the requirement to retain and conserve buildings and other features
        which make a positive contribution to the character or appearance of the CA4.
14. The proposal would result in a moderately high scale of harm to the significance of
    the NDHA. This is due to the extent of disruption to its form, and the harmfully
    deleterious effect upon its historic interest.
Public Benefits and Heritage Balance
15. Policy HE6 of the Framework establishes that any harm to a designated heritage
    asset will be a matter of considerable importance and weight. The harmful effect
    on the asset and its significance should be weighed against any public benefits of
    the proposal. Policy HE7 establishes that where the significance of a NDHA is
    harmed, this should be weighed against the benefits of the proposal, and a
    balanced judgment made, having regard to the scale of any harm or loss and the
    significance of the NDHA.
16. The proposal would deliver a new dwelling within a Key Service Centre, and Policy
    SP4 of Burnley’s Local Plan encourages a variety of smaller sites to deliver a
    comprehensive range of choice of types and tenures. Additionally, modest
    economic and social benefits would derive from employment opportunities during
    construction, and during occupation of the dwelling. I attribute moderate weight to
    the provision of an additional dwelling in a sustainable location, and limited weight
    to the associated economic and social benefits.
17. The proposal is described as a self-build dwelling, and such housing would
    diversify the market and increase consumer choice. However, there is no evidence
    of an unmet need for self-build or custom-build housing, which this proposal would
    address. For this reason, and the limited extent of the development, I afford this
    matter limited weight.
18. Whilst the harm to the CA would be low, considerable importance and weight
    attaches to its conservation. Furthermore, the proposal would result in a
    moderately high level of harm to the significance of the NDHA. Taken together,
    these heritage harms outweigh the public benefits arising from the development,
    including the moderate benefit associated with the delivery of an additional
    dwelling in a sustainable location.
19. For these reasons, I conclude that the development would harm the character and
    appearance of the area, it would fail to preserve the character or appearance of
    the CA, and it would harm the significance of the NDHA. As such, the
    development would conflict with the relevant provisions of Policies HE2 and HE3
    of Burnley’s Local Plan. Amongst other things, the policies seek to avoid harm to
    designated heritage assets, favour retention of non-designated heritage assets,
    and require development to respect layout and historic patterns of development.


4
    Policy HE9 of the Framework.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011037


20. There would also be conflict with Policy HE4 of the Framework, as no clear and
    convincing justification for the arising harm has been identified.
Living Conditions
21. Policy HS4 of Burnley’s Local Plan requires new housing development to provide
    appropriate levels of privacy and outlook for occupants and for existing adjacent
    residents. Unless an alternative approach is justified, it applies a privacy distance
    of no less than 15 metres where windows of habitable rooms face a blank gable or
    windows serving non-habitable rooms. The Council references a distance of 20
    metres. However, I am satisfied that the guidance distance of 15 metres is justified
    in this instance. This is due to the presence of the intervening wall preventing
    overlooking between directly facing windows and giving the impression of a blank
    gable.
22. Three dwellings within a terrace on West Street directly face the appeal site, and
    the occupiers have an open aspect outlook across the site, above the height of the
    wall. Whilst I find that the relationship acceptable in terms of privacy, outlook is a
    separate consideration.
23. The proposed dwelling would be set back behind the boundary wall, but its visible
    elements would be less than 15 metres from the terrace row. The upper gable
    walling would be a significant presence, dominating the outlook in particular, from
    the windows serving the end terrace dwelling. Such interface distances are not
    uncommon within the locality, and I recognise that some Council’s refer to different
    guidelines. However, there would be a moderately harmful overbearing effect upon
    the occupants living conditions, particularly in the context of the outlook that is
    currently enjoyed.
24. The proposed dwelling would be located to the east of the terrace row. Given its
    relationship with the terrace, its height and massing, I am not persuaded that it
    would result in a harmful loss of daylight or morning sunlight. The submitted
    elevation drawing indicates that the dwelling would sit well below a 25° line
    measured from the centre of a window in the existing terrace. Whilst the Council
    contends that the orientation and spacing would reduce morning sunlight,
    particularly in winter, no substantive evidence has been provided to support this
    view. I therefore conclude that the proposal would not result in a harmful loss of
    daylight or sunlight.
25. Nevertheless, I conclude that the development would result in moderate harm to
    the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers, with particular regard to outlook. In
    this regard, the proposal conflicts with the relevant provisions of Policies SP4, SP5
    and HS4 of the Local Plan. So far as they are relevant to this matter, the policies
    require development to safeguard the amenities of residential occupiers.
Other Matters
26. There is no archaeological concern arising from the ground disturbance of the
    former burial ground, and I have found that the proposal would not result in a loss
    of daylight or sunlight to the extent that it would harm the living conditions of
    neighbouring occupiers. I also find that the widening of the access would have a
    neutral effect on the significance of the CA. These matters weigh neither for nor
    against the proposal.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6011037


27. The appellant’s stance is that a planning condition would be an appropriate means
    of securing the dwelling as self-build or custom-build, citing an example5.
    However, I am mindful that there is nothing before me from the Council to indicate
    whether this would be a suitably robust mechanism to secure this form of
    development. As this is not a determinative factor in my decision, I have not
    pursued this matter further with the parties.
Planning Balance
28. The identified heritage harm attracts substantial weight in the overall planning
    balance. The moderate harm to neighbouring living conditions weighs further
    against the proposal.
    29. Given the site’s location within a settlement, Policy S4 of the Framework
        establishes that development should be approved unless the benefits of doing so
        would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects. It specifies amongst
        other criteria, that this includes development within residential curtilages where the
        proposal fails to conform to Policy L2 (1) (d) of the Framework. It also refers to
        other national decision-making policies which state that proposals should be
        refused in specific circumstances.
30. My findings above regarding the effect on the street scene and heritage assets
    also indicate that the proposal would fail to comply with Policy L2 (1) (d) of the
    Framework. The appellant has referred me to Policy DP3 of the Framework,
    however for reasons outlined in my decision, and in the absence of clear
    justification, the development also fails to comply with paragraph 1 of this policy.
    This requires development to integrate with and enhance surroundings amongst
    other things. Paragraph 3 of Policy DP3 advises that in such circumstances,
    development proposals should be refused. I consider these conflicts with the
    Framework policies to be a significant adverse factor within the planning balance.
31. Against these matters, I have found that the proposal would provide a moderate
    benefit through the delivery of an additional dwelling in a sustainable location,
    together with limited economic and social benefits arising from its construction and
    occupation. However, taken as a whole, these benefits are substantially
    outweighed by the identified heritage and amenity harms.
Conclusion
32. For the reasons given above, the proposal conflicts with the development plan as
    a whole and the material considerations, including the Framework, do not indicate
    that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it. The appeal
    should therefore be dismissed.



E Heron
INSPECTOR




5
    Suggested conditions; decision notice and officer report: FUL/2025/0254 and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  5
