Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by J Buxton BA(Hons) DipArch ARB RIBA
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 4 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011027
The Rising Rest Home, Primrose Lane, Simmondley, Glossop SK13 6LW
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mrs Julie Townsley of The Rising Care Home Company Limited against the
     decision of High Peak Borough Council.
•    The application reference is HPK/2025/0423.
•    The development proposed is single storey extension to residential care home.


Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Background and Main Issue
2.     During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published on the 17 August 2026. Whilst the format has altered,
       any considerations that are material to this decision have not fundamentally
       changed. I am satisfied that this has not prejudiced either party and I have had
       regard to the latest version in reaching my decision.
3.     Whilst concerns have been raised by neighbouring occupiers regarding residential
       amenity, highway safety and access arrangements, these matters do not form part of
       the Council's reason for refusal. Having regard to the evidence before me, I do not
       find that they would give rise to unacceptable harm. Accordingly, these matters are
       not determinative of the appeal, and I have focused my assessment on the effect of
       the proposal on the character and appearance of the host building and surrounding
       area.
4.     In light of the above, the main issue is the effect of the proposed side extension on
       the character and appearance of the host building and the surrounding area.
Reasons
5.     The appeal property is an established care home and is a large stone detached
       building within a predominantly residential setting. The appeal building is noticeably
       larger than the properties to either side of the site, which are a mix of bungalows and
       two-storey dwelling houses. At present, a landscaped buffer along the side of the
       building provides visual separation between the care home and the adjacent
       residential use. The generous garden areas of both the host building and its
       immediate neighbours make a positive contribution to the open and verdant
       character of the area.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011027


6.     The proposed extension would be located within this landscaped buffer and would
       comprise a single-storey side extension providing additional communal space,
       sanitary and ancillary facilities for residents, together with office space. The
       expansion of the communal living space would be likely to improve the living
       conditions of residents and the day to day running of the home. In providing these
       benefits the appeal scheme would also make efficient use of the land.
7.     However, the form and design of the proposed extension would fail to respond
       positively to the architectural character of the existing building. In particular, the dual-
       pitched roof arrangement results in a roof form that lacks a clear architectural
       relationship with the host building and appears awkward in its composition. As a
       result, rather than being read as a natural continuation of the existing built form, it
       would appear as an incongruous extension.
8.     Furthermore, during my site visit I observed that the existing building is readily visible
       from Primrose Lane and Sunny Banks. Although the site lies at a lower level than
       Primrose Lane and benefits from some boundary planting, the building remains
       clearly perceptible in public views. In this context, the proposed extension would
       noticeably increase the width of the building, particularly when approaching along
       Sunny Banks, resulting in a more dominant and visually intrusive form of
       development. Also, from the access serving the site, the extension would appear as
       an awkward addition to the side of the building, reinforcing my concerns regarding its
       poor integration with the host property.
9.     The proposed fenestration would further contribute to this disjointed appearance.
       The openings would not follow the established rhythm or proportions of the existing
       building and would fail to reflect the detailing evident elsewhere on the property.
       When considered as a whole, the relationship between the windows, walling and
       varying roof slopes would create a poor arrangement of elements that would sit
       uncomfortably alongside the appeal building. Whilst matching materials are
       proposed, material continuity would not overcome my concerns regarding the
       disjointed nature of the proposal, particularly in respect of its scale, detailing and roof
       design. These factors result in a development that does not integrate with or
       enhance either the host building or its surroundings, and therefore fails to respond
       appropriately to the established character and appearance of the area. The adverse
       effects in this regard would be substantial and would outweigh the benefits identified
       above.
10. I acknowledge the appellant’s submission that the scheme was amended during the
    application process, including that the width of the extension was reduced. I also
    recognise that the ridge height would remain below that of the main building.
    However, these amendments do not overcome my concerns regarding the design,
    the scale of the footprint and its overall relationship with the existing building.
11. As part of my assessment, I have had regard to the Council's supplementary design
    guidance, including the High Peak Design Guide, which advises that extensions
    should remain subordinate to the host building and recognises that a point may be
    reached where further enlargement becomes harmful to a building's character. In
    this case, whilst the height of the extension would be subordinate, its sizeable plan
    form and lack of a coherent relationship with the design of the existing care home
    would result in a form of development that would appear out of scale with the host
    building and would detract from its overall composition.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011027


12. For the reasons given above, the appeal proposal would fail to respond positively to
    the design and form of the existing care home. Accordingly, I conclude that the
    appeal proposal would harm the character and appearance of the host building and
    the surrounding area. As such, it would conflict with Policies S1 and EQ6 of the High
    Peak Borough Council Local Plan (2016), which seek, amongst other things, to
    secure high quality development that responds positively to local character and
    contributes to local distinctiveness.
Other Matters
13. In reaching my decision, I have had regard to the appeal site's proximity to the St
    James Conservation Area (SJCA) and to the statutory duty under Section 72(1) of
    the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990, which requires
    special attention to be paid to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the
    character or appearance of conservation areas. I note that the Council raised no
    heritage objection to the proposal and concluded that, due to the separation distance
    between the appeal site and the conservation area, together with the presence of
    intervening development, landscaping and changes in land levels, the proposal
    would not affect its significance. I have no reason to disagree with that assessment
    and therefore find that the proposal would preserve the character and appearance of
    the SJCA.
14. I have considered the appellant's submissions regarding operational requirements
    and the need for additional communal, sanitary and staff facilities. I recognise the
    important role played by the care home and the benefits that improved facilities could
    provide for residents, staff and visitors. I also note the evidence regarding infection
    control, accessibility improvements and enhanced facilities for residents. These
    considerations weigh significantly in favour of the proposal.
15. Whilst I note that the proposed layout has been developed to meet the operational
    requirements of the care home, the fact that a design may successfully fulfil a
    functional purpose does not necessarily mean that it represents good design in
    planning terms. In this regard, I find that the operational requirements of the
    business have resulted in an extension whose scale and form fail to respond
    appropriately to the existing building.
16. Whilst concerns have been raised by local residents regarding highway safety and
    access arrangements, the Council has not identified any conflict with development
    plan policies in this regard and there is insufficient evidence before me to conclude
    that the proposal would result in unacceptable highway safety impacts.
Conclusion
17. Whilst I attach significant weight to the operational benefits that would arise from the
    provision of improved facilities for residents and staff, these benefits do not outweigh
    the harm I have identified to the character and appearance of the host building and
    the surrounding area. For the reasons given above, the appeal is dismissed.

J Buxton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
