Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by Richard Snow BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 07 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011373
202 Mansfield Road, Selston, Nottinghamshire NG16 6BB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by David James against the decision of Ashfield District Council.
•    The application Ref is V/2026/0010.
•    The development proposed is construction of new dormer bungalow.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Application for costs
2.     An application for costs was made by David James against Ashfield District
       Council. This application is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matter
3.     On 17 August 2026 a new National Planning Policy Framework (‘the Framework’)
       was issued replacing the version of the Framework published in December 2024.
       The parties were invited to comment and the comments received have been taken
       into account in the determination of the appeal.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue for the appeal is the effect of the proposed development on the
       character and appearance of the area.
Reasons
5.     The appeal site consists of land forming part of the garden of 202 Mansfield Road,
       a single storey property positioned towards the rear of its curtilage. The site is
       located at the junction of Mansfield Road and Portland Road and is highly
       prominent as a consequence. From a high point adjacent to 2a Portland Road,
       land levels across the site fall generally towards Mansfield Road.
6.     The Mansfield Road frontage consists primarily of two-storey properties flanking
       the south-eastern side of the road. As a bungalow set well back from the road
       frontage, no 202 is, in these respects, an anomaly in the street scene.
7.     The south-western side of Portland Road contains a variety of chalet-bungalows
       and two-storey houses, generally set below road level behind extensive roadside
       trees and hedging. A substantial area of open space flanks the opposite side of the
       road, creating a spacious, open character along the road and around its junction

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011373


       with Mansfield Road. This open character is furthered by the properties around the
       junction being set-back from the road frontages, and the undeveloped nature of
       the appeal site itself.
8.     The Jacksdale, Underwood, Selston Tomorrow (JUS-t) Neighbourhood Plan
       (2017-2032) (the NP), describes the character of Selston as being formed by two-
       storey brick-built houses set in short terraces or as semis and notes that
       bungalows do not reflect local character. Development is identified as being
       arranged in perimeter blocks with buildings fronting the street, and gardens
       contained to the rear. The NP identifies that lines of sight play a strong role in
       defining street characters and identifies Portland Road specifically as an example.
       Policy NP2 of the NP specifies that development should respect local character. It
       confirms that in Selston, development should, amongst other things, reinforce the
       existing street pattern and long sight lines.
9.     The proposed dwelling would be sited forward of no 202, closer to both the
       Mansfield Road and Portland Road frontages. The property would be a split-level
       dwelling, with accommodation across three levels including within the roof space
       where two flat roofed dormer windows would face Mansfield Road. To its rear,
       much of the site would accommodate a large parking and manoeuvring area, with
       the property’s garden being located to the front.
10. In views of the appeal site from Mansfield Road around the road junction, the
    proposed dwelling would be an incongruous addition to the street scene as a
    consequence of its siting and proximity to the Portland Road frontage. Its
    prominence on the corner would detract from the open character around the
    junction.
11. In views along Portland Road towards Mansfield Road, the proposal would extend
    beyond the established building line, interrupting the line of sight along the road
    and would be an obtrusive incursion into the street scene. The proposed low
    boundary treatment along the Portland Road frontage of the site would open up
    views of the proposed property along the street scene and the dwelling would be a
    prominent and incongruous addition to it, harming the open character of the road
    approaching the junction.
12. As a consequence of the above, the siting and alignment of the proposal would
    neither reflect the predominant characters of Mansfield Road or Portland Road
    described above.
13. The appellant relies heavily on the screening afforded by a boundary hedge, which
    currently encloses the site on both road frontages to lessen the visual impact of
    the proposed dwelling. However, the long-term retention and maintenance of this
    hedgerow could not be assured with any certainty and the proposal includes the
    removal of sections along the Portland Road frontage. Given the proposed
    dwelling’s close proximity to the hedge, it is likely that future occupiers would seek
    to reduce its height to improve outlook and amenity space. I am accordingly not
    persuaded that this feature justifies the inappropriate siting described above. It is
    suggested that the dwelling is positioned as proposed as there is nowhere else on
    the site it could be located. Given my concerns above, I do not find this a
    convincing reason to allow the appeal.
14. Whilst the appellant advances that design detailing, including materials and the
    ridge height may be reflective of nearby properties, these matters do not overcome

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011373


       my concerns in respect of its incongruous siting. The absence of concerns
       regarding the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers, parking and access
       arrangements, the retention of trees and lack of technical objections are all neutral
       factors in the decision.
15. Examples of other development approved by the council have been provided by
    the appellant. It is suggested that these demonstrate inconsistencies in decision
    making and that the council has, in these other cases, allowed development where
    openness would be affected. I have limited details of these cases before me and
    insufficient information to determine whether they constitute directly comparable
    cases. I cannot therefore attribute them positive weight in favour of the appeal.
16. Taking account of all of the above, the proposal would be contrary to the defining
    characteristics of Selston set out in the NP as described above and would present
    as an overly prominent and incongruous addition to both the Mansfield Road and
    Portland Road street scenes, detracting from the openness of the junction and the
    open sight lines along Portland Road. As such, the proposal would unacceptably
    and significantly harm the character and appearance of the area and therefore
    conflicts with Policy NP2 of the NP and Policies ST1 (a and b) and HG5 of the
    Ashfield Local Plan Review (2002) (the ALPR) which collectively confirm that
    development will be permitted where it would not adversely affect the character
    and quality of the environment and where its design is acceptable in terms of
    appearance, scale and siting.
Other Matters
17. The proposal would provide benefits to the local economy during the construction
    phase and would deliver a family dwelling on a small site within an existing
    settlement. These benefits attract weight in favour of the proposal.
18. In evidence, the appellant rehearses the planning history of the site and the
    evolution of the current proposals whilst expressing frustration with the council’s
    pre-application advice. Such matters are for the appellant and council to resolve
    and do not form part of my consideration of this appeal which I have assessed on
    the merits of the proposal before me.
Planning Balance
19. I have found that the proposal would conflict with Policies ST1 and HG5 of the
    ALPR and Policy NP2 of the NP. These policies are generally consistent with the
    Framework in so far as it seeks well-designed places which are visually attractive
    and sympathetic to local character. Therefore, the conflict with these policies
    should be given significant weight in this appeal.
20. Policy S4 of the Framework sets out that development proposals within
    settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework.
21. Policy DP3.1 of the Framework confirms that proposals should respond to their
    context so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings; such as
    through the arrangement of buildings. For the reasons above, the proposal would
    fail to respond appropriately to its surroundings and therefore conflicts with this
    policy of the Framework. Policy DP3.3 confirms that development proposals


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011373


       should be refused if, without clear justification, they conflict with paragraph 1 of
       Policy DP3 and that substantial weight should be given to compliance with relevant
       development plan policies when assessing the design quality of proposals. In
       these circumstances, Policy S4.2 of the Framework confirms that the benefits of
       approving development are likely to be substantially outweighed by adverse
       effects.
22. Taking all of the above into account, I find that the benefits of the proposal would
    be substantially outweighed by its adverse effects when assessed against the
    decision-making policies of the Framework. As such, Policy S4 of the Framework
    does not point to permission being granted in this instance.
Conclusion
23. For the reasons given above, the proposal conflicts with the development plan as
    a whole and there are no material considerations, including the Framework, that
    indicate that a decision should be made other than in accordance with it. I
    therefore conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.



Richard Snow
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
