Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 1 September 2026
by H Miles BA (hons), MA, MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 11th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011106
Fairhaven, Bellwether Lane, Outwood, Surrey RH1 5QD
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mrs Sarah Bettell against the decision of Tandridge District Council.
•    The application Ref is TA/2026/245.
•    The development proposed is alterations to existing single storey side roof with new pitched roof
     over along with conversion of garage into at home hair salon with internal alterations and changes to
     windows and doors as well as new front porch.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issues
2.     The main issues are:
       •    Whether the proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt
            having regard to the National Planning Policy Framework 2026 (the
            Framework) and any relevant development plan policies.
       •    The effect of the proposal on the openness and purposes of the Green Belt.
       •    Whether any harm by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm, would
            be clearly outweighed by other considerations, so as to amount to the very
            special circumstances required to justify the proposal.
Reasons
Whether inappropriate development
3.     The Framework states that inappropriate development is, by definition, harmful to
       the Green Belt. Development in the Green Belt is inappropriate and thus should be
       approved only if very special circumstances exist, unless it falls within one of the
       categories in the Framework.
4.     Of relevance to this appeal, policy GB7(1) (b). of the Framework provides an
       exception for the extension or alteration of an existing building provided that it
       does not result in disproportionate increase in size compared to the original
       building. This is broadly echoed by Policy DP13 of the Tandridge Local Plan Part
       2: Detailed Policies (2014) (LP).
5.     The original permission for Fairhaven was approved in 1959 and appears to have
       been a modest single storey bungalow with a pitched roof. The property has been
       subsequently altered and extended and planning permission was approved in

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011106


       1973 for the extension to garage and addition of covered way and 2 bedrooms and
       in 1989 for an extended lounge. The Council state that following this permission
       the extensions had added 72% to the volume and 77% to the footprint of the
       original dwelling and this is not disputed.
6.     The proposed development seeks planning permission for works including an
       increase in volume to the existing flat roof side addition though the addition of
       pitched roofs. The proposed addition would adjoin the existing roof to extend the
       pitched roof across the full width of the property. The proposals also include an
       addition to the front elevation with a pitched roof above a covered porch area.
7.     Green Belt policy requires consideration of the original building, which in this case
       is not the same as the existing building. There is no specific limit to the size of an
       extension which the Council consider to be disproportionate. Nevertheless, in this
       case the appeal proposal would increase the volume and height of the building to
       extend across its full width. Together with the existing extensions, the proposed
       additions would result in a marked increase in bulk and massing to the property
       This would result in a considerable increase in size compared to the original
       building and would be a disproportionate addition.
8.     As such, for the reasons described above, the appeal scheme is inappropriate
       development in the Green Belt both in the terms of the Framework and Policy
       DP13 of the LP, the aims of which are set out above.
Openness and purposes
9.     Openness has both spatial and visual dimensions. The proposed development
       would evidently increase the size of the dwelling and would result in development
       in an area above ground floor level which is currently open. There is fencing to the
       side boundaries with some plants above. Nevertheless, the increased bulk at roof
       level and the proposed porch would be likely to be visible through this, moreover, it
       would be clearly apparent from the road. Therefore, the proposed development
       would be harmful to openness.
10. In terms of the Green Belt purposes, given its scale and context the appeal
    scheme would not encroach into the open countryside or result in sprawl and
    would not conflict with any other purposes of the Green Belt. However, the lack of
    an effect on Green Belt purposes would be a neutral matter and the harm to
    openness and by reason of it being inappropriate development remains.
11. Consequently, for the reasons above, the proposed development would be harmful
    to the openness of the Green Belt. As such, it would be contrary to the Framework
    in this regard.
Other Matters
12. The existing flat roof addition is visually subservient to the existing dwelling and is
    not harmful to the appearance of Fairhaven. The proposed extension would be
    appropriate within the residential streetscene, small relative to the existing building
    and would not be prominent in the surrounding landscape. There is no objection to
    its appearance. The lack of harm in this regard would be a neutral factor.
13. The proposal would result in improved accommodation, including an at home hair
    salon at this property and the social and economic benefits associated with this.
    However, these would mainly be for the existing occupiers. Taking into account the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011106


       scale of the development, overall, the benefits are afforded limited weight in this
       case.
14. There are a number of other houses which I understand have been extended in
    the nearby area. However, generally, nearby properties are not uniform in scale or
    appearance and I do not have evidence that satisfies me that the size of any
    additions relative to the original building, or any other detail of these properties, are
    similar to those before me now. As such, they do not alter my decision.
Green Belt Balance
15. The proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt which is, by
    definition, harmful. There is also harm to the Green Belt due to the effect on
    openness. Substantial weight should be given to the harm to the Green Belt which
    would be caused. Very special circumstances will not exist unless the harm to the
    Green Belt by reason of inappropriateness and any other harm is clearly
    outweighed by other considerations.
16. On the other hand, the proposed development results in the limited benefits
    identified above. Consequently, the other considerations, even when considered
    together, do not clearly outweigh the totality of the harm. The very special
    circumstances necessary to justify the development therefore do not exist. As such
    the proposal conflicts with the Framework and Policy DP13 of the LP as set out
    above.
Conclusion
17. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    Therefore, for the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

H Miles
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
