Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by Andrew Fuller BSc (Hons), Dip TP, MA, MRTPI, IHBC
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1 September 2026.


Appeal Ref: 6011804
3 Herbert Road, Aldridge, Walsall WS9 8JR
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Luke Yates against the decision of Walsall Metropolitan Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/1409.
•    The development proposed is for first-floor side and rear extensions above the existing ground-floor
     footprint, formation of a rear dormer and installation of front rooflights (permitted development),
     removal of chimney, and associated external and internal alterations.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for first-floor side and
       rear extensions above the existing ground-floor footprint, formation of a rear
       dormer and installation of front rooflights, removal of chimney, and associated
       external and internal alterations at 3 Herbert Road, Aldridge, Walsall WS9 8JR in
       accordance with the terms of the application reference 25/1409, subject to the
       conditions set out in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The description of development in the banner above is taken from the application
       form and the appellant has continued to use this description in this appeal. The
       Council amended the description, including, amongst other things, removing
       reference to permitted development and the front roof lights. As the appeal is to be
       allowed, the front roof lights are authorised as part of this planning permission, and
       I do not need to consider whether these are permitted development or otherwise. I
       have therefore removed this reference from my formal decision here.
3.     The Council does not object to the proposed rear dormer, rooflights, removal of
       chimney, or other alterations. From my site visit these elements of the proposal
       would assimilate to an acceptable standard with the building. As such, I have no
       reason to reach a different conclusion, and I have not considered this matter
       further in my assessment below.
4.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published on 17 August 2026. The changes to the Framework do not affect the
       merits of this case in a material way and I, therefore, have not consulted the
       parties with regard to these changes.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011804


Main Issues
5.     The main issues are:
       •   the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of the
           building and the surrounding area; and

       •   the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of neighbouring
           occupiers, with particular regard to outlook, privacy, sunlight, and daylight.
Reasons
       Character and appearance
6.     The appeal site comprises a two-storey, end of terrace property. It has been
       extended at ground floor to the front, side and rear, and has had rendering and
       cladding applied to various elevations. Whilst the original form of the terrace is still
       evident, its uniformity has been altered with various adaptions and alterations. The
       surrounding area comprises a broad mix of terraced and semi-detached houses
       and bungalows, as well as two-storey blocks of flats. Being located towards the
       end of Herbert Road, the site is also visible from a number of limited points
       between properties along Walton Road and Northgate.
7.     The appeal development seeks to extend the house at first floor to the side and
       rear. It would be set back from the front elevation, set lower than the main ridge
       line, and form a slightly splayed angle to the side boundary. Its scale and form
       would introduce a modest addition on the approach towards the front of the
       property from the junction with Walton Road. Moreover, when experiencing the
       entire composition of the terrace, the recessed position of the first-floor extension
       would appear subordinate and would fall outside of many views. From the rear, the
       extension would be glimpsed between the built form along Northgate where it
       would not be prominent nor would it greatly alter the street scene.
8.     The roof of the extension would be a typical gable form albeit running at a slight
       angle to the boundary and partially fused with the existing house. Despite its
       asymmetry, this would not be prominent other than to neighbouring residents of
       Nos 30 and 32 Walton Road. From the perspective of these neighbours, the
       angled form would largely be experienced from the side and appear simple from
       this perspective.
9.     In making my decision, I have had regard to the Designing Walsall Supplementary
       Planning Document for Urban Design (Revised 2013) (Design SPD). It requires
       development to be designed to respect and enhance local identity. On my site visit
       I saw the combination of hipped and gabled roofs and other side extensions and
       alterations to dwellings that form a diverse mix of design that define the areas local
       character and residential identity. When viewed obliquely along Herbert Road the
       proposed development reflects the domestic character of the housing estate with
       its various phases of development, property types and subsequent alterations.
10. Overall, I conclude that the proposed development would not harm the character
    and appearance of the building or the surrounding area. As such, I find no conflict
    with Policies GP2 and ENV32 of the Walsall Unitary Development Plan (Saved
    policies) (2005) (Saved UDP). Together these policies, amongst other things, seek
    development to respond to their context and surroundings and not to have an
    unacceptable adverse impact on visual appearance.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011804


11. The Council's reasons for refusal concerning living conditions (addressed below)
    cited Policy ENV3 of the Black Country Core Strategy (2011) (Core Strategy). This
    policy relates to matters of design quality. Nevertheless, I find no conflict with
    Policy ENV3 insofar as it relates to character and appearance.
12. My attention has also been drawn to Policy ENV2 of the Core Strategy which
    seeks to protect and promote the special qualities, historic character and local
    distinctiveness of the Black Country in order to help maintain its cultural identity
    and strong sense of place. This policy has some limited relevance, but given that
    the proposed development does not impact on any heritage assets, it does not
    alter my conclusion on this main issue.
       Living conditions of neighbouring occupiers
       No 5 Herbert Road
13. The proposal would form a rear first floor extension over the existing single-storey
    rear extension, extending backwards as far as the rear line of that extension.
    Moreover, it would be inset away from the common boundary with the attached
    neighbour at No 5 Herbert Road, with the immediate section of the proposed
    development towards this neighbour having a flat roof.
14. No 5 has rear facing first floor habitable room windows, of which the closest to the
    appeal property benefits from a relatively uninterrupted outlook towards the rear.
    There is no dispute between the main parties that the extension would extend
    beyond a line taken at 45-degrees from the quarter point of this nearest window,
    as set out in the Numerical Guidelines for Residential Development in Appendix D
    of the Design SPD. However, the extension would only marginally exceed this line
    and would have a limited effect on the existing outlook from this window.
15. As guidance, I find the Design SPD helpful in gauging the proximity and depth of
    proposed extensions with regards outlook. However, in considering the 45-degree
    code, I note the size of the window affected, and its wide and generous outlook. I
    also note the flat roof incorporated into the design of the proposed extension,
    which would limit the scale of the proposal on the outlook of this window.
16. The rear elevation of the terrace faces southwest and the existing single-storey
    extension at the appeal property sits towards the boundary with No 5. As such, this
    existing structure extends west of an area of No 5’s garden space, thereby limiting
    light, specifically sunlight mostly during the late evening of the summer months, to
    a small area of garden space close to this house.
17. The proposed first floor extension, being set away from the boundary, will only
    very slightly increase this overshadowing. The majority of No 5’s garden would
    continue to be unaffected, including other areas across the rear aspect of the
    house where occupants could be expected to most likely sit and enjoy the garden.
       Nos 30 and 32 Walton Road
18. Neighbouring properties at No 30 and 32 Walton Road consist of a pair of semi-
    detached bungalows that back onto the appeal properties side boundary. Sat at a
    slightly lower level than the appeal site, they have rear habitable room windows
    facing towards the appeal site, along with a single-storey extension to the rear of
    No 30. They each have modest, but adequately proportioned, rear private
    gardens.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011804


19. The proposed first floor extension would form a two-storey blank elevation to the
    rear of the gardens of these bungalows. Whilst I note the 13m separation distance
    advocated in the Design SPD, there is a dispute between the main parties over
    what the exact separation distance would be across these gardens. However, the
    separation distance does not differ significantly from the requirements of the
    Design SPD and the splayed angle of the proposed extension would deflect the
    overall scale and massing so that the outlook would not be oppressive.
20. The proposed development would be positioned between Nos 30 and 32 and
    would extend across only a limited part of each of the rear boundaries of each
    property. This would leave clear areas of daylight and sunlight to still reach these
    properties and their respective gardens. As such, whilst an element of
    overshadowing could not be avoided as a result of some loss of sunlight, this
    would only be to a limited area of each garden.
       No 208 Northgate
21. To the rear of the property, fronting Northgate, is a two-storey block of flats. The
    majority of this building is off-set to the side, however the slight angle in the plot
    formation aligns the first floor flat, at No 208, broadly with the rear corner of the
    appeal site. Currently the occupants of No 208 have an acceptable degree of
    privacy afforded by distance from the appeal property.
22. The proposed first floor extension would bring the appeal property closer to this
    neighbouring flat and within the separation distance advocated between facing
    properties as set out within the Design SPD. Whilst it is considered that the
    standard should be applied more robustly to the rear of properties, the reduction in
    separation is limited and there are numerous established trees offering dense
    screening between the properties, particularly during summer months.
23. Whilst there would be less screening during winter months, the angle in the plot
    formation, would direct the proposed first floor windows towards the bottom of the
    appeal properties garden rather than directly towards No 208. Therefore, should
    tree cover be diminished, or entirely lost, an acceptable degree of privacy would
    still be maintained across what would otherwise still be a generous separation.
24. Overall, I conclude that the proposed development would not harm the living
    conditions of neighbouring occupiers, with particular regard to outlook, privacy
    sunlight and daylight. As such, I find no conflict with, Policies GP2 and ENV32 of
    the Saved UDP. Together these policies, amongst other things, seek development
    not to have an unacceptable adverse impact on outlook, loss of privacy, and the
    effect of daylight and sunlight received by nearby properties.
Other Matters
25. My attention has been drawn to the site’s planning history, including previous
    proposals in a similar location. These former applications were for different
    proposals that did not reflect the same impacts on character and appearance and
    living conditions and therefore are not directly comparable with the scheme before
    me. Furthermore, interested parties have also raised concerns in relation to
    existing extensions not being built in line with the approved plans. These former
    developments fall outside of the main issues under consideration as part of this
    appeal and therefore would not lead me to an alternative conclusion on the main
    issues above.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6011804


26. Loss of views, impact on wellbeing and property values have been brought to my
    attention. There is no dispute between the Council and appellant on these matters,
    and I note that I have dealt with views in my assessment of character and
    appearance as well as in my assessment of living conditions above. Moreover, I
    have no substantive evidence before me with regards the impact of the
    development on wellbeing and property values that would lead me to an
    alternative conclusion.
27. Representations were made to the effect that a neighbouring occupier is elderly. I
    have therefore had due regard to the Public Sector Equality Duty (PSED) set out in
    the Equality Act 2010. This sets out the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination,
    harassment and victimisation, and to advance equality of opportunity and foster
    good relations between people who share a protected characteristic and people
    who do not share it. Wider planning considerations are paramount but
    nevertheless the effects of the proposed development in this location is a matter to
    which I give moderate weight in assessing the proposal.
28. I have found above that the proposed development would not result in poor
    outlook, loss of privacy or daylight/sunlight to the neighbouring property and
    therefore that the occupier would not suffer unacceptable harm to their living
    conditions. I am satisfied there would be no harm in respect of the PSED factors in
    allowing the appeal.
Conditions
29. In imposing conditions, I have had regard to the tests within the Framework, the
    Planning Practice Guidance (PPG), and the relevant statutes. I have sought the
    opinion of the Council and the appellant on these conditions and neither party
    have raised any further comments.
30. In addition to the standard time condition (1), I have imposed a condition requiring
    that the development is carried out following the approved plans, in the interest of
    certainty (2).
31. I have imposed a condition requiring the submission of materials so as to ensure
    the development will not harm the character and appearance of the area (3).
    Finally, in the interest of the privacy of neighbouring properties, I have imposed
    conditions concerning the restriction of windows towards neighbouring gardens.
Conclusion
32. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be allowed.

Andrew Fuller
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6011804


Schedule of Conditions
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the drawing Nos 4060 – 200 (Proposed Location, Block and Site Plans),
              4060 – 201 (Proposed Ground and First Floor Plans), 4060 – 202 (Proposed
              Second Floor and Roof Plans), and 4060 – 203 (Proposed Elevations).
     3)       No development above ground level shall take place until samples of the
              materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
              extension hereby permitted have been submitted to and approved in writing
              by the local planning authority. Development shall be carried out in
              accordance with the approved samples.
     4)       Notwithstanding the provisions of the Town and Country Planning (General
              Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (or any order revoking and re-
              enacting that Order with or without modification), no windows or dormer
              windows shall be constructed in the northwest or southeast elevations.
End of Schedule




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
