Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by David Troy BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 10 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011071
2a Parkhurst Road, London, N7 0SF
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Asher Moses of Sherbet Taxi Ltd against the decision of the Council of the
     London Borough of Islington.
•    The application Ref is P2025/2863/FUL.
•    The development is for retention of four shipping containers.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The Council’s decision letter describes the retention of the development. It is clear
       from the evidence provided and that the shipping containers have been installed,
       although I observed only two containers present on the site at the time of my site
       visit. In any event, I am required to consider the development on the basis of the
       same details that were before the Council when it made its decision and as such, I
       shall determine the appeal on this basis accordingly.
3.     Since the determination of the application an updated and revised National
       Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026.
       The main parties have been consulted and provided with an opportunity to provide
       comments on it in relation to this appeal. I have therefore considered the
       development against the relevant policies in the Framework.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is the effect of the shipping containers on the character and
       appearance of the area, including the Hillmarton Conservation Area (CA) and the
       setting of the adjacent Grade II listed Verger’s Cottage.
Reasons
5.     The appeal site comprises of a two storey commercial building with a petrol station
       style canopy and open forecourt that occupies a prominent triangular parcel of
       land at the junction of Parkhurst Road and Camden Road. It is located at a busy
       road interchange, dominated by the adjacent Grade II listed Verger’s Cottage and
       former Camden Road New Church Complex, surrounded by a range of residential
       uses and some commercial premises within the CA.
6.     The public realm in the vicinity of the appeal site is defined by the wide and open
       nature of the public highways, with street trees, creating a spacious and verdant

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011071


       street scene framed by the surrounding tall buildings and former church buildings,
       providing a busy, primarily residential and verdant character to the area. The four
       storage containers, two stacked at either side of the existing building are painted
       black to match the other structures on the site and are bounded by high white
       boards alongside the roadside of the bottom containers.
7.     The storage containers are in an open and prominent position close to the edge of
       the pavement and are clearly visible to passing pedestrians and motorists. Due to
       their height, width and overall solidity they form prominent features within their
       immediate setting. Due to their overall size and visibility, they contrast
       unfavourably with the open and verdant feel that is a characteristic of the area.
       They have an undue presence in their setting, appearing as incongruous and
       uncharacteristic industrial features with a stark and utilitarian appearance, which I
       consider adversely harms rather than positively contributes to the character and
       appearance of the area.
8.     Given the location of the appeal site within the CA and adjacent to the Grade II
       listed Verger’s Cottage, special attention must be paid to considering the impact of
       the development on the significance of the designated heritage assets and to the
       desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of the CA and
       the setting of the listed building. A balanced approach is needed to assess the
       effect on the adjacent locally listed former Church building as a non-designated
       heritage asset and ‘local landmark’ building, in accordance with the Framework.
9.     The historic and architectural significance of the CA with its older more traditional
       three and four storey buildings in the surrounding streets can be readily
       appreciated within the immediate vicinity of the site. Equally, the historic and
       architectural significance of the adjacent 19th Century red brick Grade II listed
       Verger’s Cottage, with its remodelled entrance and leaded glass timber casement
       windows fronting onto Parkhurst Road, and the 18th Century locally listed former
       Camden Road Church with its stone tower and slated pitched roof fronting onto
       Camden Road, can be readily appreciated from views around the appeal site.
10. I consider that the storage containers, by virtue of their siting and design, have a
    negative material impact on how the CA, listed building and locally listed building
    are viewed and appreciated and as such would fail to preserve or enhance the CA,
    as well as the setting of the adjacent listed building and locally listed former church
    building. The high white boards erected on the roadside frontages of the bottom
    containers, which I observed had been graffitied at the time of my site visit, adds
    further insensitive additions which are at odds with the CA, as well as the adjacent
    listed and locally listed buildings.
11. Whilst the degree of harm resulting from the storage containers on the significance
    of the CA and the setting of the listed building is at the lower level, in accordance
    with Policy HE6 (4) of the Framework, that harm should be weighed against any
    public benefits of the development. Similarly, a balanced approach is required to
    assess the harm on the adjacent locally listed building against the benefits of the
    development, in accordance with Policy HE7 (2) of the Framework.
12. I have considered the various public benefits put forward by the appellant including
    through job creation and local economic activity associated with the use of the
    appeal site as a vehicle fleet depot and optimising the efficient use of a sustainable
    brownfield site, which had been vacant for a number of years. The absence of any


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011071


         material harm in respect of the residential amenity and highways are neutral
         benefits. Overall, however, I find insufficient public benefits arising from the
         development to offset the identified harm to which I attach substantial weight.
13. I have considered the appellant’s arguments that the existing site has no unique
    character that provides a low quality contribution to the CA, listed and locally listed
    buildings in a very urban environment and that the views of the containers are
    obscured by mature trees. However, whilst I acknowledge the existing site
    provides a low quality contribution to the CA and the setting of the adjacent listed
    and locally listed buildings, this does not set a precedent for such an inappropriate
    development in this location. The benefits provided by the surrounding street trees
    are only marginal and would provide little cover during the winter months.
14. Accordingly, for these reasons, I conclude that the development has an
    unacceptably harmful effect on the character and appearance of the area,
    including the CA and the setting of the adjacent Grade II listed building. It therefore
    is contrary to Policies D3, D4 and HC1 of the London Plan 2021, and Policies
    PLAN1, DH1, DH2 and H1 of the Islington Local Plan Strategic and Development
    Management Policies 2023, as well as the guidance within the Urban Design
    Guide 2017 and the Hillmarton Conservation Area Design Guidelines 2002.
    Collectively, these policies and guidance seek, amongst other things, to ensure
    that developments are of a high quality that are designed and sited so as to protect
    and enhance the local character, and conserve and enhance the significance of
    designated and non-designated heritage assets and their settings.
Other Matters
15. I note the appellant’s willingness to consider a temporary planning permission for
    the storage containers to tie in with the temporary permission granted in January
    2026 for the use of the appeal site as a fleet vehicle depot for a taxi company1.
    This, however, would result in material changes to the development before me and
    in any event, I am required to consider the development on the same basis as
    when the Council made its decision.
16. I have considered the appellant’s comments that the development constitutes a
    sustainable form of development in line with the Framework and the various
    benefits put forward by the appellant, including that the containers provide a cost
    effective commercial solution to storage, improved security and a deterrent to anti-
    social behaviour and crime. While I have given them some weight, these benefits
    would not be sufficient to outweigh the harm I have identified.
Conclusion
17. For the reasons given above and having considered all other matters raised, I
    conclude that the development is not in accordance with the development plan
    when read as a whole and that the appeal should be dismissed.

David Troy
INSPECTOR



1
    Ref. P2025/2250/FUL


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
