 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 17 August 2026
 by K Winnard LL.B Hons Solicitor
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 28 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011601
 Quince Cottage, 4 The Bank, Stoneleigh, Warwickshire CV8 3DA
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Paul Gurney against the decision of Warwick District Council.
 •   The application Ref is W/26/0156
 •   The development is described as engineering operations, erection of glass and metal balustrade,
     boundary fencing and erection of timber gazebo structure.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. The development that is the subject of the appeal has been completed. The
   Council has indicated that it has no concerns with regard to the engineering
   operations, the erection of glass and metal balustrade and boundary fencing
   elements of the appeal and I am advised that planning permission has been
   subsequently granted for these elements of the appeal scheme. Notwithstanding
   this, the whole scheme is before me and whilst I will have regard to the planning
   permission now granted, insofar as my determination is concerned, I shall direct my
   assessment on the timber gazebo structure erected on the appeal site. From what
   I saw, the gazebo structure appears to reflect the plans in this appeal application
   which now seeks to regularise this element of the development.
3. There have been changes to the National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) since the determination of the planning application. Both parties have
   therefore been given the opportunity to comment on whether they are any
   implications for the appeal. I have had regard to the position of both parties in
   making my decision and in so doing I am satisfied that no party has been
   prejudiced by my consideration of this issue.
Main Issues
4. The main issues in the appeal are as follows:
         •    Whether the proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt
              having regard to the Framework and any relevant development plan policies;
         •    If so, the effect of the proposal on the openness and purposes of the Green
              Belt; and



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
    Appeal Decision 6011601


          •   Whether any harm by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm,
              would be clearly outweighed by other considerations to amount to the very
              special circumstances necessary to justify the development.
Reasons
Inappropriate Development
5. Quince Cottage is sited within Stoneleigh, defined in the Warwick District Local
   Plan 2011-2029 (LP) as a Limited Infill Village, which is washed over by the West
   Midlands Green Belt. Policy DS18 of the LP states that national planning policy will
   be applied to proposals within the Green Belt. The Framework states that
   development in the Green Belt is inappropriate unless it falls within one of the
   categories in policy GB7, which includes: (1)(b) the reuse, extension, alteration, or
   replacement of an existing building provided that the existing building is of
   permanent and substantial construction, is lawful in planning terms, and any
   extension or alteration will not result in a disproportionate increase in size
   compared to the original building.1
6. The Council assessed the application on the basis that the garage is the ‘original
   building’ for the purposes of assessing the proposal under Policy GB7(1)(b) of the
   Framework. This approach is not disputed by the appellant in the appeal
   submissions. Indeed, the appellant’s evidence states that the garage is the relevant
   building in this case, and acknowledges that the test in establishing whether the
   proposal is inappropriate development, and by definition harmful, is whether the
   gazebo results in a disproportionate addition over and above the size of the original
   garage.
7. It is a matter of fact and degree as to whether the garage should be treated as the
   original building. Whilst the garage has a functional link with the host property, it is
   sited some distance away at the far end of a lengthy rear garden, and direct access
   to it is gained from a track to the side of the neighbouring property of Quince
   Cottage. As such there is a significant separation distance between it and Quince
   Cottage, with very little visual connectivity. Accordingly, I do not consider it to be a
   normal domestic adjunct, and on this basis, I shall consider the scheme against the
   baseline of the garage as the original building.
8. The existing garage was constructed around 1983, although the appellant states
   that it replaced a historic structure of the same size, which is indicated on an
   historic map I have seen from 1923. However, from the information before me, I
   cannot be certain as to the form, height, dimensions, and volume of the historic
   outbuilding; nor the date on which it was demolished. Therefore, there is no
   certainty that the historic outbuilding existed on 1 July 1948, and therefore that it
   would fall within the Framework’s definition of an original building. In the absence of
   definitive information in respect of the historic outbuilding, I have based my
   assessment on the original building being of a broadly similar size to the existing
   garage at the time of its construction.
9. It is common ground that the garage, which is of a permanent and substantial
   construction had a floorspace of approximately 30.8 square metres when it was
   built. It is a single storey building with a steeply pitched roof, and the plans show

1
 Defined in the Framework as a building as it existed on 1 July 1948, or if constructed after 1 July 1948, as
constructed.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                     2
 Appeal Decision 6011601


     that it occupies approximately half of the width of the garden. These factors
     contribute to the size of the original building.
10. Neither the Framework nor Policy DS18 define disproportionate. Therefore, it is
    ultimately a matter of planning judgement as to whether the development results in
    a disproportionate increase in size compared to the original building. The
    explanatory text to Policy H14 of the LP suggests that an increase of more than
    30% of the gross floor space of the original dwelling would be likely to be
    considered disproportionate within the Green Belt. However, I do not find this to be
    determinative because Policy H14 does not apply to sites in Limited Infill Villages
    and therefore is not directly relevant to the appeal scheme. Moreover, the
    explanatory text states that a range of other factors should be considered. Indeed,
    given that the Framework refers to ‘size’ this would entail considerations of a range
    of matters, including any increase in volume, floorspace, footprint and external
    dimensions.
11. The garage has previously been extended, with flat roofed elements to the rear and
    a front veranda. Together, these extensions enlarged the depth, footprint, and
    overall volume of the garage considerably, with the evidence from both parties
    indicating the floorspace of the original building increased to around 53.2sqm.
12. Notwithstanding its open sided construction and its low height relative to the
    garage, the gazebo has enlarged the original building further, almost doubling its
    width, and extending the built form across most of the rear part of the garden.
    According to the Council’s calculations, which have not been disputed by the
    appellant, the gazebo in cumulation with the existing extensions has resulted in a
    substantial increase in the floor space of the original building, of approximately
    172%. Overall, and even though the form of the existing garage remains legible,
    the extensions have fundamentally altered the overall shape and scale of the
    original building, such that the gazebo has led to a disproportionate increase in its
    size. Consequently, the development is not one that would fall within the category
    set out in Policy GB7(1)(b) of the Framework.
13. Reference has also been made to the exception contained in Policy GB7(1)(c) of
    the Framework, which allows for limited infilling in villages lying within the Green
    Belt. Whilst the term ‘limited infilling’ is not defined in the Framework it generally
    refers to development in a gap in an otherwise built-up frontage. This is not the
    case in this instance as the development comprises the extension of a garage and
    there is a wide separation between the gazebo and buildings to the east and north.
    As such it does not have the character of infilling a gap between buildings.
    Therefore, the development is not one that would fall within the category set out in
    Policy GB7(1)(c).
14. I conclude therefore that the gazebo structure constitutes inappropriate
    development within the Green Belt, which is by definition harmful to the Green Belt,
    a matter to which I am required to attach substantial weight. The development
    would also be contrary to LP Policy DS18.
Openness and purposes
15. Due to the form, scale, and siting of the gazebo, this element of the development
    does not conflict with any of the five purposes of the Green Belt set out in policy
    GB2 of the Framework. However, the Framework states that the objective of the of


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
 Appeal Decision 6011601


     Green Belt policy is to prevent urban sprawl by keeping land permanently open,
     and the essential features of the Green Belts are their openness and permanence.
     It goes on to say that substantial weight should be given to harm to the Green Belt,
     including harm to its openness.
16. Openness has both a visual and spatial aspect. Even without solid walls, the roofed
    and pillared structure introduces built form where previously there was none, and
    the overall mass of built form in this part of the garden would be increased.
    Therefore, there would be a loss of openness in spatial terms notwithstanding the
    large size of the garden compared to the footprint of the buildings. Due to its height,
    the gazebo is visible in views from private neighbouring gardens and in limited
    public views from the highway. Overall, therefore, the development has caused
    harm to the openness of the Green Belt albeit at a small and localised scale.
Other Considerations
17. Other than on Green Belt grounds, the Council raises no concerns to the appeal
    scheme. The absence of harm however in these other respects is not a positive
    consideration, as acceptability in design and amenity terms is to be expected.
18. Quince Cottage is a Grade II Listed building sited within the Stoneleigh
    Conservation Area. (SCA). Section 66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
    Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (PLBCA) prescribes a duty upon a decision maker to
    give special regard to the desirability of preserving the listed building or its setting
    or any features of special architectural or historic interest which it possesses.
    Additionally, Section 72(1) of the PLBCA in respect of development in conservation
    areas, states that special attention shall be paid to the desirability of preserving or
    enhancing the character or appearance of that area. Furthermore, the Framework
    states (Policy HE6(3)) states that any harm to designated heritage assets will be a
    matter of considerable importance and weight.
19. Quince Cottage dates back to the seventeenth century and its significance is in
    both its architectural and historic being. It has a spacious curtilage which separates
    it both visually and spatially from the garage. The setting of a heritage asset is
    concerned with the way the heritage asset is experienced. Owing to the land levels,
    the positioning of the listed building and the siting and design of the gazebo there is
    limited visibility between it and the listed building. The listed building remains the
    dominant building in views of the appeal site and the appeal scheme,
    notwithstanding its contemporary appearance, does not undermine its significance.
20. The significance of the SCA lies in part in the way the village has historically
    evolved with a clearly defined centre and distinct cottages reflective of its rural and
    historical character. I note that the Council’s Conservation Officer has been
    consulted and is satisfied that the development as a whole does not cause harm to
    the SCA. Although partially visible from The Bank, the bulk of the appeal scheme is
    not so conspicuous such that its overall harm to the character and appearance of
    the SCA would be limited. Its therefore has no effect on the significance of the
    heritage asset and as such it preserves and conserves the character and
    appearance of the SCA.
21. As a listed building, permitted development rights are restricted and therefore do
    not provide an opportunity to provide garden structures through an alternative
    provision. I appreciate the frustration of the appellant that the scheme has not been


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        4
 Appeal Decision 6011601


    found to be unacceptable in heritage terms, but this does not enable a permitted
    development fallback as the Green Belt exceptions, amongst other things, only
    allow for extensions within size limitations. Further, the lack of harm to a heritage
    asset is a neutral factor which does not weight in favour or against the appeal
    scheme.
22. The appellant refers also to other garden/garage buildings within the area but no
    details of these are before me. In any event, the existence of development
    elsewhere does not in itself justify development which otherwise would be
    unacceptable. I accept that the development provides amenity space for the
    occupier of Quince Cottage and his family of Quince Cottage and its construction
    provided for economic investment within the local built environment. Given the
    relatively small scale of the development any such benefits do not offer strong
    support for the development. I attach limited weight in favour of these
    considerations.
Green Belt balance
23. Substantial weight is given to the harm to the Green Belt by way of
    inappropriateness and harm to its openness. Very special circumstances will not
    exist unless the potential harm to the Green Belt is clearly outweighed by other
    considerations. Taken together, I am satisfied that the other considerations put
    forward do not clearly outweigh the harm to the Green Belt. Consequently, the very
    special circumstances necessary to justify the proposal have not been
    demonstrated. It follows that the development would be contrary to LP Policy DS18,
    and the Framework, insofar as they seek to resist inappropriate development in the
    Green Belt except in very special circumstances.
    Conclusion
24. The development accordingly conflicts with the development plan. There are no
    material considerations, to indicate that the appeal should be determined otherwise
    than in accordance with the development plan. Therefore, I conclude that the
    appeal should be dismissed.


K Winnard
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        5
