Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026 by Kim Vo MPlan
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 15 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011475
Beech House, Martinsend Lane, Great Missenden, Buckinghamshire HP16 9HR
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr. Jack Nethercott against the decision of Buckinghamshire Council.
•   The application Ref is PL/26/03250/FA.
•   The development proposed is described as the “erection of oak framed garage”.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the development
   described as the “erection of oak framed garage” at Beech House, Martinsend
   Lane, Great Missenden, Buckinghamshire HP16 9HR in accordance with the terms
   of the application, Ref PL/26/03250/FA, subject to the following conditions:
    1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
       the date of this decision.
    2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
       drawing numbers: 98551/01 (Location Plan); 98551/02 (Proposed Block Plan);
       98551/03 (Proposed Elevations); 98551/04 (Proposed Elevations); and
       98551/05 (Proposed Plan).
    3) The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
       development hereby permitted shall be as they are set out on the application
       form.
Appeal Procedure, Preliminary Matter and Main Issue
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
3. Having reviewed the most recent changes to the National Planning Policy
   Framework, I am satisfied that they do not affect the substance of the main issue in
   this appeal. Since they would not therefore be prejudiced, I have proceeded without
   further consultation with the main parties on the appeal scheme. The main issue in
   regard to which is its effect on the character and appearance of the area.
Reasons for the Recommendation
4. The appeal site is within a residential part of the Chilterns National Landscape,
   which is characterised by detached two storey dwellings set within spacious plots,
   including the appeal property. Most dwellings are set well back from the road, with
   some featuring detached garages to the front. Whilst there is a sense of

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011475


     spaciousness through the large plot sizes and generous front gardens, properties
     along the lane are generally screened by strong boundary treatments.
5. This includes the appeal site, which features mature hedgerow along majority of its
   frontage that contributes positively to the verdant character of the area.
   Neighbouring boundary treatments also comprise of mature trees, hedgerows, and
   dense planting, as well as timber, brick and stone walls and gates. Consequently,
   the established pattern of enclosure and greenery is a defining characteristic of the
   street scene and collectively, these features reinforce the area's leafy and semi-
   rural character.
6. The proposed garage would be positioned close to the highway. Due to the appeal
   property's forward position, it’s depth would extend across most of the front garden
   and appear as a noticeable structure from the street scene. However, the garage
   would be orientated with its shortest elevation facing the highway, reducing its
   visual impact. It would also be single storey with a hipped roof, ensuring that its
   scale and massing would appear recessive and proportionate to the host dwelling.
   Garages to the front are also not an unusual feature in this residential area.
7. Additionally, the mature front hedgerow would be retained and screen views of the
   garage, ensuring that the verdant character of the area would be maintained.
   Although its retention cannot be guaranteed in perpetuity, even in the event of its
   loss or removal, the garage would not appear discordant or overly prominent for the
   above reasons. This is reinforced by the presence of a similarly designed front
   garage at Dancing Meadows, opposite to the site, which is visible from public
   views, and which integrates successfully with the area. Moreover, the green
   frontage along the lane is already broken up by solid structures of tall walls, fences
   and gates, some of which span a considerable length. As such, even in the
   absence of the hedgerow, the proposal would sit comfortably within this context.
8. With regards to the site’s location in the Chilterns National Landscape, I am mindful
   of the duty to further the purpose of conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of
   National Landscapes. Since I have found that the proposal would not harm the
   character and appearance of what is a relatively built up area, it follows that the
   proposed development would not undermine the scenic qualities or beauty of the
   wider landscape designation. Allowing this scheme would not automatically set a
   precedent for similar proposals, as they would be required to go through their own
   site and development specific assessment.
9. For these reasons, the proposal would not result in harm to the character and
   appearance of the area. Accordingly, it would comply with Policies GC1 and H20 of
   the Chiltern District Local Plan 1997 (including alterations adopted 2001)
   Consolidated 2007 & 2011 (CDLP), Policy CS20 of the Core Strategy for Chiltern
   District 2011, the Residential Extensions and Householder Development
   Supplementary Planning Document 2013, and Policy DP3 of the National Planning
   Policy Framework.
10. Together, and amongst other things, these policies and guidance seek
    development proposals to be designed to a high standard and to respond to their
    context, so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings. Ancillary
    residential buildings should also be modest in size and subordinate in scale.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011475


Other Matters
11. Policy H13 of the CDLP is not directly applicable as the proposed garage is not an
    extension. The policies mentioned above are sufficient to make a decision against
    the development plan on the main issue. Whilst the proposal would be in close
    proximity to the hedgerow, there is limited substantive evidence before me to
    demonstrate that this would adversely affect its long term health or lead to its loss
    or deterioration.
Conditions
12. To provide certainty and for enforcement purposes, it is necessary to impose the
    standard time limit and to specify the approved plans. A condition is also necessary
    to ensure the materials accord with the details submitted in the application form,
    which would be acceptable for the character and appearance of the area.
Conclusion and Recommendation
13. For the reasons given above, I recommend that the appeal should be allowed in the
    circumstances set out, given it would comply with the development plan and there
    is nothing compelling to suggest a decision other than in accordance therewith.

Kim Vo
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
14. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed. Planning permission is thus granted, subject to the
    stated conditions.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
