    Appeal Decision
    Site visit made on 10 September 2026
    by L Gardner MRTPI
    an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
    Decision date: 17 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011807
21 Ground Floor Business Premises, Grace Hill, Folkestone, Kent CT20 1HA
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of
       the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as
       amended).
•      The appeal is made by Paul Walker against the decision of Folkestone and Hythe District Council.
•      The application Ref is 26/0398/FH/PA.
•      The development proposed is change of use of ground floor business premises formally known as
       Grace Hill Hair & Beauty into 1 residential C3 flat.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Background and Main Issue
2.       Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of the Town and Country Planning (General
         Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) (the Order) permits
         a change of use of a building and any land within its curtilage from a use falling
         within Class E (commercial, business and service) to a use falling within Class C3
         (dwellinghouses).
3.       Schedule 2, Part 3, Section W of the Order outlines the prior approval process and
         provides that a local planning authority has regard to the National Planning Policy
         Framework (the Framework), so far as relevant to the subject matter of the prior
         approval, as if the application were a planning application.
4.       During the course of the appeal a revised Framework was published on 17 August
         2026, as referred to in the appellant’s final comments. I have had regard to the
         2026 version of the Framework in my decision.
5.       There is no dispute between the main parties that the proposal meets the
         requirements set out in paragraph MA.1 of Class MA. I find no reason to disagree.
         Further to this, Paragraph MA.2 sets out that development under Class MA is
         permitted subject to, amongst other aspects, an application to the local planning
         authority for a determination as to whether prior approval is required in relation to
         the conditions set out in Paragraph MA.2(2).
6.       One of those conditions is contained within (e). This concerns buildings located in
         a conservation area where the development involves a change of use of the whole
         or part of the ground floor. Here, an assessment of whether prior approval is
         required will be needed in respect of the impact of that change of use on the
         character or sustainability of the conservation area. The Council’s reason for


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011807


       refusal relates to this issue. The Council does not contest compliance with the
       other requirements of this paragraph, and based on the evidence before me, I see
       no reason to disagree.
7.     Accordingly, I consider the main issue to be whether prior approval should be
       granted with regard to the impact of the change of use on the character or
       sustainability of the Folkestone Leas and Bayle Conservation Area (CA).
Reasons
8.     The appeal property is within an end terraced, three storey building with an
       additional floor at attic level. The property, as with the attached neighbours within
       the terrace is finished in red brick, with decorative moulding around the windows.
       The three properties within the terrace have a consistency in their scale and
       architectural character, each with a commercial unit (or units) at ground floor
       served by shopfronts, and residential uses above.
9.     Further along the western side of Grace Hill, ground floor units largely retain a
       commercial focus, albeit demonstrate variance in uses including an office at 15
       Grace Hill. Nevertheless, even acknowledging the evolvement and diversity in
       uses within the wider area, the part of Grace Hill within which the appeal site is
       interpreted, holds a strong and legible commercial function at ground level.
10. The appeal site is within the Folkestone Leas and Bayle CA which extends across
    a wide area, incorporating both residential and commercial uses. In respect to the
    location of the appeal site, the CA derives its significance in part from the function
    as a historic town centre street. The commercial function to which the appeal site
    forms part of, creates a level of activity and vitality which positively contributes
    towards the character of the CA.
11. Accordingly, despite no external alterations being proposed, the loss of a
    commercial unit is still capable of harming the character or sustainability of the CA,
    even without a specific CA Appraisal requiring the retention of commercial units. In
    my judgement, introducing a residential use at ground floor at the appeal site
    would harm the character of the CA. It would erode the functional consistency of
    the terraced row and in doing so, remove the potential for the appeal property to
    provide a commercially active street frontage.
12. The appeal proposal would diminish the scope for human activity and interaction,
    thus altering how the buildings and spaces are used and undermining one of the
    key characteristics of the CA in this location, even in acknowledgement of the end
    of terrace location of the appeal site. In this respect it would impose harm to the
    significance of the CA.
13. Whilst I appreciate that the ground floor unit at the appeal property is currently
    vacant and thus at present does not provide an active contribution to the vitality of
    the CA, I understand that it was last in use relatively recently. There is little
    substantive evidence to suggest that the current period of vacancy would be
    sustained in the long term. I have therefore attached the current vacant nature of
    the property limited weight in my decision.
14. Whilst a residential occupation would make the street frontage marginally more
    active than in its vacant form, it has not been convincingly demonstrated that the
    appeal buildings are unlikely to be commercially occupied. I therefore cannot be


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011807


       satisfied that the proposed residential conversion is the only viable, and least
       harmful means of bringing the unit back into an active use.
15. Equally, based on the evidence, I cannot be satisfied that the other vacant units
    referred to are indicative of a persistent long term commercial decline, rather than
    a snapshot in time of transitional tenancies. Whilst the supermarket adjacent to the
    appeal site (which lies outside of the CA), may have influenced retail trends to
    some extent, I am not persuaded that it has directed trade away from the
    commercial frontages within the CA to such a degree that there has been a
    complete decline in the vibrancy and vitality of this part of the CA.
16. Policy HE4 of the Framework describes heritage assets as an irreplaceable
    resource, that should be conserved in a manner appropriate to their significance.
    Policy HE6 of the Framework, states that, when considering the potential effect of
    a development proposal on the significance of a designated heritage asset,
    substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation.
17. Where a development proposal would harm the significance of a designated
    heritage asset, as would be the case here, the effect on the asset and its
    significance should be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the
    proposal.
18. The proposal would provide an additional dwelling in a sustainable location,
    representing an efficient use of the land. The contribution to housing supply is
    particularly important given that the Council cannot demonstrate a five year supply
    of deliverable housing sites.
19. Overall, I find these to represent public benefits to which I have given a good deal
    of weight. However, the adverse impact on the CA is a matter of considerable
    importance and weight. In this case, I consider that the harm to the designated
    heritage asset outweighs the benefits.
Conclusion
20. For the above reasons, I conclude that the proposal would not be permitted
    development under Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of the Order having regard to its
    impact on the character and sustainability of the Folkestone Leas and Bayle
    Conservation Area. The appeal is therefore dismissed.

L Gardner
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
