 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 5 August 2026
 by N McGurk BSc (Hons) MCD MBA MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 28 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011561
 4 Stanley Road, Halifax, HX1 3RX
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Miss S Kausar against the decision of Calderdale Metropolitan Borough
     Council.
 •   The application Ref is 26/00088/HSE.
 •   The development proposed is the addition of front and rear dormer windows (the rear dormer under
     permitted development) and a single storey rear extension.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matter
2. The Council’s refusal and the appellant’s appeal statement relate solely to the
   proposed front dormer.
Main Issue
3. The main issue in this case is the effect of the proposed dormer on the character
   and appearance of the area.
Reasons
4. The appeal property is a traditional two storey mid-terrace dwelling on Stanley
   Road, within an established residential area of Halifax. Stanley Road comprises a
   long, continuous run of similar terraced dwellings, the roof pitches of which remain
   uninterrupted by any dormer windows to the front elevation.
5. The proposed front dormer would occupy approximately half of the front roof slope
   and would be finished in dark slate to match the existing roof covering.
6. During my site visit, I observed that part of the pleasant uniformity of Stanley Road
   derives significantly from the continuity and simplicity of its uninterrupted roof
   pitches. This uniformity makes a positive and important contribution to the
   character and appearance of the area.
7. Section 3.3 of the Council’s Placemaking and Design Guide Supplementary
   Planning Document advises that front dormer windows are “unlikely to be
   acceptable”. Whilst this represents a starting presumption rather than a blanket
   prohibition, it provides clear guidance.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
    Appeal Decision 6011561


8. Notwithstanding its use of matching materials, in this case I find that the
   introduction of a dormer window to the appeal dwelling’s front roof slope would
   interrupt this established uniformity. The proposed dormer would appear as an
   incongruous feature that would draw the eye and detract from the simplicity and
   rhythm that is characteristic of the terrace.
9. The harm arising from the above would be exacerbated as a result of the prominent
   location of the proposed dormer, forward facing and high up on the dwelling’s roof.
   This prominence would draw further attention to the incongruous nature of the
   proposal and result in it appearing as a feature that would unduly dominate its
   surroundings.
10. Taking all of the above into account, I find that the proposed front dormer would
    harm the character and appearance of the area, contrary to the National Planning
    Policy Framework; to the Calderdale Placemaking and Design Guide
    Supplementary Planning Document; and to Policy BT1 of the Local Plan1, which
    together amongst other things, seek to protect local character.
Other Matters
11. The appellant draws attention to the approval of a front dormer at 16 Vaughan
    Street, to the rear of the appeal site. However, Vaughan Street is a narrower street
    which, in practice, reads more as a rear lane than as a principal frontage, such that
    a front dormer in that location has a materially different, and lesser, effect on the
    character and appearance of the wider area. Stanley Road, by contrast, is a wider
    and more prominent street along which, as noted above, the uninterrupted roofline
    makes a significant contribution to local character.
12. The appellant is critical of the Council’s failure to expressly assess the proposal
    against the Park Ward Neighbourhood Plan. However, there is no substantive
    evidence before me to suggest that the proposed development would be supported
    by any adopted policy within the Development Plan – including any Neighbourhood
    Plan policy.
Conclusion
13. For the reasons given above, the appeal does not succeed.

N McGurk
INSPECTOR




1
    Calderdale Local Plan (2023).


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
