 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 12 August 2026
 By Michael Evans BA MA MPhil DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 24 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011621
 26 St Johns Road, Higham, Rochester, Kent ME3 7BZ
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Spike against the decision of Gravesham Borough Council.
 •    The application Ref is 20260334
 •    The development proposed is described on the application form as “New front porch, single-storey
      side extension. Garage to be demolished and replaced with brick external storage building. Raised
      patio extended, height and materials to match existing”.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Application for costs
2. An application for costs was made against Gravesham Borough Council by the
   appellant. This application is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary matter
3. Since the appeal was submitted a revised version of the National Planning Policy
   Framework (The Framework) has been published. Consequently, the main parties
   were given the opportunity to make representations on this. These have been taken
   into account in making this decision.
Main issue
4. The Council’s concerns do not relate to the proposed raised patio extension. As
   such, the main issue in this appeal is the effect of the proposed porch, side
   extension and storage building on the streetscene and the character and
   appearance of the host dwelling and locality.
Reasons
5. The locality of the appeal site is characterised by detached and semi-detached
   bungalows, and the appeal concerns one of a pair of such properties. The host
   dwelling has a fully hipped main roof and there is also a hipped projection at the
   front that spans both properties. The main hipped part would be extended to the
   side and would therefore remain compatible with this character.
6. However, a gable ended projection would be built to the side and a gabled porch at
   the front. These roof forms would introduce a noticeable contrast with the
   predominantly hipped roof character of the host dwelling and neighbouring


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6011621


     properties, interrupting the established rhythm of the street. Although its effect
     would be fairly modest, the porch would also awkwardly overlap the hipped roof
     projection, highlighting the discordant difference in form. Despite their modest size,
     their form and projection to the side and front would make these features prominent
     in views from the street.
7. The appellant has drawn my attention to additions and alterations at other
   properties in the locality and I have carefully considered the submitted
   photographs. However, I saw at my site visit that properties in the vicinity of the site
   do not generally incorporate such alterations and have largely retained their original
   appearance at the front.
8. There is a gabled porch at No 10, but this is centrally located in a detached
   dwelling and does not have a comparable relationship with a hipped roof form, as
   would arise in this case. In any event, despite the extended dwellings in the vicinity,
   the proposed gabled porch and side extension would be atypical additions that
   would not sit comfortably within the prevailing characteristics of the streetscene.
9. The enlargement of the attached dwelling at No 24 includes a partly gabled side
   enlargement and a gabled front dormer addition. These changes already result in
   the pair of dwellings having a less balanced and asymmetrical appearance. The
   proposed fully gabled side extension and porch would add further elements,
   leading to a more visually disjointed relationship between the pair of dwellings.
10. In any case, these examples illustrate the detrimental effect such development can
    have and should not be used to justify a proposal that I consider would further
    erode the quality of the built environment. Moreover, without the full details and
    background to such cases there is nothing to show that the Council’s
    decision-making has been unreasonably inconsistent.
11. The existing garage is of a modest scale and appearance and its replacement with
    a smaller outbuilding would not be beneficial to the streetscene. The additional
    height over the existing building would be sufficiently modest to prevent an adverse
    effect even allowing for the falling ground levels to the north.
12. However, despite matters such as these, I conclude that the streetscene and the
    character and appearance of the host dwelling and locality would be harmed by the
    proposed porch and side extension. Among other things, Gravesham Local Plan
    Core Strategy, Adopted 2014, Policy CS19 seeks new development that is visually
    attractive, conserves the character of the built environment and makes a positive
    contribution to the streetscene. Because of matters such as the disjointed
    appearance of the pair of dwellings and the contrasting roof forms, there would be
    conflict with these aims.
Other matters
13. The appellant has referred to a potential fallback position in the planning statement
    that was submitted with the planning application. A drawing has been provided that
    shows the appeal scheme and the plans submitted with an application for a
    certificate of lawfulness. This indicates that the potential fallback scheme would
    have a smaller porch and a lower side extension.
14. The case for allowing an appeal can sometimes be strengthened where the fallback
    proposal would have a greater adverse effect such that granting permission could


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
 Appeal Decision 6011621


     avoid a scheme with more harmful consequences being built. However, that is not
     the situation here, as the relevant parts of the fallback scheme would clearly be
     smaller, with a lesser bulk and resultant visual impact. Consequently, this matter
     does not lend support to the appeal scheme.
15. Framework Policy S3 indicates that decisions on development proposals should
    apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. This requires that Policy
    S4 should be applied when considering development proposals located within
    settlements as in this case. This policy intends that proposals should be approved
    unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse
    effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the
    Framework.
16. In this instance there would be a benefit to the local economy from construction
    works, but this would be relatively modest given the small scale of the
    development. Energy efficiency would be improved but there is no suggestion that
    this would meaningfully exceed the requirements of the building regulations.
17. It is acknowledged that the scheme would result in an improved quality of
    accommodation providing additional space for a dining table and storage. It would
    also provide additional floor area at a property where the existing space is below
    the Nationally Described Space Standard for England.
18. In Policy S4 2. c. it is indicated that one of the circumstances where the benefits of
    approving development are likely to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects
    is failure to comply with one of the national decision-making policies which state
    that development proposals should be refused in specific circumstances. In this
    case there would be conflict with Policy DP3 1, because the development would not
    respond to the context or integrate with and enhance the surroundings for the
    reasons given.
19. In the above circumstances I conclude that the benefits of the scheme would be
    substantially outweighed by the adverse effects.
20. Because the adjacent extension would not be built, there would be a gap between
    the existing side wall of the bungalow and the raised patio for which there are no
    plans. Consequently, it is not clear that the two parts are functionally and physically
    severable, and I shall not therefore make a split decision.
21. I note the concerns of the appellant over the Council’s handling of the application.
    However, I must consider this appeal on its own planning merits.
Conclusion
22. The proposal would result in harm and conflict with the development plan. There
    are no other material considerations that indicate a decision should be made other
    than in accordance with the development plan. Accordingly, the appeal is
    dismissed.

M Evans
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     3
