Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 2 September 2026
by P Barton BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011150
Land off Welshpool Road and adjacent to Southerly, Chavel, Ford, Shrewsbury,
Shropshire SY5 9LB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•    The appeal is made by G Harrison and A Hall against the decision of Shropshire Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/04311/PIP.
•    The development proposed is described as “application for permission in principle for the
     development of between seven and eight dwellings on land off Welshpool Road and adjacent to
     Southerly, Chavel, Ford, Shropshire”.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A new version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published on 17 August 2026. The main parties were given the opportunity to
       comment, and the comments received have been taken into account in the
       determination of the appeal.
3.     The proposal is for permission in principle. The Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
       advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
       housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has 2 stages:
       the first (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site is suitable in
       principle and the second (technical details consent stage) is when the detailed
       development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first stage.
4.     The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
       land use and the amount of development proposed. All other matters are
       considered as part of a subsequent technical details consent application if
       permission in principle is granted. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues are whether the site is suitable for residential development,
       having regard to its location, the proposed land use and the amount of
       development, with particular reference to:
           •    whether the site would be a suitable location for the proposed development,
                in respect of the spatial strategy in the Development Plan, and accessibility
                to services and facilities; and
           •    the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011150


Reasons
Location
6.     As an irregular-shaped parcel of land with hedgerows and trees along the
       boundaries of the open fields, the appeal site sits alongside further open fields, a
       group of dwellings and the busy A458.
7.     Policy CS1 of the Shropshire Local Development Framework: Adopted Core
       Strategy (March 2011) (CS) and policy MD1 of the Shropshire Council Site
       Allocations and Management of Development (SAMDev) Plan (17/12/15)
       (SAMDev Plan) set out the strategic approach to the location of development in
       the district. These policies aim to meet its needs and to make its settlements more
       sustainable and development will be supported in Shrewsbury, the Market Towns
       and Key Centres, and the community Hubs and Community Cluster settlements.
       Outside of these settlements, development will primarily be for economic
       diversification and to meet the needs of the local communities for affordable
       housing.
8.     The appeal site is located outside of any of these settlements and therefore, for
       planning policy purposes, is classed as in the open countryside, where CS Policy
       CS5 establishes that new development will be strictly controlled. The policy
       provides a list of scenarios where on appropriate sites, which maintain and
       enhance countryside vitality and character as well as improve the sustainability of
       rural communities by bringing local economic and community benefits, proposals
       will be permitted. Based on the evidence before me, none of these would be met
       by the proposed development. Moreover, the proposal would not represent the
       types of housing development in the countryside given in SAMDev Policy MD7a,
       which strictly controls new market housing outside these settlements. Therefore,
       the proposed development is contrary to the Council’s development plan spatial
       strategy.
9.     CS Policy CS6 states that to achieve an inclusive and accessible environment,
       amongst other things, proposals likely to generate significant levels of traffic are
       required to be located in accessible locations where opportunities for walking,
       cycling and use of public transport can be maximised and the need for car based
       travel can be reduced.
10. Whilst not identified as such in the development plan, comments have been made
    by the main parties as to whether Chavel is a settlement. The definition of a
    settlement in the Framework includes cities, towns, villages and other
    predominantly built-up areas, but not hamlets and scattered groups of houses
    located outside predominantly built-up areas.
11. Chavel consists of a ribbon of houses, a restaurant, a hot food takeaway and a
    petrol filling station with a convenience store, to the southern side of the A458, and
    a more sporadic cluster of dwellings to the northern side. Due to the modest area
    covered by development and the prevailing sense of openness between the
    buildings with views of the surrounding countryside, I found that Chavel did not
    comprise a predominantly built-up area and therefore does not constitute a
    settlement for the purposes of my assessment.
12. Unchallenged distances of 400m, 440m and 450m to the restaurant, takeaway and
    convenience store respectively have been indicated. Furthermore, a bus stop and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011150


       a primary school are positioned further west at a distance of some 700m and
       800m. The route to these from the appeal site would be via a lit footpath, with a
       central refuge crossing fronting the petrol filling station and convenience store.
13. Nevertheless, and despite this stretch of the A458 being subject to a 40mph speed
    limit, the footpath is narrow in places and positions pedestrians in close proximity
    to the busy traffic flow travelling east, which includes a noticeable proportion of
    large commercial vehicles that create a distinctive wind blast as they pass. The
    impact of these passing vehicles would be amplified during adverse weather.
    Cyclists using the A458 in either direction would also face a similar experience.
    Consequently, these conditions, in conjunction with the distances involved, would
    not be an attractive option for walking or cycling to access these services and
    facilities. The presence of public rights of way to Ford has not altered my findings
    as these are partly across fields via unlit and unmade surfaces
14. Therefore, due to a lack of genuinely sustainable travel choices, the occupants of
    the proposed dwellings would be heavily reliant on private motor vehicles to
    access services and facilities on a regular basis.
15. In addition, there is no compelling evidence before me that future occupants of the
    proposed houses would use the services and facilities on the A458 or within Ford,
    thereby enhancing or maintaining their vitality, rather than those that would be
    found in a town.
16. My attention has been drawn to the granting of permission in principle1 for the
    replacement of an existing dwelling with 3 new dwellings in close proximity to the
    appeal site. I note that in the reason for approval the Council refers to Chavel as a
    hamlet and close to the village of Ford, and that the site is within reasonable
    walking distance of services and facilities. However, that development related to
    an existing residential use on the site and was located marginally closer to the
    services and facilities. Moreover, I have assessed the appeal scheme before me
    under the latest version of the Framework, including its definition of a settlement. I
    have therefore considered the appeal before me on its individual planning merits.
17. A further appeal decision2 presented is materially different to the scheme before
    me. In that case, the Inspector found that future occupiers would have access to a
    reasonable bus service, with a bus stop at an approximate distance of 250m. As
    detailed above, such a scenario would not apply in this case. As such, a
    comparison is of limited relevance in this instance.
18. Moreover, I have found a former proposed housing allocation3 not to be
    comparable to the appeal site as it immediately adjoins Ford, including the bus
    stop on the A458 and on the opposite side of But Lane to the primary school.
    Furthermore, this allocation formed part of the previous draft Local Plan that was
    withdrawn.
19. I understand that the Council, as part of a comprehensive ‘scoping consultation’ for
    the next Local Plan, has sought views on a draft ‘Community Hierarchy’ that
    includes an assessment of the connectivity of all recognisable named communities
    in the district. Although this document, including the connectivity score of Chavel,


1
  Planning Decision Ref: 26/00858/PIP
2
  Appeal Decision Ref: 6005634
3
  Housing allocation FRD011


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011150


         is a material consideration, in light of the current stage of preparation of the
         emerging plan, I give this limited weight.
20. For the above reasons, I conclude that the appeal site is not in a suitable location
    for the proposed development, in respect of the spatial strategy in the
    Development Plan, and accessibility to services and facilities. It would conflict with
    CS Policies CS1, CS5 and CS6, as well as SAMDev Plan Policies MD1 and
    MD7a.
21. The reason for refusal refers to CS Policy CS11, which relates to the type and
    affordability of housing. As detailed development proposals are assessed at the
    second stage of the permission in principle consent route, I have found this policy
    not to be determinative on this main issue.
Character and appearance
22. The appeal site consists of part of a larger field and an existing vehicular access
    off the A458 that runs parallel to this highway and serves the field as well as
    Burnell House. High vegetation run along much of the site’s boundaries as well as
    the remainder of the field to the east that is also in the appellant’s control. Whilst
    this reduces views of the site, glimpses are possible through breaks in the
    vegetation with clearer and far-reaching views possible from the access.
23. The proposal would not represent the rounding off of existing development, as only
    a relatively small part of the appeal site would be positioned between the spacious
    grounds of Southerly and Burnell House. I found the majority of the site to have a
    strong visual and physical relationship with the large expanse of open countryside
    that lies to the east and north, thereby making a positive contribution to the
    character and appearance of the area.
24. The indicative layout shows the provision of a main road off the access and 2
    further smaller service roads serving 8 detached dwellings. Whilst no detailed
    plans are before me, the development of the site with 7 or 8 dwellings with
    associated access and hardstanding, would form a significant urbanising intrusion
    into the countryside, eroding the rural character and appearance of the area.
25. An appeal decision4 that found a housing proposal would infill a gap between
    existing residential properties has been presented in support of the proposal. Due
    to the size of the appeal site and its relationship with existing development, I have
    found this not to be the case with the scheme before me and therefore cannot
    draw any direct comparison with the proposal that would weigh in its favour.
26. In conclusion, the proposed development would have an unacceptable effect on
    the character and appearance of the area, contrary to CS Policies, CS5, CS6 and
    CS17 and SAMDev Plan Policy MD2. Together these policies seek, inter alia,
    developments that contribute to and respect local context and character, including
    the form and layout of existing development.
Other Matters
27. The second reason for refusal relates to the total floorspace of the proposal being
    likely to exceed 1000 square metres, which would categorise it as a major
    development and thereby causing it to be excluded from a grant of permission in

4
    Appeal decision Ref: 6005634


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    4
Appeal Decision 6011150


         principle. However, in this case, permission in principle has been sought for
         between 7 and 8 dwellings on the appeal site, which is below the 10 houses or
         more threshold for a major development. Moreover, as this is the first stage of the
         permission in principle consent route and there are no detailed plans before me,
         including floor areas, the appeal scheme does not constitute a major development.
28. I acknowledge the Council’s concerns surrounding the efficient use of the land in
    the event permission in principle were to be granted. Nevertheless, as I am
    dismissing the appeal for other reasons, including its effect on the character and
    appearance of the area based on the proposed range of dwellings, I have found
    this to not be a determinative matter, and it is not necessary for me to examine this
    further.
29. The appellant refers to positive pre-application discussions. However, I am mindful
    that pre-application discussions are informal and not binding on any future
    decision the Council may make once a proposal has been subject to the formal
    planning process. This has not swayed me from my conclusions on the main
    issues in this case.
30. It is suggested that the proposal would deliver an appropriate level of affordable
    housing. However, as the proposal relates to a permission in principle, any
    provision could not be secured since planning conditions or obligations cannot be
    included. Any provision would need to be secured at the technical details consent
    stage.
Planning Balance
31. The appeal site would not be in a suitable location for the proposed development,
    in respect of the spatial strategy in the development plan, and accessibility to
    services and facilities, and would also have an unacceptable effect on the
    character and appearance of the area. I have found that the proposal would
    conflict with the development plan as a whole.
32. There is no dispute between the parties that the Council cannot currently
    demonstrate a five-year supply of deliverable housing sites, though the Council
    has stated the figure at 4.61 years and the appellant refers to 3.81 years given in
    an appeal decision5. However, irrespective of the scale of the housing land supply
    shortfall, the proposed development does not fall within any of the forms of
    development given in policy S5(1) of the Framework, including S5(1)(j) as, for the
    reasons already given, the appeal site is not physically well-related to an existing
    settlement. Consequently, the appeal scheme falls to be considered under policy
    S5(4), where proposals should only be approved in exceptional circumstances,
    where the benefits of the proposal would substantially outweigh the adverse
    effects, including to the character of the countryside and in relation to promoting
    sustainable patterns of movement.
33. Paragraph 2 of Annex A of the Framework states that development plan policies
    should not be given reduced weight simply because they were adopted prior to the
    publication of the Framework. The spatial strategy set out in CS Policies CS1, CS5
    and CS6, as well as SAMDev Plan Policies MD1 and MD7a is consistent with the
    Framework’s aim in locating development where it can support sustainable


5
    Appeal Decision Ref: APP/L3245/W/25/3362414)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           5
Appeal Decision 6011150


       patterns of movement. However, considering the lack of a 5-year housing land
       supply, I attribute moderate weight to this conflict.
34. CS Policies, CS5, CS6 and CS17 and SAMDev Plan Policy MD2 are also
    consistent with the Framework in requiring development proposals to respond to
    their context, so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings. Whilst
    there is scope to mitigate some of the harm through the technical details consents
    stage, due to the long-lasting nature of the effects, I afford significant weight to this
    conflict. In addition, national decision-making policy DP3(3) advises that
    development proposals should be refused if, without clear justification, they conflict
    with DP3(1), as is the case here with the evidence before me.
35. Set against the harm that I have identified, there would be benefits associated with
    the development. The proposal would make a positive contribution in the creation
    of 7 or 8 dwellings, where the Framework instructs substantial weight to be given
    to the provision of homes. There could also be the potential for the provision of
    affordable housing. There would also be associated economic benefits during the
    period of construction and once the dwellings are occupied as well as the delivery
    of Biodiversity Net Gain.
36. Having regard to the scale and permanence of the development, the benefits
    would not substantially outweigh the adverse effects, and exceptional
    circumstances have not been demonstrated. As such the presumption in favour of
    sustainable development set out in policy S5 of the Framework does not apply.
Conclusion
37. The proposal conflicts with the development plan as a whole and the material
    considerations, including the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal should be
    decided other than in accordance with it. The appeal is therefore dismissed.

P Barton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
