Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 1 September 2026
by H Miles BA (hons), MA, MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011972
Semper Fidelis, Wire Mill Lane, Newchapel, Surrey RH7 6HJ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Newman-Bucket against the decision of Tandridge District
     Council.
•    The application Ref is TA/2026/347.
•    The development proposed is conversion of equestrian site to residential use, erection of eight
     detached dwellings.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     I have taken the description of development from the decision notice and appeal
       form as it accurately and succinctly describes the act of development.
Main Issues
3.     The main issues are:
       •    Whether the proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt
            having regard to the National Planning Policy Framework 2026 (the
            Framework) and any relevant development plan policies including the effect of
            the proposal on the openness of the Green Belt.
       •    Whether the development would promote sustainable transport modes.
       •    Whether any harm by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm, would
            be clearly outweighed by other considerations, so as to amount to the very
            special circumstances required to justify the proposal.
Reasons
Whether Inappropriate Development
4.     The Framework states that inappropriate development is, by definition, harmful to
       the Green Belt. Development in the Green Belt is inappropriate and thus should be
       approved only if very special circumstances exist, unless it falls within one of the
       exceptions in the Framework.
5.     Of relevance to the appeal, Policy GB7 (1) (e) of the Framework provides an
       exception for the redevelopment of previously developed land (including a material
       change of use to residential or mixed use including residential), which would not

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011972


       cause substantial harm to the openness of the Green Belt. In this case, this is
       broadly echoed by Policies DP10 and DP13 of the Tandridge Local Plan Part 2:
       Detailed Policies (2014) (LP).
6.     There is no dispute between the parties that the appeal site is previously
       developed land for the purposes of the Framework. This exception specifically
       permits a change to residential use, however it must also not cause substantial
       harm to openness. I will therefore go on to consider the effects on openness.
7.     The appeal site has a group of buildings in the western corner of the site with a
       large barn and some smaller buildings including stables towards the boundaries. In
       the eastern part of the site are buildings which are modest and low level. There are
       gaps between these buildings which breaks up the massing of these small
       structures. The central part of the site is mainly open and includes a sand school.
       The figures from the appellant and the Council vary, but in combination these
       buildings have a volume of between 6,130m3 - 7,270m3, a footprint of around
       1,780m2 and heights of 2.9m up to 5.6m.
8.     The development proposes eight new two storey detached dwellings along with
       access routes, parking, private gardens and paraphernalia associated with the
       houses. They would be arranged in two groups in the eastern and western corners
       with open space in the northern corner and an access road which circles a planted
       area in the centre. The houses would have a volume of 6,260m3 a footprint of
       around 990m2 – 1,090m2 and a height of up to 8.6m.
9.     Openness has both spatial and visual dimensions. The proposed development
       would result in a reduction in the size of the footprint of the buildings on the site
       and, taking the appellant’s figures, there would also be a reduction in volume, but
       there would be a notable increase in the overall height. Additionally, the bulk of the
       buildings on the site would change from one large barn and a collection of low
       level, modest equestrian buildings to eight large two storey houses with pitched
       roofs. As such, although the number of buildings and volume would reduce, the
       proposed dwellings would be taller, bulkier and more conspicuous. The separate
       residential curtilages would also result in the introduction of domestic
       paraphernalia for multiple households as well as hardstanding for an access road
       and driveways which would further impact on openness. The development would
       be clearly seen from the footpath to the west as well as from nearby properties and
       consequently these effects would be highly visible. As such, there would be harm
       to spatial and visual openness and taken together the harm would be substantial.
10. The appellant has sought to address the concerns of the previous Inspector
    through the relocation of the built form and the open space to the centre and
    northern part of the site. However, for the reasons above, it can be seen that the
    appeal scheme does not result in an acceptable impact on openness.
11. As such, it is inappropriate development in terms of the Framework and Policies
    DP10 and DP13 of the LP as set out above.
Sustainable Transport Modes
12. The appeal site is located on Wire Mill Lane, which is a narrow rural road with no
    lighting or pavements. It connects to Eastbourne Road, the A22, which leads onto
    the services and facilities in Felbridge. There are bus stops at Wembury Park with
    three-four services in each direction on Monday-Friday only.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011972


13. On Wire Mill Lane, although the speeds of vehicles are usually slow, the features
    set out above would not be attractive to occupants walking from the site.
    Particularly in hours of darkness, for children and those with mobility issues.
    Furthermore, the majority of services are some distance away. Whilst the bus
    service would provide some limited connections for those that would walk to the
    stop, given its infrequency it would not be suitable for most journeys. In addition,
    the speed and traffic flows on the main road would mean that it would not be
    attractive to the majority of cyclists. Whilst there may be opportunities for
    recreational walking and cycling nearby, overall, the vast majority of day to day
    journeys from the site would be likely to be by private car.
14. The appellant states that there would be a reduction in the number of vehicle
    movements to and from the site. Nevertheless, the new occupants would not be in
    a location that would limit the need to travel, particularly by private car, or offer a
    genuine choice of transport modes for residents and users. This is a rural area,
    however opportunities to improve sustainable transport have not been shown to
    exist. As such, even taking into account the existing situation, this would not
    promote sustainable transport modes or be a sustainable location for the proposed
    residential development.
15. Therefore, the development would not promote sustainable transport modes. As
    such, it would be contrary to Policy CSP1 of the Tandridge District Core Strategy
    (2008) (CS) which seeks to locate development where it promotes sustainable
    patterns of travel, amongst other things.
Other Considerations
16. The Council cannot demonstrate a 5 year supply of deliverable housing sites. The
    appellant states that there is a 1.92 year supply and this is not disputed by the
    Council and the latest Housing Delivery Test figures show a measurement of 38%.
    The proposed development would provide the social and economic benefits of
    eight houses in an area where there is a clear shortfall and I afford substantial
    weight to the benefits of providing these homes. I have also taken into account the
    scale of the development proposed. Overall, the benefits would be moderate in
    this case.
Green Belt Balance
17. The proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt which is, by
    definition, harmful. There is also harm to the Green Belt due to the effect on
    openness. In addition, there are unacceptable effects with regard to sustainable
    transport. Substantial weight should be given to the harm to the Green Belt. Very
    special circumstances will not exist unless the harm to the Green Belt and any
    other harm is clearly outweighed by other considerations.
18. On the other hand, the proposed development results in the moderate benefits
    identified above. Consequently, the considerations advanced by the appellant,
    even when considered together, do not clearly outweigh the totality of the harm.
    The very special circumstances necessary to justify the development therefore do
    not exist. As such the proposal conflicts with the Framework and DP10 and DP13
    of the LP, the aims of which are set out above.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011972


Planning Balance
19. The development would be outside a settlement, However Policy S5 (5) of the
    Framework states that it does not apply to development proposals in the Green
    Belt which, in these circumstances, should be determined in accordance with
    policies GB6 and GB7. The development proposals do not accord with an up-to-
    date development plan or the decision-making policies in the Framework.
    Consequently, the presumption in favour of sustainable development does not
    apply in this case.
Conclusion
20. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    Therefore, for the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

H Miles
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
