Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 19 August 2026
by Mr C J Tivey BSc (Hons) BPl MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date:27 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011690
 190 York Way, Watford, Hertfordshire WD25 9RX
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Ms Coupe & Mr Carpenter against the decision of Watford Borough Council.
 •    The application Ref. is 26/00031/FULH.
 •    The development proposed is for a single storey rear extension, double storey side extension and
      front porch amendments.


 Decision
 1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a single storey rear
    extension, double storey side extension and front porch amendments at 190 York
    Way, Watford, Hertfordshire WD25 9RX in accordance with the terms of the
    application, Ref. 26/00031/FULH, subject to the following conditions:
       1)      The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
               date of this decision.
       2)      The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
               the following approved plans: 1125-01 and 1125-03 Revision B.
 Preliminary Matter
 2. A new National Planning Policy Framework (Framework) was issued on 17 August
    2026 which replaced the previous version published in December 2024, and all
    other iterations. Paragraph 1 of Policy S4, as set out therein, stipulates that
    development proposals within settlements should be approved unless the benefits
    of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies in the framework.
 3. Policy L2 of the Framework stipulates that substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits where proposals would achieve, amongst other things, the creation of
    additional homes or floor space within settlements through additional development
    within existing plots, provided that it is consistent with the overall street scene
    (Policy L2, para. 1.d i.). Furthermore, paragraph 1.d.iii. of Policy L2 states that
    where the development would involve the use of residential curtilages, it should not
    occupy more than twice the footprint of all existing buildings on the site and,
    following development, should retain at least 50% of the non-developed area within
    the curtilage of the existing buildings, unless additional development can be
    accommodated without harm to the overall character of the area. Policy DP3 of the
    Framework sets out the key principles for well-designed places.


 https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011690


4. I consider that this new national policy does not affect the substance of the
   proposal before me and therefore it was not necessary to refer back to the parties, I
   have determined the appeal on this basis.
Main Issue
5. The main issues are the effect of the appeal proposal upon the character and
   appearance of the area; and upon the living conditions of the occupants of
   192 York Way, with specific reference to outlook.
Reasons
Character and Appearance
6. The appeal site comprises a two storey link-semi-detached house situated within a
   line of similarly designed properties. No190 is attached to, and separated from
   no192 by a single storey flat roof outbuilding serving each property, providing
   incidental and ancillary accommodation to the respective dwellings.
7. Consequently, there is a quite significant space in between nos 190 and 192 and I
   noted on my site visit that 180-182 York Way (York House) has been extended to
   both sides with the latter being adjacent to no184 giving rise to a reduced gap
   between the two. 194 York Way has also been extended to its side over two
   storeys, although that is on the end of the row of houses adjacent to Widgeon Way,
   but demonstrates a change in the character of this part of the street since originally
   constructed.
8. As acknowledged by the Council, the absence of a set-in of the proposed side
   extension from the principal elevation does feature within the surrounding area; and
   the 0.5m set-in from the boundary shared with no192 at the front of the property
   would increase further back into the site due to the tapered nature of the boundary.
9. I note the concerns about the reduction of the ‘sky gap’ between the buildings,
   however, by virtue of the aforementioned outbuilding which serves no192, there
   would remain a reasonable distance at first floor level between the two and
   therefore no terracing effect would occur. In coming to this conclusion, I have had
   regard to the advice as set out within the Residential Design Guidance 2016 (RDG)
   which, amongst other things, requires extensions to respect the scale and
   character of the properties within the street as a whole; and whilst I acknowledge
   that the existing view between nos190 and 192 would be reduced by the proposal, I
   consider that this would not have a detrimental effect upon the street scene.
10. Therefore I consider that the proposal would not have a harmful effect upon the
    character and appearance of the area and complies with Policies QD6.2 and QD6.4
    of the Watford Local Plan 2021 – 2038 (WLP) which together require proposals for
    new development to make a positive contribution to higher quality design,
    welcoming and taking design cues from existing buildings where they make a
    positive contribution to the character of the area, requiring facades and their
    detailing to have a positive relationship with the street.
Living Conditions
11. As highlighted above, no192 has a single storey outbuilding adjoining that on the
    appeal dwelling. There is a window on the rear elevation of this ancillary element
    although the bulk of the neighbouring dwelling, which has a flat roof single storey

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6011690


     extension to the rear of its main range, does not have any windows facing the
     appeal site. Consequently, by virtue of this, the width of the plot, along with the
     angle of the neighbouring dwelling facing slightly away from that of the proposed
     two storey rear extension, I consider, on balance, that it would not be unduly
     overbearing upon the occupants of the neighbouring dwelling as a whole.
12. Therefore, pursuant to paragraph 8.4.1 of the RDG, whilst there would be an
    increase in the sense of enclosure experienced from within a habitable room and
    the rear garden of no192, due to its relatively limited depth of 3.4m I consider that
    the proposal would not unduly affect the outlook of the occupiers of the
    neighbouring property and therefore, again it complies with Policies QD6.2 and
    QD6.4.
Conclusion and Conditions
13. For the reasons set out above and having regard to all other matters raised, I
    conclude that the appeal should succeed.
14. In addition to the standard time limit condition, I consider that it is appropriate to
    require the development to be carried out in accordance with the submitted plans in
    the interests of protecting the character and appearance of the area.


C J Tivey
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     3
