Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by P Barton BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 07 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011209
Land east of Lichfield Road, Little Haywood, Stafford ST18 0FH
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Miss Kate Perry against the decision of Stafford Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/41603/FUL.
•    The development proposed is change of use to dog walking field and associated works.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A new version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published on 17 August 2026. The policy emphasis of the parts of the Framework
       most relevant to this appeal have not changed. As a result, I have not sought
       comments on the new version of the Framework, and I am satisfied that no party’s
       interests have been prejudiced by taking this approach.
3.     The application form indicates that the development started on 1 July 2025.
       However, I have considered the appeal based on the proposed plans before me,
       rather than anything that has been carried out on site.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on highway safety.
Reasons
5.     Access to the field and the associated parking and turning area is via an existing
       access point off the A51 Lichfield Road. There is no dispute between the parties in
       relation to the width dimensions of this access, as indicated on the submitted
       plans. On the basis of the evidence before me and from my own observations, I
       am satisfied that 2 vehicles can be positioned alongside each other on this access,
       within the kerbstones, before it reduces to a width that can only accommodate a
       single vehicle.
6.     However, due to the extent of the width and radii of the access, a vehicle entering
       the site off the A51 would need to undertake this manoeuvre with particular care if
       there was a vehicle leaving the site at the same time. It would also require the
       vehicle exiting the site to be fully positioned to the correct side of the access, as
       shown on the submitted drawings. If a vehicle were to exit the site in a position that
       is not immediately adjacent to that side of the access, any vehicle wishing to enter


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011209


         the site would need to wait in the carriageway of the A51 until the access was
         clear or drive partly over the highway verge.
7.       The provision of an on-line pre-booking system, with instructions, and a 15-minute
         buffer between appointments, which could be conditioned, seeks to manage the
         movement of vehicles so the previous customer has already left before the next
         customer arrives.
8.       However, there is no compelling evidence before me that the time frame of this
         buffer would be sufficient, taking into account people arriving early and leaving late
         due to, for example, misjudging the time required to travel to the site or retrieving,
         cleaning and drying dogs before being placed into a vehicle.
9.       Despite the monitoring of the site by CCTV, a lack of an on-site presence to
         actively enforce the arrangements means that I am not persuaded that there would
         not be occasions where an overlap between visitors associated with different
         bookings on the site would occur. Consequently, there is the real possibility of
         vehicles entering the site at the same time as others exiting.
10. The stretch of the A51 that the access is located along is relatively straight with no
    other accesses within the vicinity. Therefore, it is reasonable to expect that
    vehicles would be driving in a manner that would reflect the speed limit and this
    was reinforced by my observations of the traffic flow on the A51. For visitors not
    familiar with the exact location of the access, and in the absence of appropriate
    signage, vehicles may have to decelerate hastily, resulting in different tracking
    when entering the site than that shown on the submitted plans.
11. As such, the proposed access arrangement could result in vehicles waiting on the
    A51 or overriding the adjoining highway verge, resulting in the potential for conflict
    between highway users as well as mud and debris ending up on the highway.
    Consequently, on the evidence presented, and even with a driver exercising
    caution when using the access, I cannot conclude with reasonable certainty that
    the development would not represent a hazard to highway users.
12. Although I noted 2 low yellow poles and a number of small orange flags around the
    access, these were not particularly prominent and did not sway me away from my
    findings or provide a suitable warning for the location of the site’s entrance.
13. My attention has been drawn to an approval1 for a similar proposal, and the
    differences with the appeal scheme, including a narrower access width, a greater
    number of dog walking fields and parking spaces, its positioning on a road with a
    higher speed limit and a shorter handover period. Moreover, it is also claimed that
    the approved plans share similarities with the appeal scheme as they do not show
    wider radii kerbs and the existing access was not approved to be widened.
14. Notwithstanding this, photographic evidence submitted by the Council of that
    particular site before and after the development shows significant changes to the
    access, including what appears to be wider radii kerbs. Furthermore, I do not have
    full details relating to the particular circumstances of that development, including
    the vehicular movements associated with the site’s previous use and the traffic
    flows and conditions of the highway, and whether the circumstances are
    comparable to the appeal proposal. As such a comparison is of limited relevance

1
    Planning decision Ref: 22/036826/FUL


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011209


       in this instance. I have therefore considered the appeal before me on its individual
       planning merits.
15. For the above reasons, the development has an unacceptable effect on highway
    safety, contrary to Policy T2 of The Plan for Stafford Borough 2011-2031, which
    requires, amongst other things, all new development to have safe and adequate
    means of access and not materially impair highway safety or traffic movement.
Other Matters
16. I recognise that there is a level of support for the appeal scheme, including, but not
    limited to, the provision of a service and a form of rural diversification. However,
    these benefits do not overcome the adverse impact on highway safety that I have
    found and to which I have attributed significant weight.
17. Concerns that the suggested alterations to the access would not be financially
    viable or sustainable for such a small-scale venture to absorb have not been
    substantiated and as such I give this matter limited weight in the planning balance.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
18. Given in Policy S3 of the Framework is a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. Policy S5 applies as the type of development proposed would be
    located outside of a settlement. However, policy TR6 of the Framework is clear
    that development proposals should be refused if they would have an unacceptable
    impact on highway safety. Applying policy S5 (2), the moderate benefits listed
    above are significantly outweighed by the adverse effects I have found in terms of
    highway safety.
19. The appeal scheme conflicts with the development plan as a whole and the
    material considerations, including the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal
    should be decided other than in accordance with it. Therefore, the appeal should
    be dismissed.

P Barton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
