Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by Graham Wraight BA(Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011274
Land To The South Of 18, Thompson Street, Chesterfield, Derbyshire S41 9AR
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a grant of planning permission subject to conditions.
•    The appeal is made by Michael Walker (Walkers Building Services Ltd ) against the decision of
     Chesterfield Borough Council.
•    The application Ref CHE/25/00866/VCON was approved on 10 March 2026 and planning permission
     was granted subject to conditions.
•    The development permitted is Variation of Condition 2 (approved drawings) of application
     CHE/16/00727/FUL- Pitched roof two storey building for 3 no. light industrial units at ground floor
     with 7 no. offices above; including new vehicle access off Eastside Road.
•    The condition in dispute is No 10 which states that:
     The first floor office windows to the north elevations of the buildings hereby permitted shall be
     obscure glazed to a minimum of level 4 glazing and fitted with window restrictors such that the
     windows may not open more than 100mm. The obscure glazing and window restrictors shall
     thereafter be retained.
•    The reason given for the condition is:
     In the interests of residential amenity in accordance with policies CLP14 and 20 of the Adopted Local
     Plan.

Decision
1.       The appeal is allowed and the planning permission Ref CHE/25/00866/VCON for
         Variation of Condition 2 (approved drawings) of application CHE/16/00727/FUL-
         Pitched roof two storey building for 3 no. light industrial units at ground floor with 7
         no. offices above; including new vehicle access off Eastside Road at Land To The
         South Of 18, Thompson Street, Chesterfield, Derbyshire S41 9AR granted on 10
         March 2026 by Chesterfield Borough Council, is varied by deleting condition 10
         and substituting for it the following condition:
     1) The following first floor office windows to the north elevations of the buildings
        hereby permitted shall be obscure glazed to a minimum of level 4 glazing and
        fitted with window restrictors such that the windows may not open more than
        100mm:

     •     Two windows to office 1
     •     Two windows to office 2
     •     Three windows to office 5 (including the window to the partitioned room within
           that office)

           The obscure glazing and window restrictors shall thereafter be retained.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011274


Preliminary Matter
2.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
       August 2026. I am satisfied that this does not have any material bearing on the
       matters relevant to the main issue in this case, and therefore I have not referred
       back to the parties.
Background & Main Issue
3.     Planning permission was granted in 2017 to construct 3 light industrial units at
       ground floor with 7 offices above. The Council accepts that this planning
       permission was commenced in time, and part of the development has been built
       out, consisting of what was referred to as Office 7 and the light industrial unit
       below it on the 2017 approved plans. The first floor windows in this built section
       differ from those approved in 2017, in terms of their number and their positioning.
4.     An application was made under Section 73 of the Town and Country Planning Act
       1990 (as amended) to make various amendments to the 2017 scheme. That
       application was granted, but a condition (10) was imposed requiring that the first
       floor office windows to the north elevations of the building be obscure glazed to a
       minimum of level 4 glazing and fitted with window restrictors such that the windows
       may not open more than 100mm.
5.     The appellant seeks to delete the condition on the grounds that it is not needed in
       the interests of residential amenity. The main issue is therefore whether the
       condition is necessary in order to protect the living conditions of the occupiers of
       the adjacent dwelling with regard to overlooking, and whether it meets the tests set
       out in Policy DM6 of the Framework.
Reasons
6.     The main north elevation windows to what is referred to as Office 7 on the 2017
       approved plans were full size windows. There were three such windows and no
       restriction was put on them in terms of being obscurely glazed or restricted in their
       opening. Whilst the Council has concerns as to the neighbour consultation that
       occurred in relation to the 2017 permission, their Delegated Report states that a
       site notice was posted. In addition, there is no substantive evidence that the Case
       Officer at the time was not aware of the relationship between those windows and
       the adjacent land and the dwelling located there, and indeed they note in their
       report the residential use of the land to the north. There is photographic evidence
       in their Delegated Report which confirms that their assessment was informed by a
       visit to the site.
7.     Aside from this and in terms of the specific planning merits that arise, the windows
       in question are offset from the common boundary, they primarily overlook the end
       section of the residential garden and views towards the adjacent dwelling are at an
       oblique angle and from a reasonable distance. I find there to be nothing to suggest
       that the Case Officer for the 2017 approved scheme erred in their assessment of
       the impact that would arise or erred in not seeking to require obscure glazing and
       opening restrictions to those three windows. Although now in different positions,
       the impact from the windows is not materially any different. In my own judgment, it
       is not necessary that windows on this part of the building are constrained in the
       way that condition 10 constrains them in order to protect the living conditions of the
       occupiers of the adjacent dwelling. There are also two smaller windows on the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011274


       north elevation of the built out section, but their presence does not materially alter
       the impact on the adjacent dwelling and they too do not need to be subject to the
       provisions of condition 10.
8.     The remaining windows in the north elevation were permitted in 2017 as very
       narrow in width or high level. There would have been limited potential for
       overlooking to occur from these. In contrast, the windows now approved are much
       wider. They would be positioned immediately adjacent to the common boundary
       with the adjacent dwelling and would offer the potential for intrusive overlooking
       towards the areas closest to it, which its occupiers would reasonably expect to be
       more private, and towards the dwelling itself. This would cause significant harm to
       the living conditions of the occupiers of this adjacent dwelling and means that it is
       reasonable and necessary to require that those windows be obscure glazed and
       have restricted opening, in order to prevent overlooking. This ensures that there
       would be no harm to living conditions and that the development would accord with
       Policies CLP14 and CLP20 of the Chesterfield Borough Local Plan 2020 in that
       respect. The retention of the condition for those windows also meets with the other
       tests set out in Policy DM6 of the Framework.
9.     The appellant suggests an alternative with the bottom half of the windows
       obscurely glazed, the top clear glazed and no restrictors, however such a
       configuration would still allow unacceptable overlooking. They also refer to
       narrower windows, but that is not the proposal that was before the Council. In any
       event, it appears that there would be an intention that those windows would be
       wide enough to escape from, and therefore they would be highly likely to also
       facilitate unacceptable overlooking.
Other Matters
10. Whilst the appellant refers to fire safety matters, they do not dispute the Council’s
    assertion that obscure glazed windows with restrictors in place can meet with the
    requisite fire standards. They also raise concern that office 2 would be unattractive
    for potential occupiers if it has only obscure glazed windows that were restricted.
    However, this consideration does not justify the harm to living conditions that I
    have identified.
11. A number of representations from interested parties were made at planning
    application stage. Apart from where they refer to the matters of overlooking and
    loss of privacy, those representations raise matters which fall outside the scope of
    my considerations in relation to Condition 10.
Conclusion
12. The condition should be varied to address the matter relating to the windows in
    Office 7. This means that the appeal will be allowed so that the wording of the
    condition can be varied. However, I have worded the condition so that the original
    requirements set out in condition 10 remain in place with respect to the other first
    floor office windows to the north elevations of the buildings.

Graham Wraight
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
