 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 5 August 2026
 by Lynne Evans BA MA MRTPI MRICS
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 17 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011295
 9 Princes Avenue, Petts Wood, Orpington BR5 1QP
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Alexander Farrell against the decision of the Council of the
      London Borough of Bromley.
 •    The application Ref is 26/01085/HPA.
 •    The development proposed is erection of first floor rear extension and raising of height of existing
      first floor rear extension.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. The appeal submission was amended to include a Certificate B under the Town
   and Country Planning (Development Management Procedure) (England) Order
   2015 in respect of ownership, together with the submission of a copy of the notice
   served, to correspond with the certificate served at the application stage.
3. I have been referred to an appeal decision in 2019 at the same property under the
   Ref: APP/G5180/D/19/3232331 which granted planning permission for, amongst
   other matters, a first floor rear extension. The Council states that the depth of the
   extension the subject of this appeal would be the same as previously approved
   under the 2019 appeal, but I have no further details on that scheme, including on
   the proposed height of that extension as approved.
Main Issue
4. The main issue in this appeal is the effect of the proposal on the character and
   appearance of the existing dwelling and on the Chislehurst Road Conservation
   Area and Petts Road Area of Special Residential Character.
Reasons
5. The appeal property is a semi-detached, two storey dwelling on the south-west side
   of Princes Avenue and within a predominantly residential area. The immediate
   surrounding area comprises primarily pairs of semi-detached dwellings, mainly with
   full or part white painted rendered front elevations, either with gable fronts and
   asymmetrical front roofs, as exemplified by the appeal property, or in a neo-Tudor
   style with timber panelling.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6011295


6. The appeal site and surrounding area lie within the Chislehurst Road Conservation
   Area. Section 72 (1) of The Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act
   1990 requires me to pay special attention to the desirability of preserving or
   enhancing the character or appearance of such areas. The appeal site and
   surrounding area also lie within the Petts Wood Area of Special Residential
   Character (ASRC).
7. The proposal seeks to erect a first floor rear extension and raise the height of the
   existing first floor rear extension to create a rear extension across the width of the
   original property, under a flat roof together with the introduction of two rooflights.
8. The significance of the Conservation Area relates to its cohesive and visually
   distinctive character and appearance, largely influenced and developed on the
   garden suburb principles of design.The same characteristics relate to the
   designation of the ASRC. Policy 44 of the Council’s Local Plan (2019) (Local Plan)
   requires proposals within such areas to respect, enhance and strengthen their
   special and distinctive qualities.
9. The proposed development would not increase the depth of the first floor rear
   extension but would materially increase its height. The increased height would
   result in a clumsy and jarring junction with the rear roof, and the roof to the
   extension would sit noticeably above the existing eaves level. This would result in a
   visually unsympathetic and discordant roof profile and detract from the character
   and appearance of the existing dwelling. The unsatisfactory profile from the height
   of the rear extension would be exacerbated by the introduction of two rooflights to
   the flat roof which would add to the overall bulk and massing of the proposal. The
   proposed development would not respect but would harm the character and
   appearance of the existing dwelling.
10. The profile of the existing first floor rear extension is not precisely the same as the
    rear extension on the adjoining property which is slightly higher. However, the
    difference in height and profile with the proposed extension at the appeal property
    would be very noticeable and would be visually discordant and therefore further
    upset the balance between the pair of properties.
11. Given its siting at the rear, the proposed extension would not be visible in street
    scene views, although it would be seen from a number of surrounding properties.
    Whilst it would not, therefore, detract from public views of the Conservation Area, in
    failing to respect the character and appearance of the property, it would harm the
    integrity and significance of the Conservation Area; it would not preserve its
    character and appearance. It would, for the same reasons, also not respect the
    distinctive qualities of the ASRC.
12. I therefore conclude that the proposed development would materially harm the
    character and appearance of the existing property and would not respect the ASRC
    and would not preserve the character and appearance of the Chislehurst Road
    Conservation Area. This would conflict with Policies 37, 41 and 44 of the Local Plan
    and the Council’s Urban Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document (2023),
    all of which, amongst other matters, seek a high standard of design which respects
    the local context and the significance of designated heritage assets.
13. Paragraph 212 of the Framework advises that when considering the impact of a
    proposed development on the significance of a designated heritage asset, great
    weight should be given to the asset’s conservation. Consistent with that approach,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
 Appeal Decision 6011295


     paragraph 213 says that any harm to, or loss of, the significance of a designated
     heritage asset, including from its alteration, should require clear and convincing
     justification.
14. I have identified harm to the character and appearance of the Conservation Area.
    Given the relatively small scale of the proposal, the level of harm would in respect
    of the heritage asset and using the language of the Framework, be ‘less than
    substantial’. Under such circumstances, paragraph 215 of the Framework advises
    that this harm should be weighed against the public benefits of the proposal.
15. Neither the Appellant nor the Council has drawn my attention to any public benefits
    arising from the proposal. The Appellant has refenced that the existing rear
    extension is not insulated and this would be incorporated into the proposed
    extension, with a required increase in height. Although this would be largely a
    private benefit, there would be some small scale environmental benefit from these
    works. There would also be a public benefit that would arise to the local economy
    from the required construction works, but this would be limited in effect. Therefore, I
    conclude that the very limited public benefits would not be sufficient to outweigh the
    harm, which although ‘less than substantial’ still attracts ‘great weight’.
Other Considerations
16. The Council has indicated that roof profile for the rear/side element of the 2019
    permission granted on appeal has not been completed in accordance with the
    approved plans. However, this is not before me, and my consideration relates to
    the proposed first floor rear extension.
17. Issues raised by neighbouring residents in respect of property values are not a
    planning matter. Construction and party wall matters would be addressed under
    other legislation and are not material planning considerations.
Conclusion
18. For the reasons set out above and having regard to all other matters raised,
    including in representations, I conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.



L J Evans
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
