Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 September 2026
by John Pearce MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011192
The Stables, Underriver House Road, Underriver, Sevenoaks TN15 0SJ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
     planning permission
•    The appeal is made by Mr Joe Winder against Sevenoaks District Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00135/FUL.
•    The development proposed is the erection of a stables block.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the erection of a
       stable block at The Stables, Underriver House Road, Underriver, Sevenoaks
       TN15 0SJ in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 26/00135/FUL,
       subject to the conditions in the attached Schedule.
Application for Costs
2.     An application for costs was made by Mr Joe Winder against Sevenoaks District
       Council. This application is the subject of a separate Decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     The appeal is made against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of
       a decision on an application for planning permission. In response to the appeal,
       the Council has prepared a statement outlining its view that permission should be
       refused. I have had regard to this statement and the suggested reasons for
       refusal within it in framing the main issues below.
4.     The proposal is for the erection of a stables block only and does not include the
       change of use of the land. If planning permission is required for any change of use
       of the land, it is open to the appellant to apply for this.
5.     The revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published
       in August 2026. The revised Framework is a material consideration which should
       be taken into account from the day of publication. Having considered the revisions
       and in light of the principles of natural justice, the parties have been provided with
       an opportunity to comment on the revised Framework.
Main Issue
6.     The main issue is whether the proposed development would conserve and
       enhance landscape and scenic beauty in the Kent Downs National Landscape
       (NL).


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011192


Reasons
7.       The appeal site comprises part of a larger field accessed from Underriver House
         Road. The site is within the Kent Downs NL. Section 245 of the Levelling-up and
         Regeneration Act 2023 places a duty upon me to seek to further the purpose of
         conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of the NL. Policy N4 of the
         Framework states that proposals within Protected Landscapes should be limited
         in scale and extent and sensitively located and designed to avoid harm to the
         statutory purposes and special qualities of the Protected Landscape. Moreover,
         substantial weight should be placed on the importance of conserving and
         enhancing the natural beauty of these areas.
8.       The site is within a predominantly rural area comprising large fields bounded by
         established hedgerows and mature trees. The low-lying, undulating agricultural
         landscape rises to a wooded ridge that provides expansive views of the
         surrounding area, including distance views of the site. Development in the area is
         limited and primarily includes that typical to this part of the NL, including scattered
         hamlets, farmsteads and large houses interspersed throughout the arable and
         pasture fields and the woodland. The undeveloped and open nature of the site
         and the wider field makes a positive contribution to the special qualities of the NL.
9.       The proposal is for a building consisting of two stables. The stables building would
         have a simple rectangular form with a low ridge height and would be positioned
         discreetly close to the existing access from Underriver House Road. The
         diminutive scale of the building would limit its visual impact within the area,
         particularly from medium and long-distance viewpoints.
10. While the existing and proposed vegetation, including the hedgerows forming the
    field boundaries, would restrict views of the building, it would be visible within the
    landscape, particularly from Underriver house Road. However, visibility is not
    analogous to harm and whilst the building would be detached from other
    development in the area, the stables would be of a scale and design that would be
    sensitive to the rural setting of the site and would not be out-of-character within
    the landscape. Moreover, the discreet position close to established hedgerows in
    addition to the supplementary planting, and the application of black staining to the
    timber boarding would further assist in blending the proposal within its
    surroundings.
11. The Council has drawn my attention to two appeal decisions for development at
    the site. The details before me in respect of the previous proposals are limited, but
    I note that the Inspector for the first appeal1 considered that the stables building
    would be a sizeable structure and that being set back from the road would also
    accentuate its isolation in the wider landscape. The proposal before me would be
    of a limited scale and in a more discreet position towards the corner of the site
    where its isolation would not be harmfully accentuated. The second appeal2 was
    for the use of an agricultural field as a private dog walking leisure and recreational
    facility, which differs considerably from the proposal before me. In any event, each
    proposal should be considered on its individual merits and with appropriate regard
    to the development plan and any material considerations.



1
    APP/G2245/W/15/3031307
2
    APP/G2245/W/23/3314956


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6011192


12. I conclude that the proposal would conserve landscape and scenic beauty in the
    NL. The development therefore accords with Policies EN5 and LT2 of the
    Allocations and Development Management Plan 2015, which collectively permit
    proposals where the form, scale, materials and design would conserve and
    enhance the character of the landscape and permit equestrian buildings where
    the proposal would not result in harm to the character of the landscape. The
    proposal would also comply with Policy N4 of the Framework, as set out above.
Other Matters
13. The appeal site is within the Green Belt. The Framework explains that the
    objective of Green Belt policy is to prevent urban sprawl by keeping land
    permanently open and that the essential features of Green Belts are their
    openness and their permanence. Policy GB7 of the Framework sets out
    categories of development that are not inappropriate in the Green Belt, and
    includes at criterion f. iv. the provision of appropriate facilities (in connection with
    the existing use of land or a change of use), including buildings, for outdoor sport,
    outdoor recreation provided the impact on the openness of the Green Belt is
    minimised, and there would not be a significant conflict with the Green Belt
    purposes.
14. The building would be used for outdoor recreation purposes and, given the limited
    scale of the building and its discreet position, the impact on the openness of the
    Green Belt would be minimised and there would not be a significant conflict with
    the Green Belt purposes, including safeguarding the countryside from
    encroachment. It is noteworthy that the Council found similarly in this regard.
15. Concerns have been raised in respect of flooding at the site and in respect of
    contamination from the storage of manure at the site. While the building would be
    within an area that is subject to surface water flooding, the limited scale of the
    proposed development would not lead to an increased risk of flooding either at the
    site or on other land. I note that the Council has reached a similar conclusion.
    Conditions could be included, if I were minded to allow the appeal, to ensure that
    appropriate drainage would be provided and to prevent contamination from the
    manure storage.
16. The proposal would utilise the existing access from Underriver House Road, a
    narrow lane with hedges on either side. The Council indicate that the access is
    lawful. The development would be unlikely to generate a significant number of
    vehicle movements such that the proposal would lead to an unacceptable impact
    on highway safety. I note that the Council reached a similar conclusion in this
    regard.
17. Concerns have also been raised that the scheme would lead to pressure for
    further development at the site. Nevertheless, there is no substantive evidence
    before me that indicates that further development would be necessary. In any
    event, where planning permission is required for further development, any
    proposal should be considered on its individual merits and with appropriate regard
    to the development plan and any material considerations.
18. The site is subject to an Enforcement Notice (EN) in relation to an area of
    hardstanding ,which has been removed. The development that is the subject of
    this appeal differs from that of the EN as it is for a stables building. The EN would
    remain active insofar as it relates to the relevant matters.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011192


19. Schedule 7A of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) (the Act)
    introduced a statutory framework for biodiversity net gain. Under the statutory
    framework, subject to some exceptions, every grant of planning permission is
    deemed to have been granted subject to the Biodiversity Gain Condition.
20. The objective is for development to deliver at least a 10% increase in biodiversity
    value relative to the pre-development biodiversity value of the onsite habitat.
    Nevertheless, there is no dispute that the development would not impact a priority
    habitat and would impact less than 25 square metres of onsite habitat. The parties
    agree that the development is therefore subject to the de minimis exemption.
    Based on the evidence before me, there is reason for me to disagree with this
    conclusion.
21. Concerns have been raised in respect of the ownership of the appeal site and the
    wider field. Ownership Certificate A has been signed and dated on the application
    form. The appellant has subsequently provided a completed HM Land Registry
    TR1 form dated 1 September 2025 that demonstrates that the land under Title
    Number K481310, which includes the site and the wider field, is within the
    ownership of the appellant.
Conditions
22. Suggested planning conditions have been provided by the Council. I have
    considered the conditions having regard to the Framework and advice contained
    in the Planning Practice Guidance. I have adjusted the wording of some
    conditions to improve precision.
23. In addition to the standard time limit condition, I have imposed Condition 2
    requiring that the development is carried out in accordance with the approved
    plans. This is in the interests of certainty.
24. Conditions 3, 4 and 5 are necessary in respect of the character and appearance of
    the area, including the NL. Conditions 6 and 7 are necessary in respect of flood
    risk and managing the risk of contamination. Condition 8 is necessary to limit the
    activity at the site, including vehicular movements. Condition 9 is necessary to
    protect the character and appearance of the NL.
25. The Council has suggested a condition limiting the use of the stables to ponies
    only, defined by the British Horse Society as being less than 13.2 hands high.
    Nonetheless, the Council noted in the Committee Report that there would be
    sufficient land for two horses to graze. The suggested condition is therefore not
    reasonable or necessary and would not meet the test in the Framework.
Conclusion
26. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.

John Pearce
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6011192


Schedule of Conditions

1)     The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from the
       date of this decision.
2)     The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
       following approved plans: ‘Plans and Elevations’ and ‘Proposed Site/Block Plan’.
3)     The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
       building shall be as specified in the Supporting Statement.
4)     Prior to first use of the stable building, or completion, whichever is sooner, a
       detailed landscaping plan confirming the native species planting shall be
       submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The details
       shall the proposed species mix, planting sizes, and a management plan for the
       establishment and maintenance of the hedgerow. The details shall be
       implemented as approved, in the first planting season following the completion or
       first use of the development, whichever is sooner, and shall be retained thereafter.
5)     No external lighting shall be installed at the site.
6)     Prior to the first use of the development hereby permitted, details of the manure
       storage and disposal (including size of trailer, frequency of removal, waterproofing
       materials and measures to ensure no run off enters the ditch to the east), shall be
       submitted and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The details shall
       be implemented as approved prior to the first use of the development and
       maintained thereafter.
7)     Prior to the first use of the development hereby permitted, details of how any
       drainage and run-off will be dealt with shall be submitted to and approved in
       writing by the local planning authority. Drainage/runoff shall not be allowed to
       enter the ditch to the east of the site. The details must be implemented as
       approved prior to the first use of the development and retained thereafter.
8)     The stables hereby permitted shall be used for private equestrian purposes only
       and shall not be operated on a commercial basis at any time.
9)     No additional equestrian paraphernalia (including but not limited to, jumps,
       chattels, storage items) shall be stored on site.

End of Schedule




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
