Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026 by E Clifford BA (Hons) MA
Decision by H Jones BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011456
10 Churchfield Road, Upton St Leonards, Gloucestershire GL4 8AU
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Ashley Naylor against the decision of Stroud District Council.
•   The application Ref is S.26/0150/HHOLD.
•   The development proposed is extension and alterations to property.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for extension and
   alterations to property at 10 Churchfield Road, Upton St Leonards, Gloucestershire
   GL4 8AU in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref S.26/0150/HHOLD,
   subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: NAY-10CR-USL-G-002-A (site location plan
              and block plans) and NAY-10CR-USL-G-003-OPT2 (as proposed plans and
              elevations).
     3)       The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
              property extension and alterations hereby permitted shall match those used
              in the existing building.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. On 17 August 2026, a revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework
   (the Framework) was published. In making my decision, I have had regard to the
   Framework. I am satisfied that the Framework’s content does not affect the
   substance of the main issues in the appeal. Since they would not therefore be
   prejudiced, I have proceeded without further consultation with the main parties.
4. The development description on the application form refers to a previously granted
   planning permission. In the banner heading and the decision above, I have




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011456


        removed this reference as it is not an act of development.
Main Issues
5. The main issues are the effect of the proposed development on the:
        •    character and appearance of the area; and
        •    the living conditions of the occupiers of No. 12 Churchfield Road (No. 12)
             having particular regard to outlook.
Reasons for the Recommendation
Character and appearance
6. The appeal site is a large residential plot comprising of a generous front garden
   and driveway, a large, detached two-storey house, and a spacious rear garden.
   The house has a prominent gabled front elevation served by a dual-pitched roof.
   However, elsewhere, the property’s roofscape also includes flat-roofed and mono-
   pitched roofs and, therefore, exhibits a varied design.
7. The wider street scene is characterised by its variation in housing style; there is a
   mixture of size, age and architectural style present along Churchfield Road. Some
   properties in the area have also been extended and altered, adding to this variety
   of built form and design. The adjacent property, No. 12, was originally of a like
   design to the appeal property. However, at the time of my site visit significant
   extensions and alterations were being undertaken to it.
8. The proposed development would result in a marked increase in the overall size,
   scale and mass of the appeal property. However, the property’s plot is so
   generously sized that the site would not become cramped or overdeveloped. At the
   front of the property, the two side extensions would not be recessed. However,
   because their ridge heights would be lower, they would be served by hipped roofs
   and they would each be narrower in comparison, they would nevertheless remain
   subservient to the central gable. Like is the case now, some varied roof forms
   would remain, but roof hips would be particularly well-represented, and this would
   ensure the roofscape overall would have a balanced appearance.
9. Consequently, whilst the development would markedly remodel the appeal
   property, and its design departs from that which has been previously approved1, it
   would exhibit a high standard of design in its own right and would sympathetically
   add to the heterogenous character of the area.
10. For these reasons, the proposed development would have an acceptable effect on
    the character and appearance of the area. It would thereby comply with Policy HC8
    of the Stroud District Local Plan (2015) (LP) which, amongst other things, requires
    the plot size of the property to be large enough to accommodate any extensions
    proposed, the development to be in keeping with the original dwelling, but also the
    site’s wider setting and location.
Living Conditions
11. Plots along Churchfield Road, including that of the appeal site and its neighbour
    No. 12, are generous with large, deep rear gardens. As such, the occupiers of

1
    Planning permission reference S.19/1942/HHOLD


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            2
Appeal Decision 6011456


     these houses are afforded a spacious outlook, with expansive and clear views of
     the sky. This outlook is also characterised by the verdant nature of the rear
     gardens. There is a very slight change in ground levels between the two properties,
     with the appeal site sitting at a marginally higher level than its neighbour.
12. At the time of my site visit, No. 12 was a significant way through an extensive
    programme of extension and alteration. These works include a rear extension
    which, when completed, will extend its single-storey accommodation to
    approximately the same depth as the adjacent rear extension proposed at the
    appeal site. Since the rear building lines would be similar, the appeal proposal
    would not project significantly beyond, and therefore would not limit outlook from,
    No. 12's ground floor. Nor would it project alongside any significant stretch of No.
    12's rear garden or patio, such that it would have a harmful enclosing effect.
13. The appeal proposal’s two-storey extension on this side would extend beyond a
    first-floor window within No. 12’s adjacent extension; however, the degree of
    projection would not be excessive. The proposed extension on this side would also
    be set-in from the shared boundary with No. 12, providing some separation from
    the neighbouring property. Moreover, the difference in ground levels is marginal.
    Taken together with the expansive outlook already afforded at the rear of No. 12,
    these factors would ensure that the proposal would not be overbearing or
    dominant.
14. Therefore, for these reasons, whilst the proposed development has evolved from
    that previously permitted, it would have an acceptable effect on the living conditions
    of the occupiers of No. 12 having particular regard to outlook. Consequently, it
    would comply with Policy ES3 of the LP which requires, amongst other things, for
    development to not lead to an overbearing effect.
Other Matters
15. A third-party representation queries the location of any scaffolding, construction
    access given the presence of nearby sheds, and access arrangements in order to
    maintain the development in the future. However, these matters are principally
    private matters and, consequently, have limited bearing on my decision.
16. The occupiers of No. 12 have raised concerns regarding the effect of the proposed
    development on sunlight. The rear garden of No. 12 is positioned to the south-east
    of the dwelling, and this orientation means that it will receive generous amounts of
    sunlight. There is no substantive evidence before me to indicate that the proposed
    development would result in an unacceptable reduction in this sunlight.
Conditions
17. Other than the standard time limit condition, it is necessary to ensure that the
    development is carried out in accordance with the approved plans for the reason of
    certainty. In the interests of the character and appearance of the area, a condition
    relating to matching materials is also necessary.
Conclusion and Recommendation
18. The proposed development accords with the development plan as a whole. There
    are no material considerations, including the Framework, that indicate the decision
    should be made other than in accordance with the development plan. Therefore, I


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011456


     recommend that the appeal should be allowed, subject to the conditions set out
     above.

E Clifford
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
19. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed.

H Jones
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
