 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 26 August 2026

 By Michael Evans BA MA MPhil DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date:02 October 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011615
 1 Harberton Crescent, Chichester PO19 5NY
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Glenn Jones against the decision of Chichester District Council.
 •    The application Ref is CC/26/00089/DOM.
 •    The development proposed is described on the application form as “Two storey side and rear
      elevations. Enlarged replacement porch”.



Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary matters
2. Since the appeal was submitted a revised version of the National Planning Policy
   Framework (The Framework) has been published. Consequently, the main parties
   were given the opportunity to make representations on this. Those submitted by the
   Appellant were received within the deadline and have been taken into account in
   making this decision.
3. On the appeal form and in the Council’s decision notice the proposed development
   is described as “Two storey side and rear extensions. Enlarged replacement
   porch”. This is a more accurate description of the development than that used on
   the application form and I shall consider the appeal on this basis.
Main Issue
4. The main issue in this appeal is the effect on the character and appearance of the
   locality and the streetscene.
Reasons
5. The locality is characterised by detached properties set in large plots with fairly
   generous gaps to the side that often include the space above single storey
   garages. The two storey dwelling at the appeal site is on a corner plot and has a
   flat roof garage to the side. This provides a significant gap between the two storey
   part of the dwelling and the boundary, reflecting the spacious character of
   development in the vicinity. There are also attractive views of vegetation and the
   sky over the top of the garage that make a positive contribution to the streetscene.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6011615


6. The side addition would be set back from the main front wall, but only to a fairly
   minimal degree. There would also be a relatively modest gap to the nearest point of
   the tapering side boundary. Materials to match the existing dwelling would be used
   in the development. The Appellant points out that the host dwelling is set in one of
   the largest plots in the locality and suggests that it therefore has the capacity to
   facilitate enlargement of the dwelling.
7. However, despite matters such as these the property would be extended to the side
   at full two storey height with a rear addition extending from this at the same height.
   This would create a relatively deep side elevation forward of the adjacent dwelling
   with the rear corner of the enlarged property in fairly close proximity to the front
   corner of the neighbouring garage. The scheme would result in full two storey
   development coming relatively close to the side boundary and the open views
   above the existing garage would be significantly reduced.
8. Because of the extent of its projection forward of the adjacent dwelling, two storey
   height and bulk, the enlarged dwelling would be unduly prominent and visually
   intrusive in the street. Moreover, the depth of that to the rear and the width of the
   side extension would be an unduly high proportion of those dimensions of the host
   dwelling, illustrating their undue dominance.
9. In these circumstances the extended dwelling would be out of keeping with the
   pattern of development in the locality, unacceptably detracting from the open and
   spacious character. The visual impact of the development would noticeably exceed
   that of the single storey flat roofed garage because of the significantly greater
   height and depth. Moreover, the vegetation at the appeal site and adjacent dwelling
   would be insufficiently tall and dense to prevent these adverse effects from being
   readily apparent in views from the street.
10. Despite being hipped as with the main roof of the host dwelling, the slope of the
    roof in the two storey rear addition would be noticeably shallower than in other
    parts of the host dwelling, as shown in the proposed rear elevation. This would
    reflect the excessive width and poor proportions of this part, giving an unduly squat
    appearance. Rather than giving a more cohesive appearance, this would result in a
    jarring and discordant contrast with the host dwelling. Moreover, this adverse effect
    would be appreciated when looking towards the rear of the dwelling from Stanton
    Drive.
11. The Appellant has identified a number of properties in the area where the Council
    has permitted extensions. However, those in Harberton Crescent are not located on
    corner plots and do not project forward of the adjacent dwelling to the extent that
    would occur in this case. The extended dwelling in this instance would therefore be
    significantly more prominent in the streetscene. A number of other cases brought to
    my attention concern dwellings in other streets, which are not part of the immediate
    context within which the enlarged dwelling would be most readily seen. The cases
    referred to, including those for which photographs have been provided, therefore
    lend no support to the appeal.
12. For these reasons, it is concluded that the character and appearance of the locality
    and the streetscene would be harmed. Policies P1, P2, P7 and P8 of the
    Chichester Local Plan 2021-39 are relevant in this instance. Taken together and
    among other things, these seek development that achieves a high design quality,
    respects the distinctiveness of the local area, enhances the streetscene and the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
 Appeal Decision 6011615


     resultant building should appear as an attractive and coherent whole, while
     development should not dominate the host building. For the reasons given there
     would be conflict with these policies.
13. This is a case where there would be no harm in relation to matters such as
    residential amenity, highways and biodiversity. However, these are neutral matters
    that weigh neither for nor against the proposal.
14. Framework Policy S3 indicates that decisions on development proposals should
    apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. This requires that Policy
    S4 should be applied when considering development proposals located within
    settlements as in this case. This policy intends that proposals should be approved
    unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse
    effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the
    Framework.
15. The scheme would provide additional accommodation to meet the needs of the
    occupiers and make more efficient use of the plot. However, there is no evidence of
    any significant adverse consequences in the event of the appeal being rejected.
    Moreover, the better use of the land is in the context of extending an existing
    property with no extra dwellings being provided that would accommodate additional
    families. There would be a benefit to the local economy from construction works,
    but this would be relatively modest given the small scale of the development. It is
    also suggested that there might be an increase in Council tax payable.
16. Nevertheless, in Policy S4 2. c. it is indicated that one of the circumstances where
    the benefits of approving development are likely to be substantially outweighed by
    adverse effects is failure to comply with one of the national decision-making
    policies which state that development proposals should be refused in specific
    circumstances. In this case there would be conflict with Policy DP3 1. because the
    development would not respond to the context or integrate with and enhance the
    surroundings for the reasons given.
17. In the above circumstances I conclude that the benefits of the scheme would be
    achieved at the unacceptable expense of the quality of the built environment and
    would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects.
18. This is a case where harm would arise and there would be conflict with the
    development plan. Moreover, there are no other considerations that would justify
    making a decision other than in accordance with the development plan and the
    appeal is dismissed.

M Evans
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
