Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 24 August 2026
by T Bennett BA(Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011667
10 Rufford Close, Watford WD17 4UU
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Zillur Rahman against the decision of Watford Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00183/FULH.
•    The development proposed is installation of safety glass balustrade on the flat roof of single story
     rear extension (retrospective).

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the installation of
       safety glass balustrade on the flat roof of single story rear extension at 10 Rufford
       Close, Watford WD17 4UU in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref
       26/00183/FULH, subject to the following condition:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall be retained in accordance with
              drawing no NA590-A06 Rev 2.
     2)       The roof of the rear ground floor extension, where the safety glass balustrade
              is hereby permitted, shall not be used as a balcony, roof garden or similar
              amenity area.
Preliminary Matters
2.     In my formal decision above, I have removed the word retrospective as this does
       not describe an act of development.
3.     On 17 August 2026, the Government published a revised National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework). The main parties have had an opportunity to
       consider the relevance of the Framework to their case. I have considered any
       comments made in the determination of this appeal.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is the effect of the balustrade on the character and appearance of
       the area.
Reasons
5.     The appeal property is a large detached dwelling located in a corner position at the
       junction of Rufford Close and Tunnel Wood Road with its rear boundary adjoining
       properties that front Nascot Wood Road. Properties in the area are situated in
       generous plots and comprise a variety of architectural styles and ages which
       contributes to the character and appearance of the area.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011667




6.     The balustrade surrounds the perimeter of the flat roof of the ground floor rear
       extension and is approximately 1.3 metres in height above the finished roof level. It
       has a simple appearance consisting of large glazed panels with a slender dark
       surround. Although I observed no other single storey extensions in the vicinity with
       balustrading attached, difference alone does not necessarily equate to harm,
       particularly in an area characterised by a variety of architectural styles.
7.     The balustrade is visible from Tunnel Wood Road but is set well back from the
       boundary adjoining the road, and as the glazed panels are transparent, it does not
       appear as a prominent or visually intrusive addition.
8.     The balustrade is also visible from Nascot Wood Road above the shared boundary
       with No 42 Nascot Wood Road. However, it is seen against the backdrop of the
       large host property where the height of the balustrading appears subservient and
       proportionate relative to the size of the host property as a whole. Whilst the use of
       glazing gives the balustrading a modern appearance, the design of the ground
       floor extension is also modern, incorporating large expanses of glazing. The
       materials are therefore not unsympathetic and the glazing limits its visual presence
       and any perception of bulk. Furthermore, the colour of the balustrade matches the
       window frames and fascia boards of the host property, with the balustrade
       appearing as a cohesive addition. Considering these factors, the balustrade does
       not appear as a dominant feature when viewed from Nascot Wood Road.
9.     For the same reasons, the presence of the balustrading neither diminishes the
       ability to appreciate nor detracts from the significance of No 42 Nascot Wood
       Road, a locally listed building that derives its significance from its architectural and
       historical interest as a late Victorian estate lodge.
10. In conclusion, the development does not have a harmful effect on the character
    and appearance of the area. It therefore accords with Policies QD6.1, QD6.2 and
    QD6.4 of the Watford Local Plan 2021-2038. Together these seek development
    that is of high quality design using high quality materials, that responds positively
    and appropriately to its context and does not detract from or harmfully dominate
    the character of the surrounding area. It would also accord with the Watford
    Residential Design Guide 2016.
Other Matters
11. Whilst the balustrading would be located close to the boundaries of neighbouring
    properties, given the expansive use of clear glazing and its modest height, I am
    not persuaded that the balustrading has a harmfully overbearing or enclosing
    effect on the living conditions of the neighbouring occupiers. I note the Council
    also found no harm in this regard.
12. I am mindful of the comments of the neighbours which have expressed concerns
    that the roof could be potentially used as a terrace, balcony or other amenity
    space, giving rise to noise and privacy concerns. Whilst a balcony is not being
    proposed, given the close proximity of neighbouring properties, a condition will be
    attached to the permission that would prevent the use of the roof as a balcony or
    other amenity space. There is limited evidence before me to indicate such a
    condition would not be enforceable.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011667


13. Interested parties note that the balustrading has been installed as a safety
    measure but consider less intrusive methods could be used. However, I have not
    found the balustrading to be an intrusive addition, with no harm identified to the
    character and appearance of the area.
14. I have no substantive evidence to indicate that the balustrade would prevent either
    the windows on the property being cleaned or leaves to be collected from the roof.
    This therefore carries limited weight.
Conditions
15. As the development has been completed, the standard timescale condition is not
    necessary. I have however imposed a plans condition for certainty.
16. As the balustrading could potentially facilitate the use of the roof as a balcony, and
    having regard to the close proximity of neighbouring properties, in particular 9
    Rufford Close and 42 Nascot Wood Road, a condition is necessary to prevent the
    use of the roof as a balcony or other similar amenity area. This is to safeguard the
    living conditions of the neighbouring occupiers.
17. Given a condition will be imposed restricting the use of the roof of the rear
    extension, a condition preventing additional roof access points is not necessary.
18. Interested parties have requested that a legal agreement be secured to restrict,
    amongst other matters, the use of the flat roof and to prevent items such as
    planters and outdoor furniture from being stored on it. However, I consider that a
    legal agreement is not necessary as a planning condition would be sufficient to
    ensure that the roof is not used as a balcony or amenity space. A condition
    preventing the storage of items on the roof would not be reasonable and would fail
    to meet the relevant tests for planning conditions, as even without the balustrade,
    occupiers could have placed objects on top of the flat roof.
Conclusion
19. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.

T Bennett
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
