 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 28 August 2026
 by Victor Callister BA(Hons) PGC(Oxon) DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 14 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011745
 5 East Park Close, Chadwell Heath, Barking and Dagenham RM6 6XX
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant [outline] planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Muhammad Arshad against the decision of the London Borough of Barking
      and Dagenham.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00354/HSE.
 •    The development proposed is the construction of front porch, a two-storey side extension and a part
      single-storey, part two storey rear extension.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the construction of front
   porch, a two-storey side extension and a part single-storey, part two storey rear
   extension at 5 East Park Close, Chadwell Heath, Barking and Dagenham RM6 6XX
   in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 26/00354/HSE, subject to the
   following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
              following approved plans: 25-878-P00, 25-878-P03, 25-878-P04, 25-878-P05,
              25-878-P06 and 25-878-P07.
     2)       The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
              development hereby permitted shall match those in the existing building.
Procedural Matters
2. Subsequent to the decision made by the Council on the application to which this
   appeal relates, the Government published a revised National Planning Policy
   Framework (August 2026) (the Framework). I consider that there have been no major
   changes relevant to the main issues in this appeal. It will therefore not prejudice any
   party by making my decision with regard to the revised Framework.
Main Issues
3. The main issues are the effect of the proposal on:
          •    The character and appearance of the appeal dwelling and that of the local
               area; and
          •    The living conditions of neighbouring residential occupiers.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
    Appeal Decision 6011745


Reasons
Character and Appearance
4. The appeal dwelling is a two storey end of terrace house, with a hipped roof above its
   side flank elevation, which faces onto a side alley between the appeal dwelling and
   the neighbouring short terrace of houses. It is located in a local area that forms part of
   a planned estate made up of short terraces of similar two storey houses with front
   and rear gardens. The front garden of the appeal property is hard paved to provide off
   street parking.
5. Many of the houses in the local area have undergone a variety of alteration and
   extensions. The extensions, apart from a variety of front porch additions, are limited
   to the rear of houses in the terraces or to the side of some end of terrace properties.
6. Due to the appeal dwelling being located on the outside of a curve in the street The
   rear garden of the appeal dwelling angles away from the appeal dwelling as it
   extends rearwards and follows the line of the alleyway. Despite this angle the garden
   remains the same width for its full length, which results in it also angling away from its
   attached neighbour and 4 East Park Close (No.4).
7. Approval of a prior approval application1 was previously issued for permitted
   development of a single storey rear extension. To the rear of the property walls have
   been constructed that follow both the plans submitted for the application that forms
   the basis of this appeal for a front porch, a two-storey side extension and a part
   single-storey, part two storey rear extension and of the previous prior approval
   application for the permitted development.
8. The application to which the appeal related was made on 9 March 2026. Within the
   material submitted with this application the appellant clearly indicated, on plans dated
   February 2026, that implementation of the permitted development of a single storey
   ground floor extension had commenced. The Council has stated that the
   implementation of the permitted development of the proposal that was the subject of
   the prior approval application needed to have commenced by 20 March 2026 and
   have not accepted that the implementation of the scheme had commenced prior to
   this date.
9. However, nothing is before me to indicate why the Council would come to this
   conclusion. As such, I see no reason to not accept the material submitted with the
   application, prior to the end of the time limit for implementing the permitted
   development, along with the presence of the constructed walls to the rear of the
   appeal dwelling, as reasonable evidence that it has commenced. The completion of
   the permitted development of the rear extension therefore forms a legitimate fallback
   position for the appellant, should this appeal be refused.
10. The application to which this appeal relates follows the refusal of an earlier
    application2 for a similar proposal for a front porch, a two-storey side extension and a
    part single-storey, part two storey rear extension. The appellant indicates in their
    appeal submission that there are small changes in design intended to overcome the
    reasons given for refusal of this earlier application.


1
    Planning Ref: 23/00232/PRIEXT
2
     Planning Ref: 25/01765/HSE


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
 Appeal Decision 6011745


11. In the appeal proposal the proposed side extension would align with the original front
    wall of the appeal dwelling and would extend the existing original hipped side roof
    form. Along with the proposed porch element, that construction of which appears to
    have already commenced, the proposal would reflect the original design of the appeal
    dwelling, and its fenestration. It would also reflect the type of side extension to end of
    terrace houses evident elsewhere in the local area.
12. At first floor level, the proposed side extension would align with the flank of the
    proposed two storey element of the proposed rear extensions. The two storey
    element of the proposed rear extension would be approximately half the width of the
    extended property. This would have a hipped roof form that would merge and hip with
    the roof of the side extension and the original rear roof slope. The ridge of its hipped
    roof would be set well down from that of the main house. The proposal in these
    regards would generally reflect the design of the rear two storey extension to the
    neighbouring house at 6 East Park Terrace, without appearing to differ significantly
    from the hipped roof forms seen on virtually all houses in the local area.
13. Due to the presence of the alley between the appeal dwelling and the neighbouring
    short terrace, the proposed side extension and two storey rear element of the
    proposed rear extension would not encroach significantly on the gap between short
    terraces on either side of it. As such the proposal would not significantly disrupt this
    clear visual break, which is a significant characteristic of the spatial pattern of the
    local area.
14. Overall, the two storey element of the proposed rear extension would result in the
    appeal dwelling having a predominantly ‘L shaped form. Rather than appearing as
    fragmented, the overall resulting effect would be of an evident and complimentary
    hipped roof form when viewed from the rear, as well as in the tangential and/or partial
    street views of the proposal. Due to their height and scale, the single storey elements
    of the rear extension would not appear significantly in any street views and would
    appear recessively in rear views of the appeal dwelling, playing a limited role in
    establishing the overall character of the proposed extended appeal dwelling.
15. In combination with the stepping down of the roof over the two storey rear part of the
    proposed rear extension in the available views, the proposed bulk and recessive
    massing of the proposal would result in it appearing as complimentary and
    subordinate to the appeal dwelling. As such, it would not appear as an unduly
    prominent or dominating addition that would overwhelm the appeal dwelling.
    Therefore, the scale and design of the proposal would not result in it appearing as
    disproportionate or overdeveloped on its site, or as a discordant element within the
    streetscene of the local area.
16. For these reasons, I find that the proposal would not result in any significant harm to
    the character and appearance of the appeal dwelling or that of the local area. In this
    instance, lack of harm is a neutral factor in my considerations.
Living Conditions
17. Whilst the proposed two storey element of the proposed rear extension would be
    readily visible from the rear garden of the adjoining house at No.4, it would be
    positioned well away from the boundary between the two properties. In the available
    tangential views from the rear rooms of the appeal dwelling, it is arguable that if this
    element of the proposal would be at all visible. Given the scale of the proposal and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     3
 Appeal Decision 6011745


     the distance involved it would not appear in any of these views as unduly dominating
     or result in any significant change in enclosure or outlook that would be detrimental to
     the living conditions of the occupiers of No.4.
18. Although the Council have concluded that the proposal as a whole would result in a
    loss of daylight that would result in overshadowing of No.4, it was evident from my
    site visit and from the generally south-easterly orientation of these neighbouring
    dwellings that any loss of daylight would be minimal and restricted to the latter part of
    the day/evening. Although this would be greater in the winter months, given the
    height of the proposed single storey element of the proposed rear extension along the
    boundary, it would not be so significant that it would be substantially greater than the
    shadow resulting from the existing tall boundary fence.
19. The main part of the 5 metre wide single storey element of the proposed rear
    extension would extend rearward from the original rear wall of the appeal dwelling by
    approximately 6 metres. As such it would extend rearward significantly further than
    the 3.65 metres set out for such extensions in the in the Barking and Dagenham
    Residential Extensions and Alterations Supplementary Planning Document (2023).
20. Given the approximate 3 metre height of the proposed single storey element adjacent
    to the boundary with No.4, and notwithstanding the angling away of the garden of the
    appeal dwelling from No.4, this would result in an increased sense of enclosure to
    that part of the garden nearest to the house at No.4 and to its rear room served by
    the nearest ground floor window. The resulting degree of harm to the living conditions
    of the occupiers of this neighbouring dwelling would be moderate rather than
    substantial.
21. For the reasons given I find that the proposal would result in a loss of outlook that
    would cause moderate harm to the living conditions of neighbouring residential
    occupiers. This would be contrary to Policy DMD1 of the Barking and Dagenham
    Local Plan (2024), Policy D3 of the London Plan (2021) and Policy DP3 of the
    Framework. Collectively these seek developments that reflect the principle of
    liveability, consider the impact on neighbouring amenity and provide appropriate
    outlook.
22. As I have identified above, the completion of the commenced permitted development
    of the single storey rear extension would be a legitimate fallback position for the
    appellant, which would have a very high likelihood of being completed as an
    alternative to the appeal proposal. However, this would result in the same moderate
    harm to the living conditions of neighbouring residential occupiers as the appeal
    proposal that I have identified. Given the benefit of increasing the size of the appeal
    dwelling to meet the needs of a larger family and improve the living conditions of
    occupiers, I find that the proposal would result in greater benefits than the appellants
    legitimate fallback option, whilst resulting in the same moderate harm to the living
    conditions of neighbouring residential occupiers. As such, the balance is in favour of
    the appeal proposal, and it is reasonable to approve the appeal proposal on that
    basis.
Conditions
23. The walls already constructed on site, whilst also reflecting the implementation of the
    permitted development of a single storey rear extension, along with the implemented
    porch element of the proposal, can also be considered to constitute the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     4
 Appeal Decision 6011745


     implementation of the appeal proposal. As implementation of the proposal has
     commenced, I have not added the standard condition on the timing of
     implementation. In the interests of good design, I have applied a condition requiring
     compliance with approved plans and the use of materials to match existing, which the
     appellant has stated would be the case in their appeal statement.
Conclusion
24. The appeal is allowed.



Victor Callister
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
