 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 27 August 2026
 by D J Barnes MBA BSc(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date:11 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011644
 6 Derby Road, Beeston, Nottinghamshire NG9 2TJ
 •    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
      Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
      consent.
 •    The appeal is made by Doner Stop against the decision of Broxtowe Borough Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00169/ADV.
 •    The advertisement proposed is a new sign.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. The Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements) (England) Regulations
   2007 (the Regulations) require that applications for the display of advertisements
   are considered in terms of amenity and public safety. Although the Council has
   referred to Policy 18 of the Part Two Local Plan (LP) which it considers relevant to
   this appeal it cannot, by itself, be decisive but is a material consideration in the
   determination of this appeal.
3. The updated National Planning Policy Framework was published in August 2026
   but does not raise any new matters which affect the assessment of this appeal
   scheme.
Main Issue
4. It is considered that the main issue is the effect of the proposed advertisement on
   visual amenity.
Reasons
5. The appeal property is a 2-storey building which forms part of a terrace of
   3 buildings with commercial floorspace at ground floor level and, from what could
   be seen, residential use above. There is a projecting canopy between the first and
   second floors. There is a second terrace of a similar design and mix of uses with a
   vehicular access between the 2 terrace blocks.
6. These terraces front an area used for parking which also provides access to a
   detached building occupied by a veterinary practice. The parking area is accessed
   from a busy roundabout which is fronted by a petrol filling station, offices and a



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6011644


     public house. The area surrounding the roundabout has a primarily commercial
     character and appearance.
7. There are a variety of signs associated with the buildings in commercial use, both
   illuminated and non-illuminated. Apart from the property, the signs associated with
   the ground floor commercial uses within the 2 terraces primarily comprise non-
   illuminated fascia advertisements located either between the canopy and the
   shopfront window or between the canopy and the lower sills of the first floor
   windows. The scale of these fascia signs is modest and in proportion with the host
   buildings. They do not visually dominate their host buildings’ appearance.
8. The non-illuminated fascia advertisement subject of this appeal has already been
   erected and comprises a large fascia sign. The appeal sign is sited above the
   property’s canopy and is of a scale which is comparable to the extent of the first
   floor front elevation. The sign covers the first floor windows which were previously
   seen from the parking area and the roundabout. By reason of scale and siting, the
   sign visually and physically dominates the character and appearance of the host
   property and the terrace, particularly where the other fascia signs are of a modest
   size.
9. Although not illuminated, the size and siting of the appeal scheme is a visually
   dominate feature when viewed from the surrounding area. This judgement takes
   into account the primarily commercial character of the area surrounding the
   roundabout and the illuminated advertisements associated with the petrol filling
   station.
10. Reference is made by the appellant to the economic benefits of the take-away
    business operating from the property, including jobs, and the provision of a choice
    of take-away outlets for customers. The appellant has also referred to obtaining
    professional advice about the need for advertisement consent before erecting the
    sign. However, the assessment of this appeal has been undertaken based upon
    the effect of the sign on visual amenity. The matters referred to by the appellant do
    not alter the assessment of the identified unacceptable harm to the visual amenity
    of the property and the surrounding area.
11. Although there is reference in the appellant’s evidence, no details have been
    provided about the other advertisement erected in the local area. This matter is
    given limited weight in the assessment of this appeal. The claim by the council that
    the terraces are non-designated heritage assets has been noted but this matter has
    not influenced the assessment of the appeal and the identified harm caused to
    visual amenity.
12. For the reasons given, it is concluded that the proposed advertisement would
    cause unacceptable harm to the visual amenity and it would also conflict with LP
    Policy 12 which refers to signage relating well to the design of the building
    concerned, being in keeping with the frontage as a whole and respecting the
    character of the area. Accordingly, it is concluded that the appeal should be
    dismissed.



D J Barnes
INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
