Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 27 July 2026
by P Hatch BA (Hons) Ad. Dip MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17th August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011369
19 Somerton Drive, Hatfield Woodhouse, Doncaster DN7 6NQ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
    to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Michal Walaszek against the decision of City of Doncaster Council.
•   The application Ref is 26/00129/FUL.
•   The development proposed is the increase in height of boundary wall with a maximum height of 2m
    (Retrospective).

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. For clarity and certainty, I have used the description of development given on the
   Council’s Decision Notice in the banner heading above.
3. Retrospective consent is sought for the development, and I saw at my site visit that
   the boundary wall was constructed. Whilst its height appears to accord with the
   plans before me, parts of the upper wall were finished in block work. For the
   avoidance of doubt, I have determined the appeal based on those plans.
Main Issues
4. The main issues in this appeal are the effect of the development on:
       • the character and appearance of the surrounding area;
       • highway safety, with particular reference to pedestrian visibility; and
       • the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers, with particular reference to
         outlook.
Reasons
       Character and Appearance
5. The appeal property is a single storey bungalow which is prominently positioned on
   the junction of two spurs of Somerton Drive. The frontage of properties on
   Somerton Drive generally consists of low-level brick walls which on occasion
   include additional planting in the form of low-level hedgerows or shrubbery. These
   boundary treatments have ensured that a general sense of openness is retained to
   the frontage of properties when viewed from the street.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011369


6. The development at the appeal property consists of a boundary wall which wraps
   around two sides of its curtilage. It has supplemented a previous brick boundary
   wall which, particularly in regard to height, was less substantial in structure. The
   wall has a height of approximately 2m and is constructed from a mix of brick and
   breeze blocks and includes gated access for both vehicles and pedestrians.
7. The boundary wall, by virtue of its height and its continuous length, represents a
   significant addition to the street scene of Somerton Drive. The prominence of the
   wall is further exacerbated by the positioning of the appeal site as a corner plot
   which generates wide ranging views of the wall along the street, particularly when
   approaching the appeal site from the East. The scale and massing of the wall and
   its prominence within the street scene result in a loss of openness, as previously
   described, and appears as a highly incongruous and harmful addition to the wider
   character of the area.
8. The appellant has drawn my attention to other examples of boundary treatment
   within the vicinity of the appeal site, including properties at Nos. 8, 14, 22, 27 and
   39 Somerton Drive, 1 Main Street and 6 Warwick Road. However, I noted that
   many of these have very different relationships with their surroundings, specifically
   in terms of the length of their frontages, their prominence within the street scene or
   are located in areas which have a greater sense of enclosure. Moreover, as I have
   limited details of these schemes before me, I cannot be certain under what
   circumstances they were erected. Therefore, I have considered the scheme before
   me on its own planning merits.
9. I also note that it is the appellant’s intention to finish the wall with render, a
   requirement of which could be secured through the imposition of a planning
   condition. However, the finishing of the wall in a more consistent material will not
   alter the impact of the wall in regard to its scale and massing which I believe to be
   the determinative factors in this issue.
10. As a result, I conclude that the development, by virtue of its scale and massing, is
    obtrusive and visually discordant with the wider street scene and the broader
    pattern of development found on Somerton Drive, causing harm to the wider
    character of the area. The development is therefore contrary to Policies 41, 42 and
    44 of the Doncaster Local Plan (DLP) (2021) which seeks, amongst other things, to
    promote good urban design and respond positively to its context, setting and
    existing site features and respect and enhance the character of the locality.
       Highway Safety
11. The access to the appeal property is taken from the cul-de-sac spur of Somerton
    Drive. The cul-de-sac is made up of five residential properties including the appeal
    property itself with No.27 Somerton Drive also benefiting from vehicular access off
    the cul-de-sac. I noted during my site visit the presence of an off-street footpath at
    the end of the cul-de-sac although it was not clear whether this formed a public
    right of way.
12. The boundary wall includes a gated access for vehicles and a separate gated
    pedestrian access. The gates are flanked by large brick pillars with additional stone
    plinth detailing, these pillars project upwards beyond the 2m height of the
    surrounding wall.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011369


13. The South Yorkshire Residential Design Guide (SYRDG) provides guidance on
    levels of visibility required from private driveways. It indicates that splays of 2m x
    2m may be required where a private drive joins a footway and that they should be
    kept clear of obstructions of over 900mm in height. The SYRDG goes on to state
    that the design of the splay should take account of factors such as, amongst other
    matters, the frequency of vehicle movements, the amount of pedestrian activity and
    the width of the footway.
14. The appellant believes that the height of the current wall is not materially different
    to the previous boundary treatment. However, it is clear from the submitted
    information that the height of the new wall, particularly in its relation to the vehicular
    access, is materially different to the previous boundary treatment in regard to the
    additional height generated. As a result, the new wall acts as a significant visual
    barrier to both drivers exiting the property and pedestrian passers-by.
15. From a driver’s perspective, any views of the public highway, including the
    pavement, are restricted until such a point where the vehicle is projecting
    significantly into the public footpath. From a pedestrian’s perspective, any passers-
    by may not be aware of the presence of manoeuvring vehicles exiting the appeal
    property. Whilst I recognise the nature of the road as a cul-de-sac, pedestrian
    access to and from the properties coupled with the use of the footpath at the end of
    the street, would still result in a notable amount of pedestrian activity to the frontage
    of the appeal property. Consequently, the lack of visibility described has the
    potential to bring pedestrians into conflict with vehicle movements, posing a risk to
    highway safety and is not reflective of the ambitions of the SYRDG.
16. The appellant suggests that the area is characterised by low traffic speeds and
    movements, nor have there been any recorded accidents in the vicinity of the
    appeal property. Furthermore, the appellant suggests that there are similar
    boundary treatments nearby impacting upon visibility. However, such matters are
    not sufficient justification to support the ongoing access arrangements if they pose
    a notable risk to highway safety, whether that be to other road users or, in this
    case, pedestrians passers-by.
17. I have noted from the Council that amended plans could have been requested as
    part of the application process which could have included amendments to bring the
    proposal into line with the ambitions of the SYRDG. However, this was not
    requested by the Council due to the other suggested conflicts with the development
    plan. Whilst I would recognise that amendments could have been asked for by the
    Council and submitted by the applicant as part of the application process, this did
    not occur and, consequently, I must determine this appeal based on the plans
    before me.
18. The appellant has suggested that such amendments could have been addressed
    through the imposition of a planning condition requesting the submission and
    implementation of visibility improvements. Whilst I have considered this approach,
    without being presented with the necessary evidence in the first instance in the
    form of amended plans it is not clear whether such conditions would meet the tests
    set out in paragraph 57 of the National Planning Policy Framework (the
    Framework).
19. As a result, the proposal is contrary to Policies 9, 41 and 42 of the DLP which state
    that development should, amongst other things, not have an unacceptable impact


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011369


     on highway safety, promote positive urban design and function positively with the
     surrounding area.
     Living Conditions
20. The boundary wall wraps around the appeal property and forms part of the
    common boundary with the adjacent properties of Nos.17 and 21 Somerton Drive.
21. Both properties include existing boundary treatments, such as timber fencing and
    natural features which appear to pre-date the installation of the boundary wall.
    During my site visit I was able to observe that these features were able to provide
    sufficient screening for both properties. In the context of these existing features, the
    development does not substantially alter the outlook for the occupants of either
    property and consequently I find no harm to their living conditions in that respect.
    Similarly, given the distances across the road, I do not find harm to the outlook of
    occupiers of other properties that surround the site.
22. As a result, the development is consistent with Policy 44 of the DLP which expects
    new development to protect existing amenity and not significantly impact on the
    living conditions or privacy of neighbours.
Other Matters
23. The appellant has indicated that the boundary wall has afforded their property
    enhanced privacy and security which they believe to be particularly important given
    the nature of their corner plot. They have also highlighted the submission of two
    letters of support in favour of the development. However, in the absence of further
    substantive evidence demonstrating that the previous boundary treatment provided
    insufficient privacy and security. I afford these matters limited weight in favour of
    the appeal.
24. My attention has been drawn to the National Planning Policy Framework (the
    Framework), in particular to the presumption in favour of sustainable development,
    the need to approve proposals wherever possible, economic benefits from the
    development, social benefits and making an effective use of previously developed
    land. Notwithstanding, the development is contrary to the provisions of the
    Framework that seek to achieve well-designed places and prevent or refuse
    development that has an unacceptable impact on highway safety.
Conclusion
25. I conclude that the proposal conflicts with the development plan, when read as a
    whole, and there are no other considerations, including the Framework, that
    outweigh that harm. The appeal is therefore dismissed.



P Hatch
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
