 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 3 September 2026
 by K E Down MA(Oxon) MSc MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date:15 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011707
 17 De Parys Avenue, Bedford, MK40 2TX
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr Oliver Wyncoll against the decision of Bedford Borough Council.
 •   The application Ref is 25/02513/FUL.
 •   The development proposed is to extend existing driveway and widen vehicle crossover.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted to extend the existing
   driveway and widen the vehicle crossover at 17 De Parys Avenue, Bedford, MK40
   2TX in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 25/02513/FUL, subject to
   the following conditions:
     1)      The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
             date of this decision.
     2)      The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
             the following approved plans: Location plans (2No), unreferenced layout plan
             (Council ref. V04)
     3)      The materials to be used in the construction of the development hereby
             permitted shall be as specified on the approved unreferenced layout plan
             (Council ref. V04).
     4)      Before the development hereby approved is brought into use a triangle
             pedestrian visibility splay of 1.8m by 1.8m shall be provided on the north side
             of the vehicular access within the frontage of 17 De Parys Avenue and
             adjacent to the rear edge of the footway. The visibility splay shall be retained
             thereafter with all parts of the splay kept free of obstructions over a height of
             0.7m above ground level.
Preliminary Matter
2. Since the application was determined and the appeal made, a revised National
   Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) has been published in August 2026. Although
   changes have been made, including to historic environment policy, those that are
   relevant to this decision have not materially changed. I am therefore satisfied that
   no party will be prejudiced by my having regard to the latest version of the NPPF in
   reaching my decision.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision Ref: 6011707


Main Issue
3. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
   appearance of De Parys Avenue, including the Bedford Conservation Area.
Reasons
4. De Parys Avenue lies within the Bedford Conservation Area (CA), a designated
   heritage asset, which is characterised by the historic buildings making up the
   original core of the town. Policy HE6 of the NPPF makes clear that, when
   considering the effect of development on the significance of a designated heritage
   asset, substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation.
5. De Parys Avenue is a wide and impressive tree lined street flanked by mainly large,
   late Victorian houses set behind boundaries comprising a variety of materials
   including railings and wooden fencing as well as original walls, some backed by
   hedges. In a number of cases, including at and in the vicinity of the appeal dwelling,
   boundary features have been partly or completely removed. The footway and
   carriageway are separated by wide grass verges in which the mature trees are
   planted, giving the street a green and leafy character. Its significance derives
   primarily from its architecture and history.
6. A significant number of properties have off-street parking accessed via verge
   crossings, many long standing, with associated dropped kerbs. Some of these
   serve more than one dwelling. At others there are narrower verge crossings serving
   pedestrian entrances and providing a paved access from the dwelling to the
   carriageway. At many dwellings on wider plots there are original driveways and/or
   more modern garages to the side of the dwelling. In a noticeable number of cases,
   particularly on the same side of the street as the appeal dwelling, frontages at
   these and some other dwellings have been paved to provide space for additional
   car parking. Overall, visible on-site frontage, parking and verge crossings are
   regular features in the street scene.
7. The Bedford Conservation Area Character Appraisal (BCACA), 2008, identifies the
   harmful effect of the loss of enclosure and of frontage parking, and the risk posed
   by pressure for further similar development. However, whilst this has, over time,
   altered the original appearance of the street, it is now sufficiently frequent to form
   part of the character of the area, particularly on the east side of the road.
8. The appeal dwelling is a large, three storey semi-detached house, identified in the
   BCACA as being of positive merit to the CA. Part of the front boundary wall has
   been removed and the frontage paved. It is currently used for the parking of two
   vehicles with access from the highway gained via the drop kerb and verge crossing
   at No 15. Vehicles cut across the corner of the verge and the footway to enter No
   17.
9. The submitted evidence sets out that there have been three previous applications
   for similar works at the dwelling with the most recent refusal being in 2014. In 2011
   an appeal (Ref: APP/K0235/D/11/2155155) was dismissed. However, at that time
   the boundary wall at the appeal site had not been removed and the frontage was
   not paved. It was the effect on the dwelling of implementing these works that
   appears to have been of greatest concern. Moreover, weight was attached to the
   Council’s intention, set out in the Bedford Conservation Area Management Plan,
   2011, to introduce an Article 4(2) Direction to protect boundary walls and other

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
 Appeal Decision Ref: 6011707


     means of enclosure. That Direction has not been introduced. The Council’s
     evidence sets out that by 2015 the boundary wall at No 17 had been partly
     demolished, the frontage had been paved and that is has been used for vehicle
     parking since that time. The circumstances are thus materially different from those
     at the time of the earlier applications and appeal.
10. The proposal before me is for the widening by some 1.5m of the existing tarmac
    verge crossing serving No 15, the associated widening of the dropped kerb and the
    provision of a tarmac vehicle crossover for the footway, with associated pedestrian
    visibility splay. The widening would not be close to any tree and so no harm to trees
    is likely. The works would thus be limited. In addition, since no new verge crossing
    would be created, allowing the modest widening proposed would not provide a
    precedent for other new crossings nearby. Overall, there would be a small but
    acceptable change to the appearance of the street, resulting mainly from the loss of
    the strip of verge and the new tarmac footway crossing.
11. NPPF Policy HE9 which relates specifically to conservation areas states that the
    assessment of impact should take into account the relative significance of the
    element affected and its contribution to the CA as a whole. In this case, the kerbs,
    verges and footways in De Parys Avenue make a positive contribution to the setting
    of the buildings and the character of the area as a whole. Drop kerbs and
    verge/footway crossings also form part of that character, with the pattern between
    verge and verge crossing contributing to the character and appearance.
12. I consider that the small loss of kerb and verge would not materially alter the
    relative balance between verge and verge crossing and although the tarmac
    footway crossing would be wider and more noticeable, this would reflect other
    similar crossings in the vicinity. Overall, the proposed development would therefore
    have a neutral effect on the significance of the CA as a designated heritage asset,
    which would thus be conserved.
13. The Council and the Conservation Officer raise concerns that formalising the
    frontage parking could lead to the removal of more of the front boundary wall at No
    17 under permitted development rights, in particular in order to accommodate two
    vehicles. However, frontage parking has taken place at the site for over ten years
    and I saw that the area can already accommodate two vehicles. This concern
    therefore appears to be unfounded.
14. The Highways Officer states that a section of hedge behind the wall some 1.8m
    long would need to be removed in order to provide a pedestrian visibility splay.
    Many frontages in the street do not have hedges. Moreover, the Highways Officer
    has proposed a slightly higher than usual restriction of 0.7m on obstructions within
    the visibility splay to preserve the remaining wall which would not be disturbed. I
    therefore consider that the visibility splay would have a neutral effect on the
    character and appearance of the street and the CA.
15. Overall, it is concluded that the proposed development would have no materially
    detrimental effect on the character or appearance of De Parys Avenue and would
    preserve the character, appearance and significance of the Bedford CA. In
    consequence, it would comply with Section 72 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
    Conservation Areas) Act 1990, Policy 41S of the Bedford Borough Local Plan 2030,
    adopted 2020, and Policies HE5, HE6 and HE9 of the NPPF, 2026. Taken together
    and amongst other things, these expect development in conservation areas to


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
 Appeal Decision Ref: 6011707


     preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the area and conserve the
     significance of the heritage asset.
16. The appellant points out that the proposed development would provide a safe
    means of access and I agree that the provision of a pedestrian visibility splay and
    formal footway crossing would enhance safety for pedestrians by improving
    visibility and alerting them to potential vehicle movements. This adds further weight
    in favour of the development.
17. Turning to conditions, in addition to the statutory commencement condition,
    conditions requiring the development to be carried out in accordance with the
    approved plans and specifically in the materials specified on those plans are
    necessary. This is to provide certainty and to protect the character and appearance
    of the area, including the CA. In addition, a condition is necessary to ensure that
    the proposed pedestrian visibility splay is provided at the entrance to the appeal
    site before the widened vehicular access is brought into use and thereafter
    retained. This is needed in the interests of highway and pedestrian safety.
18. However, conditions suggested by the Highway Officer requiring the development
    to be completed within 3 months of the date of the permission and requiring the
    surfacing of the frontage at the appeal site to be approved are not necessary or
    reasonable because a developer cannot be compelled to complete works within a
    specific timescale and the frontage at No 17 is already paved.
19. For the reasons set out above, I conclude that the appeal should be allowed.

K E Down
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       4
