Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 24 August 2026
by K Dryden BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 9 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011521
Top Flat, 27 Alma Square, City of Westminster, London NW8 9PY
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Keeling of Albion Alma Limited against the decision of the Council of the City
    of Westminster.
•   The application reference is 25/08827/FULL.
•   The development proposed is mansard roof addition to extend top floor flat.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Application for costs
2. An application for costs was made by Albion Alma Limited against the Council. This
   application is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3. Subsequent to the Council’s decision on the application to which this appeal
   relates, the Government published a new National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) on 17 August 2026, which replaces the previous Framework published
   in December 2024, and all other iterations. Both the appellant and the Council were
   given the opportunity to comment on any changes relevant to the main issues in
   this appeal, and I have taken those comments into account in reaching this
   decision.
4. The appeal site lies within the St John’s Wood Conservation Area (CA). I am
   therefore vigilant of my duty imposed under Section 72 of the Planning (Listed
   Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 to pay special attention to the
   desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of the CA.
5. The appellant has submitted amended plans for this appeal. These plans have
   been submitted to respond to one of the Council’s suggested conditions within their
   appeal statement. Crucially, these plans were not submitted to the Council at the
   application stage. I cannot be assured that this submission has been reviewed by
   all parties with an interest in this appeal. This is tantamount to the submission of
   new information. The Planning Inspectorate Appeals’ Procedure Guide makes it
   clear that the appeal process should not be used to evolve a scheme, and it is
   important that what is considered by the Inspector is essentially what was
   considered by the Council. I have therefore not taken this new information into
   account in determining this appeal, as it would prejudice the Council and interested
   parties.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011521


6. A representation has been made by an interested party indicating that they had not
   been served the requisite notice under Certificate B1 and that they have a protected
   characteristic, as set out in Section 149 of the Public Sector Equality Duty (PSED),
   contained in the Equality Act 2010. The PSED sets out the need to eliminate
   unlawful discrimination, harassment and victimisation, and to advance equality of
   opportunity and foster good relations between people who share a protected
   characteristic and people who do not share it. As such, I am obliged to have due
   regard to this consideration. Having regard to the evidence provided, which
   suggests that the individual is a tenant, and they have not stated they are a
   leaseholder with at least 7 years left on their lease, or an owner who has a share in
   the freehold, I am satisfied that the relevant notice has been served. Furthermore,
   the matters raised largely concern a private dispute between the individual and the
   appellant and do not materially affect my determination of the planning merits of the
   proposal.
Main Issue
7. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
   appearance of the host property and the surrounding area, with particular regard to
   whether it would preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the CA.
Reasons
8. The appeal site is situated towards the west of the CA. The significance of the CA
   derives from the historic interest and architectural quality of its buildings. The St
   John’s Wood Conservation Area Audit (2008) (SJWCA) states that Alma Square is
   an enclosed private garden. Whilst the properties constitute a slight departure from
   the Arcadian suburban character of St John’s Wood, Hamilton Gardens and Alma
   Square are considered to be of significant townscape value. It further states that
   the Alma Square properties were constructed around the later part of the
   nineteenth century and are faced in stucco, where the locality displays a distinct
   sense of place which could readily be harmed by insensitive alterations. The
   SJWCA highlights No 27 Alma Square (No 27) and the wider terrace, as unlisted
   buildings of merit within the CA. It was evident at my site visit that the property,
   together with the wider terrace group, makes a positive contribution to the
   character, appearance and significance of the CA.
9. No 27 is a mid-terrace property situated within the terrace on the southern side of
   Alma Square. It forms part of a run of buildings with largely unaltered roofscapes,
   with no roof alterations or rooftop additions evident at the western end of the
   terrace. The buildings display a consistent building line and coherent composition,
   with parapet walls at roof level extending across both the front and rear elevations,
   behind which sit butterfly roofs. Whilst roof additions were evident at the eastern
   end of the terrace at Nos. 36, 37, 38 and 39 Alma Square, the roofscape in the
   vicinity of No 27 within the central and western part of the terrace group remains
   largely unaltered and contributes positively to the character and significance of the
   CA.
10. The proposal seeks the addition of a mansard roof extension. Although the
    proposed roof profile would be sloping, the alterations would still have a significant
    effect on the form of the existing building and its roof profile. The introduction of


1
    The Town and Country Planning (Development Management Procedure) (England) Order 2015.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              2
Appeal Decision 6011521


     mansard cheeks, increased roof height, and the raising of the parapet walls and
     associated chimney stacks would appear discordant and at odds with the building’s
     existing proportions, resulting in a prominent and incongruous addition that would
     be out of keeping with neighbouring properties within this part of the terrace.
11. Furthermore, the combined alterations would appear visually intrusive in a setting
    where the original and distinctive butterfly roof form remains evident. Whilst public
    views of the existing butterfly roof form are limited, higher-level views overlook the
    appeal site and the proposed development would erode the uniformity of the
    terrace roofscape in this location, causing harm to the character and significance of
    the CA.
12. I noted at my site visit that the appeal property is readily visible in views along Alma
    Square from both the front and rear. Given the size, design and scale of the
    proposed alterations, the eye would be drawn unfavourably to the resultant
    development. As a result, it would detract from the character and appearance of the
    host property and undermine the contribution made by the building to the
    significance of the CA, to the detriment of the surrounding area and the CA as a
    whole.
13. Whilst the appellant draws my attention to the roof additions at the eastern end of
    the terrace, I note that those permissions are not recent decisions and were not
    determined under the current adopted development plan policy framework.
    Consequently, they are not directly comparable to the proposal before me.
    Furthermore, whilst the SJWCA may indicate locations2 where roof extensions may
    be acceptable on buildings, I note that Figure 56 of the SJWCA highlights the
    appeal property within its terrace group where roof extensions would not normally
    be acceptable.
14. I have also had regard to Roofs, A Guide To Alterations and Extensions on
    Domestic Buildings, Supplementary Planning Document (2004) (SPD) insofar as it
    provides guidance and is a material consideration in the determination of this
    appeal. I note that the SPD sets out that where additional floors in any form will
    harm the architectural integrity of a building or the unity of a group, these will not be
    accepted. Whilst only guidance, this reinforces my findings where the proposed
    development would harm the integrity of No 27 and the adjacent properties within
    the western part of the terrace.
15. The appellant states that the detailed design of the proposal can be controlled
    through planning condition, to include the use of materials such as natural slate and
    traditional leadwork, alongside requesting further details relating to the detailed
    design. However, these matters would not overcome the harm arising from the
    additional height, bulk and physical presence of the roof extension in this location.
    Furthermore, whilst there has been a representation from an interested party in
    support of the proposal, where it is considered that the development would balance
    the street given the presence of mansard roof extensions at one end, this does not
    alter my findings or overcome the harm that I have identified in my reasoning.
16. Policy HE9 of the Framework recognises that not all elements of a conservation
    area will necessarily contribute to its significance. However, I have found that the

2
 75 Abbey Road London NW8 0AE, 79 Abbey Road London NW8 0AE, 14 Belgrave Gardens London NW8 0RB, 6 Ordnance Hill
London NW8 6PX, 76 Allitsen Road London NW8 7BG, 20A Grove End Road London NW8 9LL and 10 Belgrave Gardens London
NW8 0RB.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
Appeal Decision 6011521


       proposal would appear excessive and discordant, which would undermine the
       contribution made by the host property to the significance of the CA and detract
       from the character and appearance of the area. Consequently, the proposal would
       harm the significance of the CA.
17. Given the relatively modest scale of the proposal, the proposed development
    would, under the terms of the Framework, result in a low level of harm to the
    significance of the CA. It is noteworthy that even a low level of harm to the
    significance of a designated heritage asset carries considerable importance and
    weight. Policy HE6 of the Framework establishes that when considering the
    potential effect of a development proposal on the significance of a designated
    heritage asset, substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation.
    Where a development proposal would harm the significance of a designated
    heritage asset, the effect on the asset and its significance should be weighed
    against any public benefits resulting from the proposal.
18. I have had regard to the benefits identified by the appellant, including that the
    proposed development would create a larger, three-bedroom family home through
    increased living space from the existing two-bedroom arrangement at the property.
    The proposal would also make efficient use of an existing building in a sustainable
    location and adopt a traditional mansard roof design. However, these benefits
    would be countered, and in my judgment, comfortably outweighed by the harm that
    I have identified to the significance of the CA.
19. In addition, I have been provided with insufficient information to demonstrate that
    the claimed benefits of the development could not be achieved in a less harmful
    manner. Whilst I have given careful consideration to the public benefits advanced
    by the appellant, it is nevertheless my judgment that, when considered
    cumulatively, they would not outweigh the low harm that I have identified to the
    significance of the CA. Conflict therefore arises with the historic environment
    conservation and enhancement policies contained within the Framework.
20. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude that the proposed development would
    have a harmful effect on the character and appearance of the host property and the
    surrounding area, which would fail to preserve or enhance the character or
    appearance of the CA. The development is contrary to City Plan 2019 – 2040
    (2026) (CP) Policies 42 and 44 which together seek high-quality design in
    development and ensure that heritage assets are conserved and enhanced. I
    further find conflict with Policy 45 of the CP which requires roof extensions to not
    adversely impact heritage assets.
Other Matters
21. The appellant has provided details of an appeal decision3 relating to 105
    Westbourne Grove, City of Westminster, London W2 4UW, where a proposal for
    the erection of a mansard roof extension was allowed. In addition to an appeal
    decision4 at 14 Kildare Terrace, London W2 5LX, where the erection of a mansard
    roof extension at third floor level to provide additional floorspace to a single-family
    dwelling house was allowed. However, whilst those developments are located
    within conservation areas, they do not share the same site-specific circumstances,


3
    APP/X5990/W/25/3358529
4
    APP/X5990/D/21/3288673


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6011521


        and each proposal must be assessed on its own merits. As such, I do not consider
        the circumstances of those appeals to be directly comparable to those before me.
22. My attention has also been drawn to a number of planning permissions for mansard
    roof extensions elsewhere within the Council’s area, including at: 3 West Warwick
    Place London SW1V 2DH, 57-61 Shirland Road, London, W9 2JD, 12 Denbigh
    Street, London, SW1V 2ER, 35 Northumberland Place, London, W2 5AS, 141A
    Praed Street, London, W2 1RL, 60 Ledbury Road, London, W11 2AJ, Flat 54
    Ledbury Road, London, W11 2AJ. However, I have not been provided with full
    details of these examples including the relevant officer reports, proposed plans and
    supporting information. At any rate, each proposal must be determined on its own
    merits, having regard to the current development plan policy framework and
    individual site circumstances. Consequently, these examples do not overcome the
    harm I have identified in my reasoning above, nor do they alter my findings.
23. The evidence provided indicates that the Council was subject to a cyber-attack.
    However, from the information before me I find that the Council’s statutory
    consultation process was satisfactory and in accordance with the legislative
    requirements5.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
24. The proposed development would create a larger, functional three-bedroom
    property. However, the proposed development would have a harmful effect on the
    character and appearance of the host property and the surrounding area, which
    would fail to preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the CA. The
    proposal therefore conflicts with the development plan, taken as a whole.
25. Policy S4 of the Framework states that development proposals within settlements
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in the Framework.
26. Policy L2 of the Framework requires substantial weight to be given to the creation
    of additional floorspace within settlements through the use of the airspace above
    existing residential premises, in order to make effective use of land. Whilst I
    acknowledge that the proposal would provide enlarged residential accommodation,
    the Framework Policy L2 1.d)i. requires such development to be consistent with the
    overall street scene, or that building upwards would not cause substantial harm to
    the character of a building and its surroundings. I have found in my reasoning
    above that the proposal would result in unacceptable harm to the character and
    appearance of the host property, and the surrounding area, and would fail to
    preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the CA. Furthermore, the
    public benefits advanced by the appellant would not outweigh the low level of harm
    identified to the significance of the CA.
27. Furthermore, Policy DP3 1. of the Framework requires development proposals to
    respond to their context, so that they integrate with and enhance their
    surroundings. This should not preclude innovation or change where appropriate.
    For the reasons set out in my reasoning above, I have found harm to the character
    and appearance of the host property, the surrounding area and the CA and conflict
    with the historic environment conservation and enhancement policies contained

5
    The Town and Country Planning (Development Management Procedure) (England) Order 2015.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              5
Appeal Decision 6011521


     within the Framework. Furthermore, whilst the appellant has set out that the
     proposal meets the definition of a ‘mansard roof extension’ within the glossary of
     the Framework, this does not imply that the proposed development is acceptable.
28. Policy HO7 of the Framework states that substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community as identified through needs assessments
    prepared for the area of the local planning authority and other relevant evidence.
    However, whilst there may be an identified need for larger family sized
    accommodation in the Council’s area, the benefits arising from the development do
    not outweigh the harm identified, nor the conflict with other policies of the
    Framework, including those relating to the conservation and enhancement of the
    historic environment. Furthermore, the appellant draws my attention to Policy HO1
    of the Framework, where this policy relates to plan-making and not decision making
    policies.
29. Taken together, I find the benefits of the proposal would be substantially
    outweighed by the adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies of the Framework. As such, Policy S4 of the Framework does not
    point to permission being granted in this instance.
30. In the final balance, material considerations in the proposal’s favour are not of
    sufficient weight to suggest the decision should be made other than in accordance
    with the development plan. Therefore, for the reasons given, and having regard to
    all other matters raised, the appeal should be dismissed.



K Dryden
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
