Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by C McDonagh BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 10 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011301
Land at Doctors Hill, Bournheath, Bromsgrove B61 9JE
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•    The appeal is made by Mark Donald against the decision of Bromsgrove District Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00226/PIP.
•    The development proposed is ‘erection of between 3no. and 5no. bungalows and houses.’

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and permission in principle is granted for the erection of
       between 3no. and 5no. bungalows and houses at Land at Doctors Hill,
       Bournheath, Bromsgrove B61 9JE in accordance with the terms of the application,
       Ref 26/00226/PIP.
Applications for costs
2.     An application for costs has been made by Mark Donald against Bromsgrove
       District Council. This is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     The Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) advises that permission in principle is an
       alternative way of obtaining planning permission for housing-led development. This
       has 2 stages: the first stage (permission in principle) establishes whether a site is
       suitable in principle and the second (technical details consent) assesses detailed
       development proposals. This appeal relates to the first of these two stages.
4.     The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
       land use and the amount of development. All other matters are considered as part
       of a subsequent technical details consent application if permission in principle is
       granted.
5.     On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published by the Government. This is a material consideration in
       the decision-making process from the day of publication. The main parties were
       given the opportunity to comment on the changes and the implications for the
       appeal, with their respective observations taken into account where relevant.
Main Issues
6.     The main issue is whether the location of the appeal site is suitable for housing in
       principle having regard to the Green Belt, highway safety and the spatial strategy
       of the development plan for the distribution of housing.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011301


Reasons
Whether Inappropriate in the Green Belt
7.     The appeal site is located within the Green Belt where development is
       inappropriate unless it falls within one of the exceptions given in policy GB7 of the
       Framework. GB7(1)(g) relates to development which would utilise grey belt land,
       which is defined as previously developed land and/or any other land that, in either
       case, does not strongly contribute to any of purposes (a), (b), or (d) in policy GB2
       of the Framework. I note the Council does not dispute that the appeal site could be
       considered grey belt land. To my mind, it does not strongly contribute to checking
       the unrestricted sprawl of large built-up areas, prevent neighbouring towns
       merging nor does it preserve the setting or special character of a historic town. As
       such, I concur that the site can be considered grey belt land.
8.     I am therefore taken back to policy GB7(g) where parts i-iv must all be met. Given
       the scale of development, the proposal would not undermine the purposes of the
       Green Belt taken together across the plan area, and while there is some dispute
       that the Council cannot demonstrate a 5 year supply of deliverable housing land
       from local residents, the Council itself states that its supply is deficient. The
       proposal does not constitute major development and as such part iv does not
       apply.
9.     Part iii of policy GB7(1)(g) relates to whether a location is considered sustainable
       with respect to policy TR3. This advises that development should be located where
       it can support sustainable patterns of movement, enable good accessibility for
       different users and make the most of existing and proposed transport
       infrastructure, subject to the given criteria.
10. Part 1a of TR3 includes development proposals which could generate a significant
    amount of movement, in the context of the area within which they would be
    situated, which should be in locations that are sustainable. As this is a proposal for
    permission in principle, the number of dwellings is in a range, although set against
    the size of Bournheath up to 5 dwellings would be a significant amount of
    movement. As such, this means the location should limit the need to travel,
    particularly by private car, and offer a genuine choice of transport modes for
    residents and users.
11. From my observations on my site visit, Bournheath has 3 pubs and a community
    hall, all of which would be relatively easy to reach by walking. The nearby ‘small
    settlement’ of Fairfield evidently includes a first school, a volunteer run shop,
    village hall and some recreational facilities. Walking or cycling to Fairfield would be
    along a number of narrow roads although many of these have a 30 miles per hour
    speed limit and have street lighting with stretches of footpath. As such, some
    people may choose to walk or cycle this route which could be done safely. This
    would limit the need to travel by private vehicle for prospective future residents.
12. There is a wider range of services in Catshill. Walking to here would be much
    more unlikely given the road increases in speed to the national limit and is largely
    unlit with few footpaths. The majority of journeys to Catshill would therefore likely
    be made by private vehicle, as would those further afield to locations such as the
    main town of Bromsgrove.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011301


13. To that end, I am informed of a scheduled bus service, and the stop is located
    adjacent the appeal site on Doctor’s Hill. However, this is evidently only in
    operation once a day on a Tuesday and Friday. This would clearly not offer a
    reasonable alternative to the private vehicle.
14. There is much discussion regarding an on-demand bus service whereby
    passengers can request a journey using an app to specify a pickup and dropoff
    location. This is evidently run by the County Council. I have regard to this process
    described by the appellant as well as the conflicting reviews of this service from
    interested parties who have objected to the scheme.
15. The photographic evidence provided by the appellant demonstrates it is possible
    to travel to settlements in the plan area, including the main town of Bromsgrove,
    from directly outside the appeal site. There is concern from the Council and local
    residents that this service is not suitable or could potentially be cancelled in the
    future, although there is nothing substantive before me to demonstrate this. From
    all that I have seen and read, the proposal would utilise an existing transport
    option and while doubts are raised as to its longevity, with additional residents
    using it this would offer increased support to this existing transport infrastructure.
16. This would meet parts 1b and 1e of policy TR3 in taking opportunities to utilising
    and improving existing transport infrastructure. Parts 1c and 1d of TR3 would not
    apply at this stage given the in-principle stage of the proposal.
17. I am also informed that the Connectivity Tool as directed by part 2 of policy TR3
    scores the location 43 out of 100. Given the rural location this is perhaps not
    surprising, although I am informed that this is in the 90th percentile nationally. In
    this respect, in the context of the location the proposal would score relatively highly
    for connectivity.
18. Taken together, the proposal would meet the exception given in policy GB7(1)(g)
    of the Framework as well as policy BDP4 of the Bromsgrove District Plan 2011 –
    2030 (DP) (adopted January 2017) which generally seeks to avoid inappropriate
    development in the Green Belt with similar exceptions. I have determined that the
    proposal does not constitute inappropriate development. The courts1 have held
    that in this scenario, it is not necessary to consider its impact on the openness of
    the Green Belt, nor does the proposal need to demonstrate very special
    circumstances.
Highway Safety
19. I note the concerns of the Council and local residents regarding potential conflict
    between pedestrians walking along the adjacent road network to access services
    and facilities. Although the appellant advises that this is not a matter for permission
    in principle, given the locational aspect of the in-principle matter this can be
    considered at this stage, albeit with technical matters such as visibility splays
    reserved for the next stage should permission in principle be granted.
20. There is clearly some overlap between highway safety and the access to services,
    particularly as I have determined that some services could be utilised by walking. I
    observed on my site visit that this already occurs and given the profile of the road
    the speeds of motorists were very low. Further matters relating to highway safety
1
 Lee Valley Regional Park Authority, R (on the application of) v Epping Forest District Council & Anor (Rev 1) [2016] EWCA Civ
404.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                3
Appeal Decision 6011301


       would be considered at the next stage of this process as this appeal relates only to
       matters of acceptability in principle. This could include pedestrian connectivity in
       the overall site design or ensuring sufficient visibility is maintained.
21. Taken together, there is nothing before me to indicate that the proposal would be
    harmful to highway safety in principle. Any future development could therefore
    accord with policies BDP1 and BDP2 of the DP and paragraph TR4 of the
    Framework.
Whether Suitable Location
22. Policy BDP1 of the DP outlines the Council’s approach to the presumption in
    favour of sustainable development which seeks to align with the aims of the
    Framework. Policy BDP2 sets out the settlement hierarchy of the plan area. Most
    development is to be directed to Bromsgrove as the ‘main town’, with other areas
    defined as either ‘large settlements’ or ‘small settlements’. This approach seeks to
    promote sustainable communities based on the services and facilities that are
    available in each settlement and will assist villages to remain viable and provide
    for the needs of the catchment population that they serve. Bournheath is classified
    as a small settlement. Here, and in equivalent sized settlements, development is to
    be limited to suitable infill plots within settlement boundaries. The appeal site is
    located outside of the settlement boundary, and I note this is not disputed. It would
    therefore be contrary to policy BDP2 in this respect.
23. The glossary of the Framework offers a definition of settlement, which includes
    areas defined as such in the development plan and those using defined settlement
    boundaries. As such, I see no reason to disagree that the site is outside of the
    settlement by virtue of being outside of the boundary.
24. In this scenario, policy S5 of the Framework advises that this policy does not apply
    to development proposals in the Green Belt except where development would not
    be inappropriate in these locations. This includes through the application of policy
    GB7. In those cases, proposals should be approved unless the benefits of doing
    so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed
    against the national decision-making policies in this Framework, and applying
    paragraph 2 of S5.
25. Paragraph S5(2) sets out that situations where the development proposal would
    fail to comply with one of the national decision-making policies which state that
    development proposals should be refused in specific circumstances means that
    the benefits of approving development proposals are likely to be substantially
    outweighed by adverse effects. In this instance there are no relevant national
    decision making policies which state that the development should be refused.
26. Given the appeal relates to permission in principle, there are few design details
    before me at this stage. Consequently, the only conflict at this stage would be that
    the appeal site falls outside of the settlement boundary thereby conflicting with
    policy BDP2 of the DP.
27. The Council accepts that it currently cannot demonstrate 5 year supply of
    deliverable housing land. The contribution of 3-5 dwellings to its supply in this
    context is given positive but limited weight given the scale of the proposal. There
    would also be further limited positive weight attributed to social and economic
    benefits through construction jobs and the increased spend of future residents in

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6011301


       the local economy. As a result, the benefits would not be substantially outweighed
       by any adverse impacts.
Other Matters
28. I have had regard to the comments of interested parties, many of whom live close
    to the appeal site. Matters such as ecology, construction traffic, design, flood risk
    and impacts upon living conditions of neighbouring residents would be considered
    further in any subsequent technical details consent application. As I have clarified,
    this appeal relates to permission in principle and is considered only with matters of
    location, land use and amount of dwellings.
29. There is concern that the eastern side of the appeal site could be built out in
    future. I cannot assess what I do not have before me and there is nothing at this
    stage to indicate that this would occur. This would be subject to suitable
    assessment by the Council should it come to fruition. I have assessed the proposal
    on its own merits.
Conditions
30. The PPG confirms that it is not possible for conditions to be attached to a grant of
    permission in principle. I have therefore not considered such matters in the
    determination of this appeal.
Conclusion
31. Taking the above under consideration, as per policy S5 of the Framework
    development proposals should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would
    be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework. I have found that the location
    of the proposal would be acceptable in principle while it would also meet the
    exception given in policy GB7(1)(g) of the Framework in order to not constitute
    inappropriate development in the Green Belt. Matters relating to highway safety
    are largely premature although those issues raised which I could assess at this
    stage I have found to be acceptable.
32. The proposal conflicts with the development plan insofar as it relates to the spatial
    distribution of housing. The proposal would accord with the relevant provisions of
    the Framework which would be sufficient to outweigh the conflict with the
    development plan, particularly given the lack of a 5 year housing land supply of the
    Council. Accordingly, for the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal is
    allowed.

C McDonagh
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
