 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 3 August 2026
 by Les Greenwood MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 25 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011732
 554 Streatham High Road, Lambeth, London SW16 3QG
 •    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
      Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
      consent.
 •    The appeal is made by Wildstone Estates Limited against the decision of the Council of the London
      Borough of Lambeth.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00860/ADV.
 •    The advertisement proposed is the installation of a D6 internally illuminated LED advertising display
      following the removal of the existing paper display on the flank wall of the building.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issues
2. Advertisements are subject to control in the interests of amenity and public safety
   only, taking into account the provisions of the development plan, so far as they are
   material, and any other relevant factors1. Bearing this in mind, the main issues for
   this appeal are the effects of the proposed signage on: (i) the visual amenity of the
   local area; (ii) the amenity of neighbouring residents; and (iii) the safety of public
   highway users.
Preliminary matters
3. I saw at my site visit that the paper advertisement display referenced in the
   description of the proposal has been removed.
4. A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
   published on 17 August 2026. Having regard to the changes in the Framework and
   the comparatively minor scale and nature of this appeal proposal, I consider that
   further consultation on this matter is not necessary.
Reasons
Visual amenity
5. The A23 Streatham High Road is a wide through route lined in this area by a mix of
   residential and mainly small-scale commercial properties, with mature street trees
   helping to give it a somewhat suburban character. No 554 is a 3 storey brick
   building with an office frontage on the ground floor, sitting in a prominent corner

1 Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007, Regulation 3



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6011732


     position at the junction with a residential side street, Guildersfield Road. The
     proposal is to site an approximately 6m by 3m digital sign high up on the side gable
     wall, where it would be visible to drivers and others approaching the junction from
     the north, along Streatham High Road.
6. Most signs on this part of Streatham High Road are much smaller than the
   proposed sign - on shop fronts, bus stops and similar - with occasional larger
   billboards. Some of the smaller signs are illuminated, including fascia signs and a
   pavement sign in front of No 554. None of these illuminated signs are, however,
   comparable to the appeal proposal in its combination of size, prominence and
   extent of illumination. I appreciate that the sign would be in an established
   advertising position, would be near to street lights, would accord with Institute of
   Lighting Engineers luminance guidelines and would only show static images. It
   would be far enough away from a nearby conservation area that it would have no
   real effect on the setting of that heritage asset.
7. I nevertheless find that the proposal would be a sizeable, brash addition to the
   street scene in this area, intruding on the relatively low key, mixed and leafy
   character of the area. I note that there are other large digital and illuminated signs
   elsewhere on Streatham High Road, but the nearest of these are in a more
   commercialised context. I have assessed this proposal on its own merits, in light of
   its particular circumstances. I conclude that the sign would unduly harm the visual
   amenity of the local area.
Neighbours’ amenity
8. The property on the other side of Guildersfield Road evidently has residential
   accommodation at first and second floor levels, with 2 windows facing the side
   gable of No 554. These windows both appear to be secondary windows to the
   rooms in question, however, with main windows facing to the front onto Streatham
   High Road. The proposal includes some important safeguards to protect
   neighbours’ amenity, including a low limit on night-time luminance levels and a shut
   off period from 23:00 hours to 6:00 hours every night. These measures could be
   required by condition. In these circumstances, the impact of the illuminated sign on
   the residents at neighbouring properties would be within reasonable limits. I
   conclude that neighbours’ amenity would not be significantly affected.
Highway safety
9. The Council refers to a high level of road traffic accident casualties in this general
   area, including 2 fatalities within recent years. It is concerned about the potential for
   drivers on the southbound side of the A23 to be distracted by the proposed sign as
   they approach the Heybridge Avenue junction, opposite the appeal site.
10. Streatham High Road is divided by a hard central divider at this junction, limiting
    turning movements, and the speed limit has been reduced to 20mph. Heybridge
    Avenue is a residential side street which appears to be lightly trafficked so that the
    junction is not heavily used. The proposed sign would be set well away from
    Heybridge Avenue, out of drivers’ main field of view on the final approach to the
    junction. The sign could barely be seen by drivers on Heybridge Avenue due to the
    angles involved. The Council has not suggested that any of the local casualty
    accidents relate to the presence of advertising. Digital signs are a recognised part
    of the urban street scene, commonly dealt with by drivers. Details of luminance and
    images could be controlled by condition to minimise any potential distraction.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision 6011732


11. For these reasons, and subject to appropriate conditions, I am satisfied that the
    proposed sign would not unduly distract drivers or otherwise prejudice the safety of
    public highway users. I conclude that there would be no significant effect on the
    safety of public highway users.
Conclusion
12. In making this decision, I have had regard to Lambeth Local Plan policies Q2 and
    Q17, London Plan policy T4, the Council’s Supplementary Planning Document
    Lambeth Design Guide and its Advertisements and Signage Guidance. I have
    also taken note of the potential economic and other benefits of well-designed
    advertisements. Although I have found in favour of the appellant in some respects,
    my concerns in regard to the first main issue are sufficiently compelling for me to
    conclude that the appeal should not succeed.
Les Greenwood
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      3
