Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by K Townend BSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011219
10 Water Lane, Richmond, Richmond Upon Thames TW9 1TJ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Emre Oner against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
     Richmond Upon Thames.
•    The application Ref is PA25/3951.
•    The development proposed is installation of a timber decking system for the proposed external
     permanent seating area.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A section of decking and a low timber barrier has been constructed at the appeal
       site and I saw these at my visit. The proposal before me is only for the section of
       decking and the use of this area, it does not include the timber barrier and the
       appellant has confirmed this in Final Comments. Therefore, I have determined the
       appeal on the basis of the proposed development, as shown on the submitted
       plans, and the description of development which is set out in the application form.
3.     As part of the appeal the appellant has submitted a Health and Safety Policy and a
       Noise Technical Note (dated 9 June 2026). Although both documents are new at
       the appeal stage and were not before the Council as part of the planning
       application, both were available to the Council as part of the appeal and they have
       had an opportunity to comment. Moreover, I have received comments on behalf of
       the occupant of the neighbouring property. Consequently, none of the main parties
       would be prejudiced if I were to take the additional information into account.
4.     Following submission of the Health and Safety Policy, the Council has confirmed
       that it is no longer seeking to defend the first reason for refusal which related to fire
       safety. However, for completeness I have assessed the whole of the appeal.
5.     A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the revised Framework) came into
       force on the 17 August 2026. It is a material consideration which should be taken
       into account from the day of publication. Although the revised Framework is
       significantly different from the previous versions the wording of the details most
       pertinent to this appeal are not significantly changed. Having considered the
       revisions and in light of the principles of natural justice, in this instance it is not
       necessary to invite any submissions from the parties on the revised Framework.
Main Issues
6.     Given the above, the main issues are:

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011219


             •    the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of the
                  occupiers of neighbouring properties, with particular regard to No. 12 Water
                  Lane and noise; and
             •    whether the development would be safe from a fire safety perspective.
Reasons
Noise
7.       The appeal premises comprise an established and historic public house and a
         hard surfaced area to the side of the premises. The decking has been positioned
         on the hard surfaced area, between the public house and residential properties
         that were constructed under a planning application from 2011. The nearest
         neighbouring property, No 12 Water Lane, is next to the decking with a window in
         the side elevation.
8.       The appellant’s evidence confirms that the decking is intended to improve the
         comfort for patrons, to formalise a previously informal seating arrangement, and to
         promote vibrant daytime and night-time uses, as promoted by Policy SD6 of the
         Mayor of London - London Plan, March 2021 (the London Plan).
9.       The Noise Impact Assessment1 submitted with the planning application advised
         that the noise level at the closest residential window would be higher than
         recommended in guidance and would result in substantial harm. Mitigation
         measures were suggested and included reducing the seating area, installing
         acoustic barriers and restricting the hours of use to not after 23:00. However,
         except for the closing time, these measures were not taken through into the
         proposal and the scheme is proposed without most of the mitigation suggested.
10. I acknowledge that the hard surfaced area between 10 and 12 Water Lane
    previously contained external seating and that I have no compelling evidence that
    the Council received any noise complaints relating to the use of the area, prior to
    the installation of the decking. I also accept that the originally submitted Noise
    Impact Assessment did not assess the potential noise levels from this area, prior
    to the installation of the decking, but that the Noise Technical Note has sought to
    provide an assessment of the noise from the previous use.
11. From the appellant’s photographic evidence, although the appeal site has no
    limitations in planning and has historically been used for seating, it was previously
    used informally. Moreover, the seating was spread across the whole of the area
    between the two buildings.
12. The decking which has been installed has brought this outdoor seating area close
    to the window of 12 Water Lane. Moreover, the decking, the large umbrellas,
    heaters and lighting above the tables, that I saw at my visit, provide a space that is
    useable throughout the year, including late into the evenings and in inclement
    weather. In my judgement, the extent that this area was previously used would
    have been less than the intended use of the appeal proposal as it would not likely
    have been significantly occupied after dark or in cooler or damp weather.
13. The appellant’s evidence suggests that the decking would be for up to 12 patrons.
    However, I saw seating available within this space for more than this number and

1
    DAA Group Noise Impact Assessment, Issue 1, dated 4 December 2025


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              2
Appeal Decision 6011219


         this corresponds with the evidence provided by the interested party. A condition to
         limit the number of patrons within this space would overcome this concern but
         would be difficult to enforce.
14. Furthermore, the Noise Technical Note also appears to indicate that the seating
    area across the front of 10 Water Lane would no longer cause any noise and this
    is the basis of the reduction in noise levels along the frontage. However, seating
    was still clearly in place along the frontage at my visit, I have no means to prevent
    that seating area from being used, and the appellant has confirmed they have no
    intention of removing the seating along the front.
15. There would be a small reduction in the area used for seating between 10 and 12
    Water Lane as the decking is set back from the edge of the pavement and retains
    a path between the decking and the appeal premises. However, positioning the
    seating further away from the public house results in all of the seats and patrons
    being next to the wall and window of the neighbouring property. Neither the set
    back from the road nor the gap providing a path would result in the reduction of
    noise predicted in the Noise Technical Note.
16. The position of the decking would not result in a reduction in noise to the most
    affected window in the side of 12 Water Lane and would be likely to increase noise
    in the area immediately around the window. The Noise Technical Note advises of
    an increase in noise levels at the rear of the site which would be near to this
    neighbouring property.
17. Even if I accept that the increase in noise would be marginal and not likely to be
    noticeable this assumes that the previous use of the site as a seating area was
    used to the same extent as the appeal proposal, if not more. As I have already
    noted the seating on the decking provides space for more than 12 patrons and
    would be capable of being used for a greater amount of time than the previous
    informal arrangement. The proposed decking would, therefore, provide for a more
    usable space.
18. Consequently, although there would have been some degree of noise arising from
    the previous use, I do not have compelling evidence that it would have been
    directly comparable to, or worse than, the appeal proposal, as the appellant
    contends in the Noise Technical Note. Neither the original Noise Impact
    Assessment nor the Noise Technical Note have fully assessed the capacity of the
    decking, as seen at my visit, or taken into account the material differences
    between the previous informal use and the proposed permanent use.
19. The proposed Noise Management Plan and the restriction on amplified sound
    would help to reduce noise levels, but this is limited to encouraging dispersal of
    customers rather than any measures to reduce noise from the use of the decking.
    The Noise Management Plan does not restrict the number of tables and/or seats in
    the area or reduce the extent of noise nearest to the neighbouring property. The
    appeal before me is materially different to the Jaks Bars & Restaurants Ltd2
    caselaw which primarily related to the noise impacts and dispersal of patrons and
    noted that this is controlled through the licencing regime rather than planning.
20. The appellant has also confirmed that they would not agree to install acoustic
    screening as this would reduce the usable area of the decking. The appeal before

2
    Jaks Bars & Restaurants Ltd v Secretary of State for Housing, Communities and Local Government & Anor [2026]


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 3
Appeal Decision 6011219


         me is, therefore, materially different to the appeal at The Duke of Clarence3 where,
         although the number of patrons was greater than in this appeal, the decision was
         subject to a condition to require the installation of an acoustic barrier to reduce the
         noise levels and, therefore, the effect of that decking on the living conditions of the
         occupiers of neighbouring properties.
21. From the evidence before me and for the reasons given above, the appeal
    proposal would likely result in noise that would adversely affect quality of life and
    health. The proposal would, therefore, result in adverse living conditions for the
    occupiers of neighbouring properties, with particular regard to No. 12 Water Lane
    and noise. The appeal proposal would be contrary to Policies 19, 46 and 53 of the
    Richmond upon Thames Local Plan 2024-2039 (the LP). Collectively these
    policies support the use of outdoor areas in association with food and drink uses
    only where this would not cause unacceptable harm to the amenity of adjoining
    residential property, require all development to protect the amenity and living
    conditions for existing, adjoining and neighbouring properties, seek to ensure that
    there is no harm to the reasonable enjoyment of the use of buildings due to
    increases in noise, amongst other matters, and seek to ensure that local
    environmental impacts of all development proposals do not lead to detrimental
    effects on the health, safety and the amenity of existing users or occupiers of the
    surrounding land through, amongst others, noise.
Fire safety
22. The submitted Health and Safety Policy details the approach of the appeal
    premises to fire safety risk, including the risks associated with the decking and its
    use. It sets out measures for fire safety, staff training, alarms and fire drills, and
    procedures to reduce fire risk. The Council has confirmed that it is satisfied that
    the submitted document is sufficient to comply with the requirements of Policy D12
    of the London Plan and Policy 44 of the LP. I have no compelling reason to
    disagree with the Council’s findings and, therefore, find that the appeal proposal
    would be safe from a fire safety prospective and comply with the relevant policies.
Other Matters
23. The appeal premises lie within the Richmond Riverside Conservation Area (CA4).
    Mindful of the statutory duty set out in s72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
    Conservation Areas) Act 1990, I have had regard to the desirability of preserving
    or enhancing the character or appearance of the area.
24. As far as it is relevant to the appeal, I consider that the significance of this part of
    the conservation area is mainly derived from the narrowness of the streets,
    including Water Lane, and the mix of warehouses, commercial uses and
    residential uses which give the area a semi-industrial character. The appeal
    building, by reason of being a historic public house, contributes positively to the
    character and appearance of the conservation area. The appeal premises is also a
    Building of Townscape Merit.
25. Although I have not been provided with any evidence of other decking within the
    conservation area, the appeal premises already has tables and chairs to the front
    and I noted other premises with outdoor tables and chairs in the area. The addition
    of decking and a permanent seating area would not be out of keeping with the

3
    Appeal reference 6000623


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    4
Appeal Decision 6011219


       character or appearance of the conservation area and would be consistent with the
       function of the public house and the night-time economy.
26. Overall, as an appeal for an area of decking and permanent seating, without the
    boundary enclosure along Water Lane, I find that the proposal would preserve the
    character and appearance of the Richmond Riverside Conservation Area. I note
    that the Council raised no objection on these grounds either.
27. The appellant contends that any reduction in the size of the useable decking area
    would negatively affect the operations of the public house. However, I have no
    compelling evidence before me to support this claim. Therefore, this matter would
    not weigh in favour of the scheme nor outweigh the harm I have identified to the
    living conditions of the occupiers of the neighbouring property.
Conclusion
28. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

K Townend
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
