Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by Richard Gilbert BA (Hons) MSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011441
16 Avondale Road, Chesterfield, Derbyshire S40 4TF
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Oliver Rouse against the decision of Chesterfield Borough Council.
•    The application reference is CHE/25/00917/HOU.
•    The development proposed is a garage conversion, including raising of roof height and alteration to
     bay window.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The description of development in the banner heading is taken from the decision
       notice as it is the description agreed between the parties.
3.     During the course of the appeal a new National Planning Policy Framework was
       published on the 17 August 2026. Whilst the format has altered, any
       considerations that are material to this decision have not fundamentally changed. I
       am satisfied that this has not prejudiced any party and I have had regard to the
       latest version in reaching my decision.
4.     I note that the Council received revised plans but based their decision on the plans
       originally received with the application. The revised plans do not accompany the
       appeal. I have therefore based my assessment on the plans, evidence and merits
       of the case before me.
Main Issue
5.     The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
       appearance of the appeal property and the surrounding area.
Reasons
6.     The appeal property is a detached Victorian villa. It features a traditional single
       storey bay window and a small garage extension positioned either side of its main
       entrance. Sash windows are situated at the first floor above. The bay window also
       includes sash windows and is composed of a brick plinth beneath a stone
       surround. Neighbouring dwellings share common architectural characteristics with
       the appeal property, notably through the prevalence of similarly styled bay
       windows. These features contribute positively to the street scene, giving it a
       cohesive appearance and distinct character.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011441


7.     The proposed development seeks to alter the existing bay window and introduce a
       second bay window to enable conversion of the garage to a habitable room. The
       alterations to the existing bay window would maintain its trapezoidal footprint.
       However, the use of brick in its re-construction would be inconsistent with the
       stone surrounds ubiquitous to the bay windows along the street, depriving the
       appeal property of a positive visual element.
8.     Furthermore, the brick piers created between each window would be thicker than
       the existing stone equivalents. This alteration would diminish the width of the
       window voids within the bay and would make them appear very narrow relative to
       the wider first floor windows above. The subsequent visual effect would imbalance
       the façade of the appeal property, further harming its appearance.
9.     The rectangular bay window proposed to enable the garage conversion would also
       be composed of brick and would follow the same narrow style of window design.
       As a result, both bay windows comprising the proposal would be inconsistent with
       the appearance of the appeal property and would be harmful to the character of
       the street scene.
10. I acknowledge that the proposed height of the bay windows takes account of
    compliance with the Building Regulations to achieve correct window heights and
    satisfactory roof insulation. However, such considerations do not justify the harm I
    have identified above which relate to separate design considerations.
11. The existing garage extension may be in a poor state of repair and the Council
    agree in principle to its removal. However, it has not been demonstrated to me that
    conversion of the garage could not otherwise be achieved by a less harmful
    scheme. Whilst such a scheme may incur additional expense for the appellant, I
    do not consider that these personal circumstances justify the harm to character
    and appearance in this instance.
12. My attention has been drawn to a bay window at 10 Avondale Road (No.10), a
    side extension and balcony at 2 Avondale Road (No.2), as well as a bungalow and
    house also situated on Avondale Road. The bay window to No.10 is not
    comparable to the bay windows of the appeal scheme as it possesses a different
    style of fenestration as well as a pitched roof. The extension to No.2 is a wholly
    different form of development which, again, limits parallels between it and the
    proposal before me. The two modern dwellings on Avondale Road lack bay
    windows and are few in number. Their influence on the otherwise cohesive
    character of the street scene is therefore limited. Overall, these examples do not
    persuade me to reach an alternative conclusion on the appeal and do not
    overcome the harm that I have otherwise found. I therefore attach limited weight to
    them in arriving at my decision.
13. For the reasons set out above, the proposed development would have a harmful
    effect on the character and appearance of the appeal property and the surrounding
    area. Conflict therefore arises with Policy CLP20 of the Chesterfield Borough Local
    Plan (2020) which expects development that respects the character, form and
    setting of the site and surrounding area by virtue of its function, appearance and
    architectural style, landscaping, scale, massing, detailing, height and materials.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011441


Conclusion
14. For the reasons given above, the appeal should be dismissed.

Richard Gilbert
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
