Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026 by E Clifford BA (Hons) MA
Decision by B Plenty BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 04 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011424
6 Cool Oak Lane, Colindale, Barnet, London NW9 7BJ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Ms Neesha Chauhan against the decision of the Council of the London
    Borough of Barnet.
•   The application Ref is 26/1467/HSE.
•   The development proposed is a single storey side infill extension and single storey rear extension
    following demolition of existing outbuilding and greenhouse. Single storey front extension.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. Having reviewed the most recent changes to the National Planning Policy
   Framework, I am satisfied that they do not affect the substance of the main issue in
   the appeal. Since they would not therefore be prejudiced, I have proceeded
   without further consultation with the main parties.
4. It is clear from the delegated report that the Council is satisfied that the proposed
   front extension is acceptable and the remaining matter in contention is the
   proposed rear extension. I have therefore defined the main issue on this basis.
Main Issue
5. The main issue is the effect of the proposed rear extension on the living conditions
   of the occupiers of the neighbouring property, 4 Cool Oak Lane (no 4), having
   particular regard to outlook, sunlight and daylight.
Reasons for the Recommendation
6. The appeal site hosts a two-storey semi-detached dwelling. It has a reasonably
   sized garden, with a single storey garage extending down the boundary with the
   neighbouring property, no 4. Beyond the garage is a free-standing greenhouse.
7. The outlook from the host dwelling and its surrounding neighbours is characterised
   by the residential development typical of its urban location. No 4 also has a notable
   level of verdancy in the form of mature trees within its garden and that of its

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011424


     neighbouring properties. No 4 is also situated at a slightly lower land level than the
     appeal property and given the orientation of the buildings and the natural path of
     the sun, the existing outbuilding casts a shadow into the garden.
8. I note that the proposed extension would, at the furthest point from the host
   dwelling, replace an existing greenhouse. Whilst the scale of the replacement
   structure is broadly similar, the current greenhouse allows a degree of diffused light
   to be filtered through. Not only does this allow the filtered daylight and sunlight to
   be received into the garden of no 4, but it also aids in reducing any existing sense
   of imposition. The replacement with a solid walled structure as is proposed would
   be notably more overbearing when experienced from the garden of no 4, extending
   the amount of built form along the boundary. Due to the extent of the proposal’s
   projection, its proximity to the shared boundary and the neighbouring plots lower
   land level, the proposal would cause substantial harm to the living conditions of the
   neighbouring occupiers.
9. Furthermore, the existing layout at the appeal site means that there are gaps
   between the greenhouse, the rear boundary and the outbuilding. The loss of these
   and replacement with a continuous built form would reduce the amount of daylight
   and sunlight received into the neighbouring garden, which would be particularly
   noticeable given the proposed proximity to the boundary. The increased level of
   overshadowing caused by the proposal, in conjunction with the heightened level of
   overbearing, would have an unacceptable effect on living conditions.
10. I am aware that permission has previously been granted for a rear extension at this
    site to replace the existing outbuilding (25/0516/HSE). The scheme subject to this
    appeal is proposed to extend to a greater depth than the previous proposal. Whilst I
    acknowledge that the approved scheme represents a fallback position which could
    realistically be implemented, this would represent a less harmful scenario than the
    proposal before me.
11. My attention has been drawn to a rear extension at no 8 Cool Oak Lane. This
    extends to the full depth of the plot and would be likely to have a similar adverse
    effect on the neighbouring property, as such, an existing poor relationship does not
    provide support for the proposal. Nonetheless, I have not been provided with any
    details of the circumstances under which any planning permission was granted in
    order to consider this further.
12. Overall, the proposed development would have a harmful effect on the living
    conditions of the occupiers of no 4 Cool Oak Lane. As such in that regard, it fails to
    comply with Policy D3 of the London Plan (2021) and Policies CDH01 and CDH05
    of the Barnet Local Plan (2025) which together require development to deliver
    appropriate outlook and allow for acceptable levels of daylight and sunlight by
    avoiding significant adverse impacts.
Conclusion and Recommendation
13. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I
    recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

E Clifford
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011424


Inspector’s Decision
14. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

B Plenty
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
