 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 6 August 2026
 by Chris Couper BA (Hons) Dip TP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 19 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011181
 245 Violet Lane, Croydon CR0 4HN
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Vijayjayanthinathan Sankar Vedachalam against the decision of the
      Council of the London Borough of Croydon.
 •    The application Ref is 25/02686/HSE.
 •    The development proposed is demolition of chimney stack, erection of part one, part two storey
      front/side/rear extension and associated alterations.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for demolition of chimney
   stack, erection of part one, part two storey front/side/rear extension and associated
   alterations at 245 Violet Lane, Croydon CR0 4HN in accordance with the terms of
   the application, Ref 25/02686/HSE, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: location plan and drawing nos.
              TSL/245/HH/EXT/01, TSL/245/HH/EXT/02, TSL/245/HH/EXT/03,
              TSL/245/HH/EXT/04, TSL/245/HH/EXT/05, TSL/245/HH/EXT/06 and
              TSL/245/HH/EXT/07.
     3)       The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
              development shall match those used in the existing dwelling.
     4)       Prior to the first occupation of the development hereby permitted, the fire
              safety precautions detailed in the Fire Strategy Statement shall be
              implemented and shall thereafter be retained.
     5)       Prior to the first occupation of the development hereby permitted, a water butt
              shall be connected to the host property’s surface water downpipes, and shall
              thereafter be retained.
     6)       The side windows proposed for the ﬁrst ﬂoor ensuite bathroom and bathroom
              shall be obscure glazed and non-opening, unless the parts of the window
              which can be opened are more than 1.7 metres above the ﬂoor of the room in
              which the window is installed. Such measures shall be provided and
              completed prior to the ﬁrst occupation of the development, and retained for
              the lifetime of the development.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision: 6011181


Procedural Matter
2. The revised National Planning Policy Framework was published in August 2026
   (‘the Framework’). Having regard to the submitted evidence, including the
   Council’s decision and its committee report, and the main issue in this case, I am
   satisfied that it is not determinative in the appeal.
Main Issue
3. The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the living conditions in neighbouring
   properties, with particular regard to the outlook from, and availability of natural light
   to, 243 Violet Lane (‘No 243’).
Reasons
     Living conditions
4. The host comprises a detached two storey house, which is set back from the
   highway on the eastern side of Violet Lane. It is bordered to the south by No 247
   which is a semi-detached house with a flat roofed single storey side extension, and
   to the north by No 243 which is the two storey presbytery of St Dominic’s Church.
   No 243 has single storey, flat-roofed structures close to the boundary with the host,
   with a small enclosed courtyard in between them.
5. As illustrated by Images 2, 3 and 4 in the Council’s Committee report, and as I
   observed on my visit, the sliding patio doors in No 243’s presbytery office face a tall
   boundary wall, with the two storey flank of the host beyond. The outlook from there
   across the narrow courtyard is therefore enclosed by those features and, to a
   lesser extent, by No 243’s single storey structures.
6. The proposed ground floor extension would replace existing rear projections. In
   that context, and given the proposed extension’s limited single storey height,
   existing boundary treatment, and rear extensions at No 243 and 247, it would not
   affect the outlook from either neighbouring property to a harmful degree. As the
   rear face of the proposed two storey side extension next to the southern boundary
   would broadly align with the two storey rear face of No 247, it would not harmfully
   affect those occupants’ outlook.
7. The proposed first floor rear extension would be visible from No 243’s side-facing
   patio doors, and from its adjacent courtyard. However, it would be above the
   boundary wall, off-set further to the rear, and set in from the boundary beyond the
   host’s side passage. Its bulk would also be limited by its set down ridge and by its
   hipped roofed form.
8. I appreciate that the office is a sensitive part of the presbytery where pastoral care
   is administered. However, for the above reasons, and in the context of the already
   constrained outlook from that room, the scheme would not have a materially
   harmful impact on its use, or on the outlook from it and from the adjacent courtyard;
   nor would it result in a significant reduction in ventilation in that area.
9. The proposed ground floor windows in the side elevation close to No 243 would
   face the boundary wall. The proposed first floor windows would serve a small
   bathroom and en-suite, which are not habitable spaces where occupants typically
   dwell to enjoy an outlook. As such, they could be obscurely glazed, and they would
   not result in a significant outlook over No 243’s courtyard or its side facing glazing.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
    Appeal Decision: 6011181


10. The Daylight and Sunlight Study1 concludes that, of the nineteen windows
    assessed at No 243 and No 247, eighteen would continue to meet the
    recommended BRE guide (‘BRE 209’)2 vertical sky component (‘vsc’) criteria
    following the proposed development, but that the vsc for the sliding doors serving
    No 243’s office would reduce from 18.28% to 12.92%, thus below the BRE 209’s
    retained value benchmark. That said, BRE 209 is a non-statutory guide which
    should be applied flexibly and still requires planning judgement having regard to the
    site context and design quality.
11. In this case, the primarily affected glazed opening at No 243 comprises large, full
    height, sliding doors, which would typically admit higher levels of daylight compared
    to a smaller conventional window. Moreover, No 243 includes other front and rear
    facing windows which would be barely impacted, if at all, by the proposal. In that
    context, and based on the evidence before me, I am satisfied that the scheme
    would not result in a significant loss of natural light within No 243, or No 247.
12. The scheme would not impact the living conditions at No 243 or No 247 to a
    harmful degree. It would not therefore conflict with Policy DM10 of the Croydon
    Local Plan 2018, or with Policy D6 of the London Plan 2021. Amongst other things,
    and in broad terms, these set out that development shall protect the amenity of
    adjoining occupiers, including by ensuring that it does not result in a significant loss
    of sunlight or daylight, and by having regard to the usability of outside amenity
    space.
       Other matters
13. The residential and other buildings on Violet Lane are varied in terms of their form,
    proportions and design, many of the houses having been extended to the side or
    rear, including both adjacent buildings here. The proposal, including the front
    porch, the flat-roofed rear extension and the first floor extensions, would be
    subordinate in height and overall scale to the host, and they would be faced in
    matching materials. As a result of the scheme, there would still be a gap above
    ground floor between the host and No 247. In the context of this diverse area, the
    extensions would not appear overly dominant or out of place, and they would not
    set an undesirable precedent.
14. Whilst interested parties allege that the host will be used as a House in Multiple
    Occupation, the planning application was for extensions and alterations only, and I
    have no substantive evidence that that is the property’s intended use. I have
    therefore dealt with the scheme before me on its planning merits. The internal
    layout would provide appropriate living conditions for the occupants of the host
    property, and I have no cogent reason to conclude that it would give rise to damp.
15. There is space on the property’s forecourt for about two cars to park.
    Notwithstanding the area’s limited public transport accessibility rating, and the
    proximity to educational, religious and medical facilities, I am not persuaded that
    the limited additional vehicular movements typically associated with a house
    extension such as this would add so significantly to on-road parking as to cause a
    harmful impact on the safety and convenience of highway users.



1
    Daylight and Sunlight Study by Haritha Consultants Limited
2
    British Research Establishment Report 209: Site layout for daylight and sunlight – a guide to good practice 2022


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                   3
 Appeal Decision: 6011181


16. Noise during construction would be temporary, and some limited disturbance or
    inconvenience to neighbours, such as from balls landing in gardens is not untypical
    of residential areas. The scheme is accompanied by a Fire Strategy Statement,
    and I have no persuasive evidence that the layout and design of the proposal would
    pose a significant fire risk. A planning condition could be imposed requiring
    compliance with its fire safety precautions.
17. The construction of the proposed extensions would be a matter for Building
    Regulations, and party wall agreements would ordinarily be covered under
    separate legal rights and legislation. Finally, planning is concerned with land use in
    the public interest, and the impact of development on the value of a neighbouring
    property is not a material consideration.
Conditions and Conclusion
18. I have considered suggested conditions against the tests in the Framework, making
    minor amendments where necessary in the interests of clarity and precision. As
    well as the standard time limit, in the interests of certainty, I have imposed a
    condition requiring that the development be carried out in accordance with the
    approved plans. In the interests of good design, and to protect the character and
    appearance of the host property and the area, a condition is also necessary
    requiring that it be faced with matching materials.
19. For the reasons set out above, and having regard to LP Policy D12, a condition is
    necessary requiring compliance with the precautions detailed in the Fire Strategy
    Statement. To mitigate floor risk, and in accordance with LP Policy SI 13, I have
    imposed a condition requiring the provision and retention of a water butt. Finally, to
    protect the living conditions at No 243, a condition is necessary requiring that the
    first floor side facing windows are obscurely glazed and non-opening below 1.7
    metres above floor level.
20. For these reasons, and having regard to all other matters raised, including
    representations by interested parties, the appeal is allowed.

Chris Couper
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    4
