 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 11 August 2026
 By Terrence Kemmann-Lane JP DipTP FRTPI MCMI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 24 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011558
 253 Ongar Road, Writtle, Chelmsford, CM1 3NT
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Jamie Warren against the decision of Chelmsford City Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00354/FUL.
 •    The development proposed is a single storey rear extension

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issue
2. The main issue in this case is the effect of the proposed development on the
   residential amenities of the neighbouring occupiers at No.251 Ongar Road.
Reasons
3. The appeal property is a semi-detach 2-storey house under a mansard roof. It and
   its neighbour have original single storey extensions on the side of the dwellings that
   are away from the common boundary. The proposal is for a single storey rear
   extension that would fill the gap between the existing extension and the boundary
   with its neighbour.
4. I have noted that the appellant states that the neighbour was led to believe that the
   proposed wall would be constructed on or at the boundary line between the two
   properties and that this information was incorrect. The appellant further states that
   the proposed extension wall would be set back approximately 600mm into the
   appellant's garden from the boundary, and would not encroach upon or sit on the
   boundary itself. However, as I describe below, this is not what the plans show, and
   if permission were given, it is the extension shown on the plans that would be
   permitted.
5. The drawings ‘Proposed Site/Block Plan (Drawing No.JW/PL/01A) and the
   ’Proposed Ground Floor Plan (Drawing No.JW/PL/04) clearly show the eastern wall
   of the proposed extension being placed on the boundary of the curtilage. The result
   of the proposed extension would thus be a continuous wall approximately 2.4
   metres in height along the shared boundary, and positioned adjacent to an area of
   outdoor living space of the neighbour at No.251.
6. As I have already noted, this neighbour has an L-shaped rear projection, with the
   proposed extension located some 3.3 metres away. The rear living space of


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6011558




     No.251 is single aspect, served by rear-facing patio doors. The outlook from these
     doors makes an important contribution to the residential amenity of the occupiers.
7. Since the backs of this pair of houses face south, the impact in terms of daylight
   and sunlight would be limited. But the introduction of the proposal would result in a
   considerable increase in built form in close proximity to the neighbouring patio
   doors and would lead to a significant reduction in the quality of the external outlook
   from the habitable room served. The proposed extension would result in a more
   confined and enclosed environment, both indoor and outdoors. Thus, the sense of
   enclosure created by the scale and proximity of the proposed extension would be
   overbearing on the residential amenity of the neighbouring occupiers.
8. The benefit of the extra space to the appellant’s family would thus be at the
   expense of an unacceptable reduction in the quality of life for the neighbours.
   Therefore, the appeal will be dismissed.

Terrence Kemmann-Lane
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
