 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 12 August 2026
 By Michael Evans BA MA MPhil DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 17 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011611
 31 Gainsborough Drive, Northfleet DA11 8NH
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by C Sandhu against the decision of Gravesham Borough Council.
 •    The application Ref is 20260004.
 •    The development proposed is described on the application form as “Proposed first floor extension
      over approved ground floor extension”.

Preliminary matter
1. The Council on the decision notice and the Appellant on the appeal form have used
   the same description of development. Apart from the use of the term retention,
   which is not itself an act of development, this provides a more accurate reflection of
   the proposal than that given on the application form. Subject to this change I have
   therefore used this description in the decision below.
Decision
2. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the erection of part
   single storey, part two storey front, side and rear extensions and a single storey
   rear extension, at 31 Gainsborough Drive, Northfleet DA11 8NH, in accordance
   with the terms of the application, Ref 20260004 and the plans submitted with it,
   subject to the following conditions:
     1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
        date of this decision.
     2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
        following approved plans: DA11NHPP1, DA11NHPP2, DA11NHPP4,
        DA11NHPP5, DA11NHPP6, DA11NHPP7, DA11NHPP8, proposed Block Plan
        at scale of 1:500 and Location Plan at scale of 1:1250.
     3) The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
        development hereby permitted shall match those used in the existing dwelling.
     4) The first floor bathroom window in the side elevation of the development hereby
        permitted shall be fitted with obscure glass to a level equivalent to Pilkington
        Level 3 or above (or the nearest equivalent standard) with any opening being at
        a minimum height of 1.7m above internal floor level. The window shall thereafter
        be retained in accordance with these details.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6011611


Main Issues
3. The main issues in this appeal are:
    -   The effect on the character and appearance of the host dwelling and
        streetscene.
    -   The effect on the living conditions of the occupiers of the host dwelling, with
        regard to the provision of private rear amenity space.
Reasons
4. The proposal concerns a two storey semi-detached dwelling. The Council points
   out that the footprint of the property would double. Nevertheless, this statistic is
   not, in itself, evidence of a harmful impact. The two storey enlargement to the side
   would be set down from the ridge and back from the main front wall at first floor
   level. The width of this part would be a fairly small proportion of that of the existing
   dwelling across the front elevation, with the gable ended form reflecting that of the
   host dwelling. The single storey part at the front would not project beyond the
   existing porch towards the street.
5. The adjoining two storey and single storey rear projections would each have a
   depth of 3 metres. This would also be relatively modest by comparison to that of
   the existing flank of the property. The bulk of the two storey part would be further
   limited by the significant set down from the ridge of the main roof and its hipped
   form. To the side it would not extend beyond the new gable end.
6. In consequence, even if considered on a cumulative basis, the proposed additions
   would be subservient to the host dwelling and not appear overly dominant or unduly
   bulky. The enlarged dwelling would also be compatible with the scale and bulk of
   nearby two storey dwellings, including the immediately adjacent hipped roof terrace
   which has fairly prominent front gables at each end. As a result, the additions
   would not appear disproportionate, incongruous or give rise to an overdeveloped
   appearance.
7. For the above reasons it is concluded that the character and appearance of the
   host dwelling and streetscene would not be harmed. The proposal would comply
   with Core Strategy Policy CS19, which, among other things, intends that new
   development should be visually attractive and integrate with the surrounding area.
8. The Council’s Supplementary Planning Guidance 2 (SPG2) Residential Layout
   Guidelines, Adopted 1996, amended 2020, provides guidance on garden areas.
   For dwellings with four or more bedrooms, it is indicated that a minimum private
   garden area of 100 square metres should be provided.
9. The extended dwelling would result in a reduction in size of the rear garden area to
   about 82 sq m and therefore fall short of the guidance. Nevertheless, the garden
   would still comprise a fairly substantial, useable and level space immediately
   adjoining the rear of the dwelling. Given these matters and its depth and width,
   which I assessed at my site visit, it would be capable of providing adequate space
   to be effectively used for the functions identified in SPG2 such as outside storage,
   leisure use, clothes drying and play space. Moreover, given the distance to the
   nearest properties to the sides and rear of the amenity space there would also be a



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      2
 Appeal Decision 6011611


     fairly good standard of privacy and relatively open outlook, as well as good levels of
     daylight and sunshine.
10. In these circumstances, despite failing to meet the guidance it is concluded that the
    living conditions of the occupiers of the host dwelling would not be harmed. There
    would, therefore, be no conflict with the aims of Core Strategy Policy CS19 to
    safeguard amenity and ensure appropriate levels of private amenity space. The
    absence of any harm is a compelling reason for not rigidly applying the guidance so
    that an exception to SPG2 is warranted in this instance.
11. In the National Planning Policy Framework it is indicated that decisions should
    ensure that developments satisfy a number of considerations. These include that
    the proposed development should be visually attractive, sympathetic to local
    character and create a high standard of amenity for future users, which would be
    achieved by the development.
12. In this case there would be no harm and compliance with the development plan.
    Moreover, there are no other considerations that would justify making a decision
    other than in accordance with the development plan so that the appeal is allowed.
    In the interest of certainty, a condition specifying the approved plans should be
    imposed. The materials used should match those of the host dwelling to protect the
    appearance of the locality. The first floor bathroom window in the extension should
    be glazed with obscured glass and have a restricted opening, which would protect
    the privacy of the occupiers of adjacent properties.

M Evans
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     3
