 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 24 August 2026
 by John D Allan BA(Hons) BTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 8 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011133
 23 Pendragon Walk, Colindale, Barnet, London NW9 7RR
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Omid Fakouri against the decision of the Council of the London Borough
      of Barnet.
 •    The application Ref is 26/1113/RCU.
 •    The development proposed is the erection of a loft conversion with rear dormer and 3no. front and
      1no. rear facing rooflight.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. The application was made retrospectively. At the time of my visit the development
   was complete.
3. During the course of the appeal, the revised National Planning Policy Framework
   2026 (the Framework 2026) was published. Both parties were invited to comment
   about the relevance of the Framework 2026 to their case.
Background and Main Issue
4. In March 2023, planning permission (Ref 22/6127/RCU) was retrospectively
   refused for development described as ‘Roof extension involving rear dormer and
   3no. front and 1no. rear facing rooflight’. A subsequent appeal was dismissed in
   April 2025 (Ref APP/N5090/W/23/3321495) with the Inspector concluding that the
   development had an adverse impact on the character and appearance of the host
   property and area. At the same time, an appeal against an enforcement notice
   issued by the Council was also dismissed (Ref APP/N5090/C/23/3323022). As a
   consequence, the enforcement notice was upheld, requiring the demolition of the
   rear dormer extension with a compliance period of two months.
5. The planning application relevant to the current appeal was made by the same
   previous applicant/appellant. The form states that the works were completed in
   January 2022. There is no suggestion within any of the appellant’s submissions
   that the dormer has been altered since the previous appeal decisions and indeed
   the Council’s officer’s report confirms that the plans now submitted show the
   dormer to be the same scale as that previously refused.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6011133


6. With this background in mind, the main issue remains to be the effect of the
   development upon the character and appearance of the host property and wider
   area.
Reasons
7. The appeal relates to a two-storey, end-of-terrace dwelling set within a wider
   residential estate development where back gardens of properties typically face onto
   parking courts or roadways, with frontages facing each other over common areas of
   pedestrian walkways and pockets of green spaces. The area has a harmonious
   appearance, unified by consistent design features and finishing materials for the
   dwellings throughout the estate. It is understandable therefore that, in order to
   protect local amenity, permitted development rights were removed for certain types
   of development when planning permission was originally granted, including for
   additions or alterations to a dwelling’s roof. In this regard I find no conflict with the
   Framework 2026 where it addresses the use of planning conditions and the
   removal of national permitted development rights.
8. The Council’s Residential Design Guidance Supplementary Planning Document
   (SPD) was adopted in 2016. Part 3 Section 14 deals with extensions to houses. As
   a general principle, to ensure harmony, it advises that any house extension should
   be consistent with the form, scale and architectural style of the original building,
   subordinate to it and not overly dominant. Specifically with regard to dormer roof
   extensions, amongst other things, the SPD reiterates that they should normally be
   subordinate features on the roof and states that they should not occupy more than
   half the width or half the depth of the roof slope.
9. The appeal property has previously been extended to the side with a subordinate
   two-storey extension. The dormer extension sits within the original roof slope and
   occupies significantly more than half its width and half its depth. In this regard there
   is clear conflict with the SPD’s guidance. Even if the side extended roof is taken
   into consideration, it still occupies more than half the depth of the roof slope. In
   addition, as recognised by the previous Inspector, the window size, and
   proportions, as well as the finishing materials, are out of keeping with the host
   property, which further contravenes advice within the SPD. As was previously
   concluded on appeal, the dormer remains to be an oversized and bulky ‘box-like’
   addition, with windows and finishes that conflict with the host property and the
   immediate terrace to the detriment of the dwelling’s character and appearance. Due
   to the exposed nature of the rear roof slope, which is common throughout the
   estate, the dormer is highly prominent from the public domain along both Ruthin
   Close and Fryent Grove from where its visual presence is harmful to the wider
   character and appearance of the area.
10. The appellant has highlighted the neighbouring dormer at No 21, which is similar in
    form but narrower in width. However, as previously found, the scale, height, design
    and finish of such a large flat roof dormer highlights the harm such additions can
    cause to the largely unaltered rear roofscapes in the area, and the sharp contrast
    with the small, pitched roofed dormers on low sloping cat-slide style roofs that
    otherwise prevail. Furthermore, I note that the dormer at No 21 was not specifically
    given planning permission but was erroneously granted a certificate of lawful
    development issued in error (Ref 18/2763/192). The presence of the dormer at No
    21 does not justify further visual harm.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision 6011133


Conclusion
11. By failing to display a high quality of design which responds sensitively to and
    respects the distinctive local character of the area, the development is contrary to
    Policies CDH01 and CDH05 of the Barnet Local Plan 2021-2036, adopted in 2025,
    and Policy D3 of the London Plan 2021. For the same reasons, the development
    fails to accord with all the principles that are required for achieving well-designed
    places as set out within the national decision-making policy DP3 of the Framework
    2026.
12. Accordingly, for the reasons given, the appeal is dismissed.



John D Allan
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
