Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 August 2026
by R Gravett BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1st September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011045
Beech Dene, Kelsick Village, Abbeytown CA7 4TL
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     (‘the Act’) against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Scott Norris against the decision of Cumberland Council.
•    The application Ref is FUL/2025/0152.
•    The development proposed is two storey replacement dwelling and associated new access and
     planting, extension of garden into adjacent paddock, and installation of solar panels and associated
     alterations to adjacent Storage Barn building.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (‘the Framework’) was published in
       August 2026. The Framework is a material consideration of critical importance
       which should be taken into account from the day of publication. Both main parties
       have had the opportunity to comment on any implications for the appeal, and I
       have taken comments received into account.
Main Issues
3.     The main issues are:
       •   the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of the
           area;
       •   the effect of the proposed development on habitats and protected species; and
       •   whether the proposed development would be in a suitable location, having
           regard to its location in the countryside and the spatial strategy for the area.
Reasons
Character and appearance
4.     The appeal site is a regular shaped parcel of land which consists of a paddock, a
       bungalow, known as ‘Beech Dene,’ and an adjoining storage barn. The bungalow
       is modest in size and has a simple ‘L-shaped’ form which is finished in render with
       stone sills and a pitched slate roof. The gabled flank of the bungalow is sited off
       the main road (B5302) between Wigton and Abbeytown. From the south-east, the
       bungalow and adjacent storage barn are viewed alongside other distant buildings
       on the outskirts of the hamlet of Kelsick, but they sit quietly in the surrounding


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011045


       landscape which has a rural quality comprising predominantly improved pasture
       and arable land interspersed with hedgerows.
5.     The proposed dwelling would be sited around 40m to the south of the existing
       bungalow partly within the existing garden and partly within an adjoining paddock.
       The appellant asserts that the paddock was originally part of the garden of the
       bungalow. However, it falls outside the scope of an appeal under s78 of the Act to
       formally determine whether an existing use is lawful, and if the appellant wishes to
       ascertain whether the paddock has been used for residential purposes, they may
       make an application under s191 of the Act.
6.     Nevertheless, in so far as relevant to this appeal, whilst in the ownership of the
       appellant, I have no compelling evidence of the residential use of the paddock or
       that it is within the curtilage of the bungalow, such that it would fall within the
       Framework definition of previously developed land. On my site visit, I observed no
       signs of residential use, the paddock is physically separated from the bungalow,
       and it has been left to establish as natural grassland which differs markedly in
       appearance to the lawned and maintained garden areas.
7.     The paddock has an intrinsic open countryside appearance and value, and it
       contributes positively to the character of the surrounding rural landscape. The
       proposal would introduce a substantial two-storey dwelling on an undeveloped part
       of the site which would result in the harmful spatial spread of built form into the
       paddock and open countryside, and it would have an urbanising effect which
       would erode the rural quality of the area.
8.     The proposed dwelling would have a broadly H-shaped plan form with two large
       steeply pitched gables of around 9.5m in height, either side of the front (south-
       east) and rear (north-west) elevation. On the south-east elevation, these would
       incorporate wide glazing panels at ground and first floor which would extend
       almost to the pitch of one of the gables. Unlike the simple form of a traditional
       barn, the gables would give the dwelling an unduly strong vertical emphasis and
       the extensive glazing would appear starkly residential and draw the eye.
9.     Whilst there would be a degree of screening during the summer months when
       leaves would be on the existing trees and hedgerows, there would be a significant
       period throughout the year when the dwelling, due to its height and scale, would
       be unduly prominent in close-by views from the lane. Moreover, although offset
       from the boundary of the appeal site, the very long two-storey flank elevation
       would be highly conspicuous above the existing hedgerow, and it would add to the
       significant bulk and massing of the dwelling.
10. The appellant has suggested an earth bund, as well as tree and infill hedge
    planting would mitigate the visual impacts of the development. This could be
    controlled by condition. However, I have little evidence before me that such
    planting – even when mature – would be effective in screening or significantly
    reducing the prominence of the dwelling. Further, it would not be effective in
    screening longer views from the lane from the south-east, nor would it mitigate the
    spatial harm caused as a result of the position of the dwelling in the countryside.
11. The proposed dwelling would be finished in high-quality materials, including
    standing seam zinc and timber cladding which would not be unfamiliar to nearby
    agricultural buildings or appear incongruous in a rural setting.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011045


12. Nevertheless, for the above reasons, I conclude that the proposed development
    would cause harm to the character and appearance of the area. It would conflict
    with Policy 31 of the Allerdale Local Plan (Part 1) (2014) (LP1) insofar as it
    requires that replacement dwellings in the open countryside are well designed, of
    appropriate scale and do not detract from character and distinctiveness.
13. It would further conflict with LP1 policies S4, S5 and DM14. Together, these
    require that all new development demonstrates high standards of design, is of
    appropriate scale and appearance, and responds positively to the distinctive
    qualities of the location and integrates with the characteristics of the site.
Protected species
14. The Council’s concern was that insufficient information had been submitted with
    the planning application to demonstrate that the proposal would not have a
    significant impact upon the habitats of protected or key species.
15. In response to this, a ‘Preliminary Building Assessment’1 (PBA) was undertaken in
    May 2026 which assessed the existing storage barn and trees as having low or
    negligible suitability for roosting bats. However, it recorded several access/egress
    features on the exterior of the bungalow, such as ridge gaps, lifted and slipped
    slates, which could provide roosting opportunities. The PBA also noted that the
    internal roof space of the bungalow was not fully accessible for survey.
16. Consequently, the bungalow was assessed as having a moderate level of
    suitability to support roosting bats, a protected species. Circular 06/20052 states
    that it is essential that the presence or otherwise of protected species, and the
    extent that they may be affected by the proposed development, is established
    before planning permission is granted. In line with good practice, the PBA
    recommended that two presence/likely absence surveys should be undertaken
    within the bat active period (between May and September).
17. In the circumstances where if present, the bats would be affected by the proposed
    demolition of the bungalow, it would not be appropriate to leave further surveys to
    be controlled by a condition, or that demolition is managed by a Clerk of Works or
    a Construction Environment Management Plan.
18. The ‘Preliminary Ecology Appraisal’ (PEA) identified no statutory designated sites
    within 2km and no evidence of other protected species being present on the site.
    However, I have little evidence before me in respect of the suitability of the habitat
    for geese and swan, or whether the paddock, identified as consisting of plant
    species important for hosting butterflies, would support the Marsh Fritillary. All are
    identified as ‘key species areas’ by the Council. It is also unclear from the
    evidence whether the proposed additional landscaping, including additional
    planting for pollinator insects on other land within the ownership of the appellant,
    would adequately mitigate any loss of suitable habitats.
19. I therefore conclude that it has not been adequately demonstrated that the
    proposal would not have an impact upon habitats of key species or avoid or
    adequately mitigate unacceptable harm to bats, a protected species. It therefore
    conflicts with LP1 Policy S35 which states that nationally and internationally
    protected sites and species will be afforded the highest level of protection.
1
    Preliminary Building Assessment & Ground Level Tree Assessment – Bats & Breeding Birds (May 2026)
2
    Biodiversity and Geological Conservation (2005)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                3
Appeal Decision 6011045


Suitable location
20. LP1 Policy S3 states that new development will be located in accordance with the
    spatial strategy and will be concentrated within the towns and villages identified in
    the settlement hierarchy. The appellant has referred to Policy HO11 of the
    Framework. However, there is no dispute between the parties that the appeal site
    is not isolated, despite being outside of any defined settlement and in open
    countryside. In such circumstances, LP1 Policy S3 limits proposals to those
    identified, which includes the replacement of an existing dwelling.
21. LP1 Policy 31 states that in the open countryside proposals to replace dwellings
    will be acceptable provided that:
         d) the proposal is well designed, of appropriate scale for its location and does not
           detract from the character and distinctiveness of the location;
         e) the relevant building to be replaced substantially exists and is not deemed to
           have lost its lawful use as a dwelling.
22. It further states that proposals for the replacement of dwellings in the countryside
    will only be acceptable in line with national policy and where the building can be
    replaced without substantial alteration to the original footprint.
23. Policy S5 paragraph 1 of the Framework sets out a list of certain forms of
    development which should be approved outside settlements, unless the benefits of
    doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies. The list includes the
    replacement of an existing building which should be for the same use and not
    disproportionately larger than the one it replaces.
24. The proposal constitutes a replacement building in so far as the existing bungalow
    would be demolished and replaced with a new two-storey detached dwelling.
25. However, the footprint of the proposed dwelling would be over twice the size of the
    footprint of the bungalow, which is only around 150sqm. I appreciate the footprint
    of the bungalow could be increased should permitted development rights3 be
    exercised, but in all other proportions – depth, width and height – the proposed
    dwelling would also be much larger than the modest sized bungalow it would
    replace. Its floor area of around 572sqm would also be considerably greater.
    Accordingly, I find that in addition to a substantial alteration to the existing
    footprint, the proposed dwelling would be disproportionally larger than the one it
    replaces; this is irrespective of the size of the host plot.
26. In such circumstances, where development proposals do not fall within one of the
    categories in Policy S5 paragraph 1 of the Framework, Policy S5 paragraph 4
    states that they should only be approved in exceptional circumstances, where the
    benefits of the proposal would substantially outweigh the adverse effects, including
    to the character of the countryside.
27. The existing bungalow is considered by the appellant to be no longer fit or suited
    to meet modern living standards and requirements. In contrast, the proposed
    dwelling would make effective use of land, designed to meet the long-term needs
    of the family, including providing functional accommodation for homeworking. The

3
    Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 4
Appeal Decision 6011045


       repositioning of the new dwelling further away from the lane would also reduce
       noise and disturbance from passing traffic. However, I have very little persuasive
       evidence before me that the size and scale of the proposed dwelling is necessary,
       or that comfortable and flexible modern living could not be met in an alternative
       way which would result in less harm to character and appearance. Consequently, I
       afford these benefits only moderate weight.
28. I therefore find that the benefits of the proposal would not substantially outweigh
    the adverse effects to protected species and to the character and appearance of
    the area, including the character of the countryside. For these reasons, I conclude
    that the proposed development would not be in a suitable location, having regard
    to its location in the countryside and the spatial strategy for the area. It would
    conflict with LP1 policies S3 and S31 in so far as they seek to limit development in
    the countryside including replacement dwellings, where they are not in line with
    national policy.
Other Matters
29. The appellant suggests that a single-storey extension could be built on up to 50%
    of the curtilage and up to 8m from the rear wall of the existing bungalow under
    permitted development rights afforded by Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the Town
    and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015.
30. However, the appellant’s evidence is also that the bungalow would require
    extensive and costly intervention to address issues, such as poor thermal
    performance and dampness, and to bring it up to contemporary living standards. I
    am not therefore persuaded that there is a reasonable prospect that it would be
    extended in the manner that has been suggested.
31. Nevertheless, for significant weight to be afforded to a fallback position, it would
    also need to be equally or more harmful than the scheme for which planning
    permission is sought. The overall height, bulk and massing of a single-storey
    extension would be much less than the proposed two-storey dwelling before me,
    and it would not result in encroachment into the adjoining paddock. Accordingly, I
    find the fallback position to be less harmful than the appeal proposal and it does
    not provide any justification for it.
32. I have had regard to the other decisions for extended or replacement dwellings
    brought to my attention by the appellant. I am not aware of the full details,
    background or locational context of these individual examples. However, from the
    information before me, the planning permissions granted by the Council at Holme
    Leigh and Kelsick Farm, Kelsick and Longburn Farm, Abbeytown were for the
    reuse and/or extension to existing buildings, where different policy considerations
    would be relevant.
33. I appreciate that there are similarities with the examples provided at Kelsick Moss
    House and Millersholme, Brampton which are both for a large replacement
    dwelling of a contemporary design. I do not have sufficient details of the footprint,
    size or massing of the original dwelling compared to the replacement dwellings on
    these sites to enable me to draw any comparisons with the appeal proposal.
    However, unlike my findings above, the extracts from the officer reports indicate
    that they were assessed as improving the visual appearance of the area.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6011045


34. Moreover, although there may be similarities in plot proportions, there are other
    site-specific factors, such as the surrounding landscape character and context and
    the available public vantage points, which would likely materially differentiate these
    cases. Consequently, they lend little support to the appeal proposal which, in any
    event, I have considered on its own individual merits and site circumstances.
Conclusion
35. For the reasons given above, the proposal conflicts with the development plan and
    material considerations, including the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal
    should be decided other than in accordance with it. Therefore, I conclude that the
    appeal should be dismissed.

R Gravett
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
