 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 21 September 2026
 by J D Westbrook BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date:28 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011926
 220 Hoe Street, Walthamstow, E17 3AY
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Merkur Slots (UK) Ltd against the decision of the Council of the London
      Borough of Waltham Forest.
 •    The application Ref is 260732
 •    The development proposed is a change of use of the ground floor from Class E use to an Adult
      Gaming Centre (AGC) (Sui Generis).

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. The application form refers to the former use as estate agents. The Council notes
   that the former use was, in fact, a Citizens Advice Bureau. I have just used the
   generic classification of a Class E use.
Main Issues
3. The main issues are the effect of the proposed change of use on:
     •   The vitality and viability of Walthamstow Town Centre, and
     •   The living conditions of the occupiers of neighbouring residential properties by
         way of noise and disturbance.
Reasons
4. 220 Hoe Street is a commercial unit situated on the western side of Hoe Street,
   some 30 metres south of its junction with High Street. At the time of my site visit, it
   was a vacant unit. It formerly comprised a use within Class E of the Use Classes
   Order on the ground floor, and the current proposal is to change that use to an
   Adult Gaming Centre (AGC), which is a use Sui Generis. I have no details of how
   long the unit has remained empty, or of any problems regarding marketing.
Effect on vitality and viability
5. The Council contends that the proposed change of use, by reason of its location
   within the Primary Shopping Area, the over-concentration of such uses, and the
   associated loss of a Class E unit, would fail to make a positive contribution to the
   retail function and the vitality and viability of the town centre.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6011926


6. Policy 41 of the Council’s Adopted Local Plan Part One (LP), indicates that
   proposals for town centre uses will be encouraged in the Primary Shopping Areas
   of Walthamstow, while other uses will be supported where they maintain the
   continuity of active frontages on ground floors and make a positive contribution to
   the vitality and viability of a centre by attracting a significant number of shoppers
   and visitors.
7. Policy 44 of the LP indicates that proposals for evening and night-time economy
   uses that contribute to the vitality and viability Walthamstow Town Centre will be
   encouraged where they support the creation of a balanced provision of evening and
   night-time uses or where proposals make a positive contribution to active frontages
   and do not detract from the character and amenity of the surrounding shops and
   services.
8. Walthamstow Town Centre is a Primary Shopping Area that is focussed chiefly on
   High Street including the Walthamstow Street Market. The appeal property is
   located on Hoe Street which is at the eastern end of the Town Centre. High Street
   is a bustling shopping street with a range of retail outlets and other businesses
   commonly found in a Primary Shopping Area, including food and beverage outlets,
   professional services, entertainment uses, and a number of betting shops and
   gaming centres. In the vicinity of the appeal property there is a gaming centre
   almost opposite at No 159 Hoe Street, and a further gaming centre in relatively
   close proximity at No 196 High Street.
9. Whilst High Street is largely pedestrianised, Hoe Street has two-way vehicular
   traffic with fairly narrow pavements, and appears as relatively quiet compared to
   High Street with regard to pedestrian activity. The appellants have provided a
   ‘Footfall, Pedestrian Flow and Linked Trip Surveys’ report that relates to pedestrian
   activity around three of their stores. This indicates that footfall and flows may not be
   adversely affected by the existence of the AGC and that some patrons visit other
   premises as part of an overall trip. However, this report applies only to daytime
   hours and to a very limited number of locations. There is also no evidence of the
   sampling methods used for surveys about linked trips or details of the nature of the
   surrounding shopping areas. I do not consider this report to necessarily reflect the
   likely impact of the proposed AGC on Hoe Street. In any case, I have no reason to
   suppose that other common shopping centre uses would result in lower footfall.
10. The appellants comment that there are only four AGCs currently within
    Walthamstow Town Centre and that the proposed development would not,
    therefore, result in an over-concentration. Of these four, two are in close proximity
    to the appeal property and one of these is almost opposite, at No 159 Hoe Street.
    In addition, and also in close proximity, there are betting shops at Nos 208 and 216
    High Street and No 182 Hoe Street. Whilst there is no definition of what constitutes
    an over-concentration of gaming/betting outlets, I consider that, nevertheless, there
    is a significant concentration of such premises close to the appeal site, including
    the presence of an existing 24hr AGC within 20 metres of No 220. On this basis, I
    find that the proposal would be harmful to the vitality of this section of the Town
    Centre, which has a somewhat peripheral location, and where the existence of two
    AGCs could have an adverse impact on its character and nature.
11. The appellants contend that the appeal property is in an accessible location, close
    to the Bus Station and Walthamstow Central. However, I note that the most
    convenient access to these transport hubs is from High Street via Rosebank Villas

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision 6011926


     or Walthamstow Town Square. Moreover, in the context of the evening or night-
     time economy, properties on High Street, including the AGC and betting shops
     referred to above, along with the major entertainment centres at the nearby cinema
     and the Soho Theatre, have more direct access to public transport facilities via the
     most convenient desire lines. Whilst the appeal property would not be far from the
     public transport hubs, it would be in a somewhat secondary location and would
     benefit only little from pedestrian flows associated with the nearby High Street uses
     going from or to the bus station and Walthamstow Central.
12. Finally on this issue, I note the internal alterations proposed for the ‘shop window’
    of the property. It would clearly be neutral in design and would not adversely affect
    the street frontage along this part of Hoe Street from a purely visual perspective.
    However, it would not add to the vitality of the street scene, and this adds to my
    concerns outlined above that the development would not contribute to the vitality of
    the Centre or attract a significant number of shoppers or visitors.
13. In conclusion on this issue, I find that the proposed change of use would result in
    harm to the character and nature of the Town Centre, by way of adding to the
    significant number of AGC and betting outlets in close proximity, and resulting in
    two AGCs almost opposite to one another along a relatively short section of street.
    It is somewhat separated from the main pedestrian desire lines between High
    Street and the town’s transport hubs, and I do not consider that it would necessarily
    add significantly to footfall or pedestrian flows in the Town Centre. On this basis, it
    would not make a positive contribution to the vitality or viability of the Town Centre
    or to the active frontages of the area. It would, therefore, conflict with Policies 41
    and 44 of the LP.
Living conditions
14. Policy 44 of the LP indicates that proposals for evening and night-time economy
    uses that contribute to the vitality and viability Walthamstow Town Centre will be
    encouraged where there will be no significant individual or cumulative adverse
    effect on the surrounding residential amenity due to noise, general disturbance or
    problems of disorder and nuisance. Policy 57 of the LP indicates that new
    development should respect the amenity of existing and future occupiers,
    neighbours and the surrounding area by avoiding harmful impacts from noise.
15. I have little information relating to the residential properties in the vicinity of the
    appeal property, though it would appear that there is a dwelling on floors
    immediately above the ground-floor unit. The appellants have provided a noise
    analysis report, which indicates that measures could be taken to mitigate against
    noise emanating from the activities of the AGC, and I accept that such measures
    could be conditioned. However, the control of noise issues outside of the building
    would, to a large extent be outside of the ability of the appellants. I have no detailed
    information regarding incidents of noise and disturbance, or anti-social behaviour
    resulting from the existing AGC at No 159, although there is anecdotal evidence of
    a need for police assistance to deal with such issues.
16. The appellants have a Gaming Licence which conditions use of the unit only from
    07.00 am until 1.00 am, and this would mitigate to some extent against excessive
    disturbance through the early hours of the morning. However, the AGC almost
    opposite appears to have a 24hr operation, and it would seem likely, therefore, that
    a combination of disturbance issues from two such units could be harmful to the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
 Appeal Decision 6011926


     living conditions of occupiers of the neighbouring dwelling and other dwellings in
     the immediate vicinity. In addition, it would also seem likely that customers leaving
     the appeal property at 1.00am would merely cross the road to continue their
     activities at the neighbouring AGC, with associated increase in levels of noise and
     disturbance.
17. In conclusion on this issue, given the potential juxtaposition of two AGCs in this
    location where there are residential properties, I find that the proposal would be
    likely to result in cumulative adverse noise and disturbance effects to the occupiers
    of neighbouring dwellings, and that whilst internal noise could be effectively
    managed and conditioned, it is unlikely that adequate measures could be put in
    place to deal with potential external disturbance. On this basis, the proposal would
    conflict with Policies 44 and 57 of the LP.
Conclusion
•   In the light of the above, I find that the proposal would be harmful to the vitality and
    viability of Walthamstow Town Centre, and to the living conditions of the occupiers
    of neighbouring residential properties by way of noise and disturbance. It would,
    therefore, conflict with Policies 41, 44 and 57 of the LP, and accordingly, I dismiss
    this appeal.



J D Westbrook
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         4
