 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 3 September 2026
 By G Powys Jones FRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 18 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011516
 73 High Street, Ruislip, HA4 8JB
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as
     amended) against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Sunni-Ed Limited against the decision of the Council of the London
     Borough of Hillingdon.
 •   The application Ref is 14252/APP/2025/2753.
 •   The development proposed is change of use of ground floor Class E (bank) to Sui Generis
     (bingo hall), following amendments to fenestrations.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural and preliminary matters
2. The Council’s description of the proposed development as used in its decision
   notice has been adopted since it more fully and accurately describes the proposal.
3. The property is located within the Ruislip Conservation Area (CA). The Council
   does not raise a heritage objection, and I share its view and the reasons for not
   objecting on this score.
4. The main parties to the appeal were provided with and have taken the opportunity
   to comment on the relevance of the 2026 edition of the National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework) to their respective cases.
Main Issues
5. These are the effect of the proposal on: (a) the vitality and viability of Ruislip Town
   Centre, and (b) on the living conditions of neighbouring residents with particular
   reference to noise and disturbance.
Reasons
Vitality and viability
6. The appeal property is set within Ruislip’s High Street in that part of the designated
   Town Centre classified as a secondary shopping area in the development plan.
   The Council originally raised doubts as to whether the proposal could be properly
   regarded as a Bingo Hall in the context of the Framework’s advice that a Bingo Hall
   is defined as a main town centre use. However, in its comments on the recently
   published Framework, the Council now acknowledges that the use proposed is


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6011516


     identified as a main town centre use but makes the additional point that this does
     not mean that the use is acceptable in every town centre location.
7. In this regard, the Council relies principally on policies DMTC2 & DMTC4 of the
   Hillingdon Local Plan Part 2 – Development Management Policies (DMP). These
   policies were adopted just prior to the introduction of changes to the Use Classes
   Order. The amendments to the Order introduced Class E, providing greater
   flexibility as to the interchangeability of uses without the need for planning
   permission, including within town centres.
8. Thus, in the absence of an Article 4 Direction, the level of management control
   implicitly sought by the Council in parts of DMP policy DMTC4 is no longer
   available in most cases. By the same token, and for the same reason, the Council
   cannot readily achieve the degree of control sought in DMP policy DMTC2 section
   B (i) & (ii).
9. Thus, in the context of the advice provided at paragraph 2 of Annex A to the
   Framework, those parts of these two policies are attributed very limited weight.
   However, DMTC2 section B (iii) is not reduced in weight since the proposal is
   subject to planning control and the objective of supporting the vitality and viability of
   the Town Centre is consistent with the Framework’s national decision-making
   policy TC2.
10. The Council’s concerns centre on its assertion that the introduction of the use
    would reduce the continuity of retail activity and alter the character and function of a
    shopping frontage. In this regard I note that the previous use was not retail, so the
    proposal would not result in the loss of any retail floorspace. Additionally, the
    Framework’s policy TC2 does not suggest that the health of a town centre is
    entirely dependent on retail uses. On the contrary, a diversification in uses can
    assist in supporting vitality and viability. Additionally, bingo halls are accepted by
    government as a main town centre use, that is, it would be not out-of-place in the
    town centre with regard to national policy.
11. I therefore conclude the Council has failed to demonstrate that the proposal would
    harm the vitality and viability of Ruislip Town Centre, as alleged, in the terms of
    applicable local and national policy.
Living conditions
12. The facility is intended to operate throughout the night on a 24 hour basis for 7
    days a week. The Council’s concerns centre on the absence of a site-specific
    noise or acoustic assessment directed to the effect of the proposal on nearby
    residents, particularly at night. Instead, the appellant relies upon studies carried
    out elsewhere in the Capital. I can understand the reasons why the Council find
    these to be of limited value.
13. Although no maps or other information has been provided as to the location of
    residential uses in this part of the town centre, the appellant does not dispute that
    residential properties exist near to the appeal site. Indeed, I saw that there were
    flats above the next-door property at 75-79 High Street. The residents of these
    properties are more likely to be affected by any adverse impacts.
14. Residents living in town centres can reasonably expect to experience a greater
    level of activity than within more traditional residential areas. This would include


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
    Appeal Decision 6011516


       evening uses, late-night shopping and restaurants and pubs which operate towards
       midnight.
15. However, Ruislip strikes me as a suburban town centre where there would normally
    be very little activity in the early hours and for most of the night. Residents
    accordingly are unlikely to be disturbed at these times. The appellant asserts that
    the level of usage envisaged is around 8 patrons an hour between noon and 8pm
    and 3 per hour at all other times. This level of usage is considered by the appellant
    to be light, unlikely to cause disturbance at any time of day or night.
16. The Council has not challenged these predictions as to levels of usage, but it begs
    several questions in my mind, including why 35 terminals are to be provided if the
    degree of predicted usage is so significantly lower, and why the need to open at
    night arises for such a limited clientele, taking account of the costs of remaining
    open? The appellant has not properly explained the apparent contradictions.
17. I am therefore unconvinced by the appellant’s predictions of usage given the
    number of terminals subject of the submission. In the light of the close proximity of
    residents, I intend to adopt a precautionary approach, particularly in relation to the
    use of the premises at night and in the early hours, taking account of the number of
    terminals to be installed. Accordingly, there is a reasonable likelihood in my view
    that more customers than predicted will arrive at the site, particularly during the
    early hours, and their comings and goings into a relatively quiet environment would
    inevitably disturb local residents when they could reasonably expect to be sleeping.
18. I have been referred to several appeal decisions for different reasons, and some
    are of limited relevance given the recent publication of a new Framework.
    However, on the issue of living conditions, the Finchley appeal1 strikes me as a
    reasonable comparable. In that case, notwithstanding the availability of a noise
    assessment, the Inspector found against the appellants, who wishes to remove a
    condition imposed on appeal restricting the hours of use. I am particularly struck by
    the content of paragraphs 14, 15 & 16 of the decision since they very much reflect
    my concerns as to the possible conduct of the proposed use during the late night
    and early hours, its effect on the external environment and its impact on local
    residents.
19. This is a case where planning judgment has to be exercised based on site
    conditions and experience. In my view, there is a realistic prospect of the use
    harming the living conditions of local residents late at night and during the early
    hours. A condition restricting hours of operation would allay my concerns in this
    respect, but given the nature of the original submission and the appeal
    representations, this would clearly go against the grain of the proposal and the
    appellant’s intentions and requirements, and no such condition has been suggested
    by the appellant.
20. In conclusion I find that the proposal is likely to result in unacceptable harm to
    nearby residents by reason of noise and disturbance, conflicting with those
    provisions of DMP Policy DMHB 11 requiring development proposals not to
    adversely impact on the amenity of adjacent properties.




1
    APP/N5090/W/24/3339159


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
 Appeal Decision 6011516


Other matters
21. Many local residents, their representative and a local organization have objected to
    the proposal. I have dealt with most of their concerns in my decision. Several
    express a distaste for the type of activity proposed, but it is an entirely lawful
    activity in all parts of the country, subject to licensing and planning permission.
22. No other matter raised is of such strength or significance as to outweigh the
    considerations leading me to my overall conclusions set out below.
Overall conclusions
23. I find for the appellant on the first main issue, that of the effect of the proposal on
    the vitality and viability of the town centre. However, I find against the appellant on
    the second main issue, given the likely adverse effect on local residential living
    conditions. This is sufficient reason to dismiss the appeal.

G Powys Jones
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        4
