 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 18 August 2026

 by Megan Thomas KC
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 17 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011994
 18 Winterdown Road, Esher, Surrey KT10 8LJ
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) against a
     refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr W Palmer against the decision of Elmbridge Borough Council.
 •   The application Ref is 2026/0576.
 •   The development proposed is a “part two storey part single storey side and rear extension and a 1.7m
     high closeboarded fence following the partial demolition of the existing dwellinghouse and existing
     boundary fencing.”


Decision

1.   The appeal is dismissed.

Procedural Matters

2.   The description of the development sought in the box heading above includes a 1.7m high
     closeboarded fence, as does the Block Plan submitted with the application. The Council has
     indicated that it had objections to the proposed fence. The appellant indicated in the Appeal
     Statement that he no longer sought a closeboarded fence as part of the scheme. I have
     approached the determination of the appeal with that amendment in mind.

3.   On 17 August 2026, the Government replaced the National Planning Policy Framework ‘NPPF’
     with a revised version. Consequently, the main parties were given the opportunity to make
     any relevant comments on the NPPF in relation to the appeal if they so wished and where
     comments have been made I have taken them into account.

Main Issue

4.   The appeal site is situated within the West End (Esher) Conservation Area “CA”. The main
     issue in the appeal is the extent to which the proposal preserves or enhances the character or
     appearance of the host dwelling and West End CA.

Reasons

5.   The appeal site is a detached mainly two storey dwelling with annexe which is located on the
     junction of Winterdown Road (north side) and Nightingale Road (east side) in the semi-rural
     village of West End. The dwelling and its front door faces Winterdown Road across from a
     large pond on the village common in front of it. The dwelling turns the corner and there is a
     second entrance on the western flank facing Nightingale Road.

6.   The wider area comprises an attractive Conservation Area. Most of the buildings are
     unpretentious ex-farmworkers cottages in attractive groupings. The common is the focal

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6011994


     point of the nucleated shape of the village, and Winterdown Road plays an important role in
     partially enclosing and delineating the common. The appeal site and Winterdown Road are
     reasonably prominent in views when moving around the village.

7.   In making this decision, I am mindful of the statutory duty under s.72 of the Planning (Listed
     Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990, to give special attention to the extent to which
     proposed development preserves or enhances the character or appearance of the
     Conservation Area.

8.   The proposal includes demolition of the rear portion of the dwelling (very approximately half)
     which includes some single storey elements. It would include erection of part single and part
     two storey elements, some new fenestration and alterations to the roof. The front western-
     most chimney would be retained. The three others and the one on a rear single storey element
     would be removed. There would be a side mainly two storey projection towards Nightingale
     Road which would be located about 8m back from the front elevation.

9.   The ground floor/side extension would wrap around parts of the north and east side of the
     building and would have a flat roof. The first floor element of the extension would have a
     hipped roof and there would be a crown roof in the central area.

10. “Key principles for well-designed places” in the NPPF is dealt with at DP3, and DP3(1)
    specifies that development proposals should respond to their context (the history, character
    and features of their site and its setting) so that they integrate with and enhance their
    surroundings. Principle (g) of DP3(2) is to create visually attractive, distinctive and
    characterful development to maintain a strong sense of place. DP3(3) indicates that
    development proposals should be refused if, without clear justification, they conflict with
    paragraph 1 of DP3 or relevant aspects of the principles in paragraph 2.

11. Along Winterdown Road there are a number of detached, semi-detached and terraced
    dwellings in either brick, white wash render with mainly grey slate roofs with both hips and
    gables. The appeal building is mainly brick with attractive fenestration and three chimneys on
    the front roof. Along with many of the other dwellings it sits on a building line about 5m back
    from the back edge of the road. There are open views northwards down Nightingale Road to
    the northern part of the CA. The existing side fence at the appeal site is low and on the
    opposite side of Nightingale Road is a similar open slatted low level fence then vegetation and
    that current boundary arrangement and set back of the flank of the appeal building allows
    views of a pleasing and open character. The proposed two storey side projection (about a 2m
    projection) from the dwelling would cut down views into that area to the detriment of the
    character and appearance of the CA.

12. The proposed roof alterations would introduce a crown roof. The consequent removal of
    chimneys and change in the roof profile would result in losses of parts of the dwelling which
    are intrinsic to its historical character and architectural detailing. The contribution it currently
    makes to the CA would be noticeably diminished and it would take on a rather anodyne
    appearance.

13. There would be more harm to the CA by the proposed windows in the rear/side two part single
    part two storey element which would fail to sufficiently match the existing fenestration in the
    dwelling. They would be overly large and the glazing bars would be of a different arrangement.
    As the dwelling is on a corner with low boundary treatment, views of flank windows and some
    rear facing windows would be available from the public realm. Conservation areas tend to be
    preserved by, inter alia, attention to details such as matching and appropriately-positioned
    windows which in this case would be absent.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               2
 Appeal Decision 6011994


14. The proposal does not provide a sensitive appropriate response to its context or good
    attention to detail including an acceptable relationship between existing buildings and
    spaces, contrary to policy DM12 of the Elmbridge Development Management Plan, and
    conflicts with paragraph 1 of NPPF DP3 and relevant aspects of the principles in DP3(2).

15. I have had regard to other extensions and dwellings that have been brought to my attention or
    that I saw on my site visit. However, I have determined the appeal on the individual merits of
    the scheme before me in its own individual context, as I am obliged to do.

16. Any harm to a designated heritage asset such as the West End Conservation Area is a matter
    of considerable importance and weight (NPPF HE6(3)). In this case, I categorise the harm as
    small to moderate. There would be some benefits arising from the proposal but nevertheless
    when these are balanced against the identified harm, they do not outweigh it.

17. I conclude that the proposed development would fail to preserve the character or appearance
    of the host dwelling or West End Conservation Area and would be contrary to policy CS17 of
    the Elmbridge Core Strategy (adopted 2011), policies DM2 and DM12 of the Elmbridge
    Development Management Plan (adopted 2015) and in conflict with paragraph 1 of NPPF DP3
    and relevant aspects of the principles in DP3(2).

Conclusion

18. Having taken all considerations into account, for the reasons given above, I dismiss the
    appeal.



Megan Thomas KC
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            3
