    Appeal Decision
    Site visit made on 3 September 2026
    By G Powys Jones FRTPI
    an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
    Decision date: 18 September 2026


    Appeal Ref: 6011901
    Land adjacent to 3 School Cottages, Church Road, Worcester Park, KT4 7RR
    •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as
        amended) against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    •   The appeal is made by Mr Mir Abdul Wares Saadi against the decision of the Royal
        Borough of Kingston Upon Thames.
    •   The application Ref is 24/03049/FUL.
    •   The development proposed is the erection of a two-storey detached house.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issues
2. These are the effect of the proposal on: (a) the character and appearance of the
   surrounding area, and (b) the living conditions of future occupants and
   neighbouring residents with reference to privacy and visual impact. Thirdly, (c) the
   provisions made for Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG).
Reasons
Character and appearance
3. The appeal site comprises an area of backland sited between the rear of properties
   in Church Road1 and Yew Tree Close. A public footpath runs along its western
   boundary, and beyond that to the west is a primary school. The site is overgrown
   but had been partially cleared for my visit so I was able to see or reach all
   boundaries from within and outside the site.
4. There are many trees on site, and these have been subject to an assessment by
   the appellant; its findings are not disputed by the Council. Some trees would need
   to be felled but the majority, subject to their protection during construction, could be
   kept.
5. The proposed dwelling would be centrally sited with its front facing the footpath. It
   would have two ridges with shallow gables. The windows to its main habitable
   rooms would face front and rear, with secondary windows and door openings to the
   side. External amenity areas would be provided all around, most of it grassed. The
   sole means of access to the property would be on foot, along the footpath, with on-
   street parking in Church Road relied upon.

1
    Some of which are referred to as Church Cottages

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6011901


6. The proposed dwelling is of a different type and design to those in the immediate
   locality and, given its orientation and position in relation to adjacent streets, goes
   against the general grain and suburban distinctiveness of local layout and
   development. The width of the spaces either side of the proposal may prove
   sufficient in some other circumstances, but in this case the rear elevations of
   properties in Yew Tree Close and Church Road respectively also impinge closely
   on the appeal site’s side boundaries. To my mind, were the dwelling built it would
   appear as if it had been shoe-horned into position, taking account of the presence
   of the other development either side, leading to an impression of a cramped and
   congested development, harming local character.
7. In conclusion, the development would harm local character leading to conflict with
   those provisions of policies DM8 and DM10 of the Kingston Core Strategy (CS) and
   policy D3 of the London Plan (LP) requiring development to relate well to its
   surroundings respecting and responding well to local distinctiveness.
Living conditions
8. The Council’s concerns centre on the effect of the development on neighbouring
   residents with reference to privacy and overlooking. In this regard, I note that the
   dwelling’s side windows at first floor level, either side, are relatively small,
   secondary in function and are intended to be obscurely glazed. Regarding ground
   floor and external amenity areas, a condition could be imposed to secure a means
   of enclosure along boundaries to protect neighbouring privacy.
9. Whilst the Council has addressed the issue of neighbouring privacy CS policy
   DM10 also requires development proposals to have regard to the future amenities
   of occupants and the avoidance of visual intrusion.
10. The site would be overlooked at close quarters from the upper windows of adjacent
    properties in Yew Tree Close and Church Road, and future residents of the
    proposed property would not therefore enjoy what I would regard as an acceptable
    level of privacy when using the patio area and the remainder of the garden.
11. Additionally, because of the shallowness of their rear amenity areas the rear
    windows of the flats in 59 Church Road and the dwellings at 13 & 14 Yew Tree
    Close, are close to the common boundary shared with the appeal site. At their
    closest the proposed dwelling’s two-storey side walls would be sited just over 4m
    from this boundary. Consequently, in my view, the development would be
    perceived as overly dominant and oppressive when viewed by the residents of
    these neighbouring properties from within their dwellings and from their rear
    gardens.
12. The Council did not raise the issues dealt with in the previous two paragraphs, but I
    am required to apply the terms of the development plan when assessing proposals.
    I therefore conclude that the proposal would be harmful to the privacy interests of
    future residents and would cause harmful visual intrusion to neighbouring residents
    contrary to the provisions of CS policy DM10.
Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG)
13. The amended Regulations and Planning Policy Guidance (PPG) clarify that the
    newly introduced exemption for development on sites no larger than 0.2 ha applies
    only where the application for planning permission was made on or after 6 August


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision 6011901


     2026. Accordingly, the BNG requirements of local and national policy apply to this
     proposal.
14. The appellant acknowledges that no relevant information was provided at
    application stage and suggests this is a matter that could be covered by a condition
    in the event of the appeal succeeding.
15. Even if the appeal succeeded, I could not do as the appellant suggests since, in the
    absence of relevant information, it has not been demonstrated that 10% net gain
    could be achieved on the site. Accordingly, the appellant may have needed to rely
    on off-site provision or credits, which cannot be governed by condition.
16. I therefore conclude that, in the absence of relevant information, a clear conflict
    arises with the provisions of national policy and local policies relating to BNG
    namely CS policy DM6 and LP policy G6.
Other matters
17. References have been made by both parties to the National Planning Policy
    Framework. However, the 2024 edition of the Framework to which reference was
    made has been replaced. The principal parties were invited to comment on the
    implications of the 2026 edition of the Framework for their respective cases. No
    submissions have been received.
18. I am aware of the importance attached by government to the provision of new
    housing and economic growth in the interest of sustainable development generally.
    However, the harm caused by the development satisfy me that the material
    considerations, including the new Framework, do not indicate that the provisions of
    the development plan should not prevail.
19. The development was opposed by many members of the local community. I have
    already dealt with many of the points raised in the representations. Regarding
    parking, I consider the appellant’s survey to have shown that sufficient off-site
    space exists, and I note that the Highway Authority did not object on this score.
    Issues that may arise during the construction phase, had the appeal succeeded,
    could have been governed by condition.
20. No other matter raised is of such strength or significance as to outweigh the
    considerations leading me to my conclusions.

G Powys Jones
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
