Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by P Eggleton BSc(Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011983
Beechwood Shopping Centre, 14 Church Street, Woodlesford, Leeds LS26 8RE
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr A Karvani against the decision of Leeds City Council.
•   The application reference is 26/00013/FU.
•   The development proposed is a raised deck to form external seating area; erection of replacement
    canopy and new boundary treatments.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issues
2. The main issues are the effect on the character and appearance of the area; and
   the accessibility of the establishment for all users.
Reasons
3. The proposal would involve modifying the existing unauthorised outdoor area. An
   application to regularise the existing works was refused and dismissed at appeal in
   October 2025 under reference APP/N4720/W/25/3369088.
Character and appearance
4. The appeal site is made up of two units that have been combined (18/04044/FU)
   but it is not clear from the evidence provided whether any boundary treatments
   were accepted at that time, with regard to the outside area. The proposal would
   enclose the area of raised decking by the use of planters. Plans have been
   provided that demonstrate that this is an approach that the council accepted
   (21/03520/FU) with regard to another unit, that is part of the shopping centre.
   Although those works are not complete, the similar approach proposed would be in
   keeping with the scheme accepted to the west; and would be equally acceptable
   with regard to this site.
5. The proposal would result in the removal of the existing unauthorised canopy and
   its replacement with a smaller canopy. The existing canopy is a prominent and
   overly dominant feature. The smaller canopy, with a greater setback, would
   represent a complimentary feature that would be viewed against the existing
   modern buildings. It would also reduce the conflict with the protected tree and allow
   it to be experienced within an improved setting.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision: 6011983


6. The site lies outside, but adjacent to, the Woodlesford Conservation Area. The
   Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 imposes a duty
   requiring that special attention be paid to the desirability of preserving or enhancing
   the character or appearance of conservation areas. It was found during the
   previous appeal that the development did not result in harm to, or loss of, the
   significance of the conservation area due to development within its setting. This
   proposal would have a lesser impact and would not harm the conservation area.
7. Overall, the changes proposed would reflect design detailing already accepted
   within this parade and would address concerns raised during the previous appeal. It
   would not result in harm to the character or appearance of the area and would be of
   a design that would not conflict with the objectives of Policy P10(i&ii) of the Core
   Strategy (as amended by the Core Strategy Selective Review 2019) (CS); or
   Policies BD6 and N19 of the Leeds Unitary Development Plan (Review 2006)
   (UDP).
Accessibility
8. The council’s second reason for refusal relates to the access to the premises. The
   ramped access would fail to accord with the Accessible Leeds Supplementary
   Planning Document 2016 (SPD) due to steepness and width with regard to safe
   access for those who require mobility aids. The Public Sector Equality Duty
   contained in Section 149 of the Equality Act 2010 requires consideration of the
   need to eliminate unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and
   foster good relations between people who share a protected characteristic and
   people who do not share it. Protected characteristics include disability.
9. Details of the original access arrangements have not been provided for the two
   former units or with regard to the permission to combine them. However, the
   current constraints with regard to access result from the existing and proposed
   enclosure and decking of the outside area. The appellant has not disputed the
   council’s findings in this regard.
10. To address the concern, it has been suggested by the appellant that a condition
    could be used to require a new access to the western edge of the site. A plan has
    been submitted to demonstrate such an arrangement. However, this plan was not
    before the council when the application was determined; and third parties and
    consultees have not had an opportunity to consider it. As it represents a significant
    change to the proposal, I am not able to accept it. I am also unable to impose a
    condition that would result in such a significant change to the overall design.
11. It is evident that access to the premises could be significantly improved by a design
    that has full regard to the access requirements of those with disabilities. The
    proposal therefore fails to accord with the SPD; CS Policy P10 (vi); and UDP Policy
    GP5. It also conflicts with Policy DP3(2) of the National Planning Policy Framework
    2026 which seeks to create well-designed places that will function well over the
    lifetime of the development.
Other matters and conclusions
12. The proposal would allow for the use of the enhanced outdoor floorspace,
    increasing the hospitality offering in the local area. It would gain support from the
    economic considerations of Policy E2 of the Framework which advises that
    substantial weight should be given to the economic benefits of proposals, for

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
Appeal Decision: 6011983


     commercial development, which allows businesses to invest, expand and/or adapt.
     However, Framework Policy DP3(3) is clear that development proposals should be
     refused if, without clear justification, they conflict with relevant aspects of the
     principles in Policy DP3(2), which I have found to be the case.
13. In conclusion, the proposal would have an acceptable appearance but would fail to
    provide suitable access to the premises for all users. Although there are matters
    that provide substantial weight in its favour, as it is likely that accessibility could be
    improved, without significant prejudice to the operation of the premises, it would
    conflict with the design expectations of the development plan and the Framework;
    and it would not be proportionate to allow the appeal on the basis of the plans that
    made up the application and on which the appeal must be determined. I therefore
    dismiss the appeal.

Peter Eggleton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          3
