    Appeal Decision
    Site visit made on 30 August 2026
    by J Somers BSocSci (Planning) MA (HEC) MRTPI IHBC
    an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
    Decision date: 18 September 2026


    Appeal Ref: 6011467
    Land at rear of Walsgrave Club, 146 Woodway Lane, Coventry CV2 2EJ
    •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
        to grant planning permission.
    •   The appeal is made by Mr Mohammad Razwan against the decision of Coventry City Council.
    •   The application reference is PL/2025/0002077/FUL.
    •   The development proposed is detailed on the Decision Notice as ‘Change of use to car wash,
        erection of canopies and associated external works including container (Part retrospective).’

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. I have taken the description of the development from the Council’s Decision Notice
   as this more succinctly details the elements requiring planning consent. I shall
   make my decision on this basis.
3. Upon my site visit despite the Application Form stating that the use/work has not
   started, I noticed that the car wash use was operating with a number of associated
   buildings, however some of these buildings do not appear to be part of the
   proposed application. As such components of the application are retrospective and
   I will therefore base my decision upon the proposed plans considering the
   retrospective nature of the use. I have assessed the scheme taking into account
   existing conditions.
4. During the course of the appeal, the Appellant in their appeal documents has
   submitted a Noise Impact Assessment1 (NIA) in order to address Reason for
   Refusal No.1. In general, the appeal process is not the appropriate place to evolve
   the scheme; and the scheme that is considered at appeal ought to be the same one
   that was considered by the Council. Whilst the Council’s Statement of Case (SoC)
   acknowledges the NIA which has been submitted after the decision was made, it
   has not had the opportunity to fully review this. Despite this the Council still raise
   concerns and still object to the application on this ground of noise. The NIA also
   suggests mitigatory measures such as the installation of a roller door, and further
   acoustic barriers which are not detailed on the plans and would also appear to
   require planning consent. As such the proposed plans do not take into account the
   NIA which will likely require amendments to the plans. Given that the planning
   application also contains a number of concerns to the proposal from interested
   parties, there is no evidence that these interested parties have been given the
   opportunity to review this NIA and associated amendments, or the impact (if any)

1
    By NoiseAir, Ref: P8685-NA2-V1, Dated 15 June 2026

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               1
    Appeal Decision: 6011467


       that these measures would have on the appearance of the building and associated
       noise generated, such as the roller door. In accordance with the ‘Wheatcroft
       Principles,2’ it would not be appropriate to consider this NIA or suggested
       amendments within my decision as the acceptance of such would deprive those
       who should have been consulted on the further information and the opportunity of
       such consultation. As such, I will base my decision solely upon the information that
       was assessed by the Council during the original planning determination.
Main Issues
5. The main issues are the effect of the car wash upon:
       •    The character and appearance of the site, including the greater locality; and
       •    The living condition of surrounding residents, with particular regard to noise,
            privacy and outlook.
Reasons
Character and Appearance
6. The appeal site is a parcel of land to the far eastern section of a car park which
   forms part of the Walsgrave Club, which appears to be a social club erected as part
   of surrounding residential development during the mid-late twentieth century. The
   club is single storey, constructed of brick with flat roof and timber boarding to the
   top of the building. Walsgrave Club is located along a corner of Woodway Lane and
   Narbeth Way, where Woodway Lane is more of a thoroughfare and contains
   residential as well as a few commercial type uses to support the surrounding
   residential environment such as the Walsgrave Club, a Co-op and convenience
   store. Despite the areas of car parking such as to the co-op, Walsgrave Club and
   Convenience store, there is still an emphasis on vegetation and spaces in and
   around buildings. Grass verges, hedges and mature vegetation are prominent
   positive features along road edges, with dwellings set back from the road edge.
   Along Narbeth Way the character is much more residential which is the overriding
   character of the locality. Dwellings to the north and west are a mix of mid and late
   twentieth century containing detached, terraced and semi-detached dwellings of
   simple functional forms with predominantly two storey construction, brick with
   concrete tiled rooves.
7. Dwellings to the east and south appear to be part of a relatively recent constructed
   residential estate that is situated around a large greenspace forming Elizabeth
   Way. Surrounding residential dwellings are constructed close to the boundaries of
   the Walsgrave Club car park. Dwellings are of typical design and appearance with
   functional two and two and a half storey dwellings constructed of brick with
   concrete roof tiles. Whilst the access was not in use on my site visit, the application
   plans show that the car wash would utilise the access along Narbeth Way
   immediately in front of the car wash, where the carwash buildings and the washing
   of cars is undertaken to the south east corner of the car park. To the immediate
   west of the car wash buildings is a fenced multi-use games area (MUGA). The car
   park is surrounded by mature landscaping on the eastern and southern boundary
   with the north boundary being more open to Narbeth Way.


2
    Bernard Wheatcroft Ltd v SSE [JPL 1982 P37]


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           2
 Appeal Decision: 6011467


8. In assessing development proposals, relevant policies of the Coventry Local Plan
   (LP) include Policy DE1 which sets a number of design principles, where
   applications are expected to contain high quality design and attention to detail,
   consider local distinctiveness, and respond to climate change, amongst others.
9. Given the positive elements of the character and appearance of the locality, the
   installation of car wash buildings would present more of an industrial/commercial
   aesthetic to the predominant residential area as can be experienced by the types of
   buildings and use already in situ. The use of large areas of uPVC cladding, PVC
   acoustic panels which have quite a poor appearance with poor environmental
   credentials which cannot be considered high quality and would not stand the test of
   time giving a quite poor appearance. I can appreciate that the car wash is
   experienced within the context of the car park and the MUGA, however the fencing
   of the MUGA and the car park area do not currently contribute positively to the
   surrounding residential environment. The increased clutter, use of the site and poor
   design of the buildings and quality of materials does not improve the area, but
   exacerbates the poor appearance.
10. The use and proposed buildings and associated infrastructure proposed would be
    experienced in a negative way within this residential environment, with proposed
    mitigation measures to reduce impact not being able to overcome the poor
    appearance and experience of the use and associated buildings in this location.
    Taking the above into account, the use and buildings current/proposed within the
    appeal site are inappropriate and contrary to LP Policy DE1, as described
    previously.
Living Conditions
11. I note that the Reason for Refusal on the Decision Notice refers to LP Policy DE1
    which is a design policy which does not appear to cover elements of effects to living
    conditions such as setting policy for noise. As such, this policy is not relevant to the
    consideration of living conditions. I also note that the Reason for Refusal also notes
    an assessment against LP Policy JE5, which is a policy aimed at assessing
    impacts of industrial uses, such as storage and distribution, research and
    development etc. Whilst I can see the logic in the Council’s assessment, strictly
    speaking a car wash is not classed as a B8 use in the Use Classes Order 1987 (as
    amended). Car washes are generally accepted as a sui-generis use meaning they
    are of their own use and need to be assessed on their merits, which I appreciate
    that there are some noises and sounds that are similar to industrial uses. It would
    be more appropriate to assess the use in accordance with the National Planning
    Policy Framework (the Framework), whereby national decision making policy P3
    Paragraph 2 seeks that development provide healthy living conditions for occupiers
    and users and not give rise to unacceptable levels of noise on or beyond the site.
12. Whilst noise can be measured, noise and disturbance are also relatively subjective
    issues to assess, as each neighbour will have different thresholds over what
    volume and types of noise might harm their living conditions. In this particular
    scenario, whilst some noise might be constant, such as the use of a generator;
    other types of noise will not be constant such as the additional noise generated
    which could vary between car doors slamming, vacuuming, jet and pressure
    washing, vehicle engines revving, spray, and comings and goings of vehicles as
    well as pedestrians chatting/talking loudly whilst their car is being washed/ waiting.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
 Appeal Decision: 6011467


13. In the original application, the Design and Access Statement contains an Acoustic
    Strategy which is not based upon any noise impact assessment, so it is unclear
    how suggestions were arrived at and what exactly was being mitigated. Given the
    number of suggested amendments within the NIA described above, it would appear
    that the use and associated buildings have been designed before and without
    detailed consideration of the effects to the surrounding area. Having been on site
    and within the surrounding residential area, it was evident that the car wash was
    causing detriment given the evident whirring and noise from the use. Whilst I
    acknowledge comments from the Appellant’s SoC in that road noise will also
    contribute to surrounding noise, given the setback of the site from the road, the
    dwellings along Elizabeth Way closest to the site were not experiencing a great
    sense of road noise. The main contributing factor to the noise of the environment of
    these dwellings was that of the car wash which is also corroborated by evidence
    from interested parties that live near the site.
14. Whilst I am not considering the NIA, I also note the Council’s comments in their
    SoC which after reading the NIA, that it confirms that the noise currently causes
    significant adverse effects, and that whilst the mitigation would lower this, that there
    would still be significant adverse effects to living conditions caused by noise and
    disturbance. That said, I am not convinced that this is a suitable location for the car
    wash use and as such the development causes significant adverse effects to the
    living conditions of surrounding residents. In conclusion of this matter, the proposal
    would be made contrary to Framework Policy P3 Paragraph 2.
Other Matters
15. I note comments from interested parties around current hours of operation being
    different to what is being proposed; loss of property value; large number of cars
    when car boot sale is on; Anti-social behaviour and organised crime concerns; the
    use of hazardous materials and their disposal; behaviour of appellant in placing a
    car wash without planning consent; and need for a car wash. Whilst some of these
    matters such as behaviour of the Appellant, loss in property value are not planning
    considerations, given the non-compliance of the application in terms of character
    and appearance and living conditions, I have not needed to delve into these
    additional aspects, some of which were dealt with within the Officer’s Report.
16. I can appreciate some of the benefits of the scheme which may include short term
    economic benefits from the construction of buildings on the site, the provision of a
    car wash for the local community, as well as local employment opportunities.
    However, these benefits are not outweighed by the harm caused towards character
    and appearance and living conditions as detailed previously.
Conclusion
17. Taking this into account, I conclude that the appeal be dismissed.



J Somers
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        4
