Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by K Stephens BSc (Hons) MTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011888
Heather Lodge, 2 Old Acre Lane, Stafford ST17 0TW
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Balginder Sidhu against the decision of Stafford Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/40867/FUL.
•    The development proposed is the erection of a replacement dwelling.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2.     An application for costs was made by Mr Balginder Sidhu against Stafford Borough
       Council. This application is the subject of a separate Decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     There is some discrepancy between the parties as to the nature and extent of the
       proposed development. A householder application was initially submitted for
       various works for a rear infill extension, new front porch and
       remodelling/replacement roof to the single storey dwelling. During the course of
       the application, the Council advised that the development was a replacement
       dwelling. The application was withdrawn.
4.     A new full application was submitted with the proposed development clearly
       described as being for a replacement dwelling. The Council proceeded to
       determine the application on that basis. The appellant has appealed against the
       Council’s decision to refuse a replacement dwelling and hence the appeal before
       me is for a replacement dwelling, and so I shall proceed on that basis. It is not
       within the scope of this appeal for me to interrogate whether the development
       constitutes extensions to the property or a new build.
5.     During the course of the appeal, a new National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was issued on 17 August 2026 and replaces the previous Framework
       published in December 2024, and all other iterations. The main parties have had
       the opportunity to comment as to whether there are any implications for the
       appeal. In reaching my decision I have had regard to it and to any responses
       received from the main parties, where relevant.
Main Issue
6.     In light of the above, the main issue in this appeal is the effect of the proposal on
       the character and appearance of the area.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011888


Reasons
7.     The appeal site comprises a single storey dwelling and its front and rear gardens.
       The dwelling is set back from the road behind a good sized front garden and drive.
       Due to the topography, the existing dwelling is sited at a lower level than the road
       and the drive slopes down to the garage. The property presents a simple, low-key,
       single-gabled elevation to the road, with an attached flat-roof link and single
       garage. The property has been extended over time but remains modest in size.
8.     Old Acre Lane is a no-through road that contours the lower western flanks of
       Cannock Chase Country Park and Cannock Chase National Landscape (formerly
       the Cannock Chase Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty), which is a nationally
       designated ‘Protected Landscaped’. Old Acre Lane is residential in nature, save
       for Brocton Village Hall.
9.     I saw that dwellings were generally on a similar building line set back from the road
       and presented a mix of designs, styles, sizes and ages. They included single
       storey bungalows, including some of a similar design and age to the appeal
       property, and larger two storey properties including a number that had been
       altered with a contemporary feel. Opposite, and up on the side of the hill, was a
       larger two storey flat roof dwelling (Swedish House) and next to it a twin-gabled
       white rendered property (No.9). I saw that properties on this eastern side of Old
       Acre Lane were generally more imposing due to their elevated position. To one
       side of the appeal property was the single storey, timber-clad Village Hall and its
       car park. To the other side was an asymmetrical, part-one and two-storey,
       contemporary-styled dwelling (No.4) which I understand has been subject to some
       remodelling. Properties on the lower, western side of Old Acre Lane, are generally
       set lower in the landscape and have a less imposing visual presence.
10. The topography, difference in ground levels and the variety of dwellings all
    positively contribute to the overall eclectic design interest of Old Acre Lane, to
    which the appeal property contributes. The mature, wooded slopes of Cannock
    Chase and the vegetated surroundings of gardens and the Oldacre Brook and
    fields to the west combine to give Old Acre Lane a distinct sense of place as a
    road of character in this mature extension to the village of Brocton.
11. The proposal would result in a substantially larger property that would have two
    floors of accommodation, with full height upper floor windows breaching the eaves.
    Whilst the self-build custom house (SBCH) declaration form states the dwelling
    would be 1.5 storeys, the form and scale and resulting appearance would be more
    akin to a two storey dwelling. There would be significant change to its roadside
    and rear elevations as the existing, shallow pitched roof would be replaced by two,
    much steeper gables with linking roof ridge between them. The footprint of the
    dwelling would be ‘squared off’. The addition of a new first floor, to provide 4 large
    bedrooms, an office, 3 ensuites and a family bathroom, would effectively double
    the floor area of the dwelling. Due to the difference in ground levels, both side
    elevations would increase in height towards the rear. As a result there would be a
    significant increase in the height, volume and massing of the dwelling compared to
    what is currently there.
12. This becomes an issue when considering the site’s location. The existing dwelling
    sits between a single storey village hall and the asymmetrical dwelling at No.4,
    whose design responds sympathetically to the existing bungalow with built form


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011888


         being lower closer to the shared boundary and the bungalow, before stepping up
         in height to the asymmetrical taller roof sections. In addition, on approaching the
         appeal site from the start of the lane in the village the general aspect is fairly open,
         with views across the single storey Village Hall towards the appeal site. The
         proposed enlarged side elevation, together with the prominent gabled roofscape,
         would dominate this generally low-lying vista and appear unduly large and
         incongruous in the street scene.
13. This harm would be compounded by the proximity of the dwelling to its shared
    boundaries. The existing dwelling occupies much of the width of the plot, leaving
    only narrow gaps to the shared boundaries with neighbouring properties being little
    more than functional access routes. The proposed dwelling would follow the same
    side elevations, but the increased bulk, massing and height would substantially
    increase its presence within the plot. As a consequence, the dwelling would
    appear excessively confined within its site, with insufficient space around it to
    moderate its visual presence. This would create the impression of a cramped and
    over developed form of development resulting in a building that would be overly
    dominant in this part and side of Old Acre Lane, which is characterised by lower-
    lying properties. Whilst I saw examples of single and two storey dwellings sitting
    next to each other, most had successfully managed to respect the differences in a
    more considered way, creating a more comfortable visual relationship.
14. Furthermore, whilst I have no reason to doubt the finished build-quality, the design
    of the dwelling would appear unduly stark with a sombre use of dark vertical timber
    cladding, which of itself is not a prevailing facing material. Most properties I saw
    were brick or coloured render. Whilst the Village Hall is timber clad it is a
    community building, not a dwelling, and therefore is not necessarily a design cue.
    In addition, the double-width garage door would sit beneath two full height upper
    floor windows that would create an unbalanced and visually uncomfortable
    elevation.
15. There are no plans showing the proposal as part of the street scene, or in relation
    to its neighbours. The artist’s impression gives an idea of what the architect
    envisages and its relationship with No.4, showing relative heights of the eaves and
    ridge. Whilst illustrative and not determinative, it reinforces my concerns about the
    design of the building and its resulting dominance and incongruity and the harm
    that would be caused to the character and appearance of the area.
16. The appeal site is located on the western edge of the Cannock Chase National
    Landscape. The statutory purpose of National Landscapes is to conserve and
    enhance the natural beauty of the area1. The Levelling-up and Regeneration Act
    2023 amends the duty on relevant authorities in respect of their functions to now
    “seek to further” the statutory purposes of Protected Landscapes. In terms of the
    effect on the Cannock Chase National Landscape, Framework policy N4:1 states
    that substantial weight should be placed on the importance of conserving and
    enhancing the natural beauty of such Protected Landscapes and that development
    proposals should be limited in scale and extent and sensitively located and
    designed to avoid harm to the statutory purposes and their special qualities. Policy
    N7 of The Plan for Stafford Borough (the Borough Plan) follows these principles to
    ensure that the special landscape character and distinctiveness of the locality is
    conserved and enhanced.

1
    Section 85 of the Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 3
Appeal Decision 6011888


17. Old Acre Lane and the residential development along it, including the appeal site,
    already sit within this National Landscape. As already described, Old Acre Lane is
    residential with a suburban form sitting on the lower western edge of Cannock
    Chase. I walked the public bridleway off Old Acre Lane up onto the country park
    hillside and also took the public footpath down to Oldacre Brook and walked along
    it. Due to the wooded nature of the slopes and the intervening vegetation and
    distances involved I was not able to discern the housing along Old Acre Lane. Even
    when the leaves fall, I consider it unlikely that the appeal dwelling would be
    distinctly discernible as it would be read as part of existing residential development
    along Old Acre Lane.
18. Furthermore, the new dwelling would replace an existing dwelling and would
    occupy the same part of the site, albeit the new building would have a greater
    height and massing on a slightly larger footprint. In the context of the scale and
    extent of this National Landscape, the appeal site is a relatively small parcel of
    residential land and is framed by other development adjacent and opposite. Hence
    the resulting building would not be isolated or sited within an expansive and open
    setting. Trees in the area generally restrict wider views of the countryside beyond.
19. From the evidence before me and my observations on site, I am satisfied that the
    landscape and scenic beauty of the Cannock Chase National Landscape would be
    conserved. Accordingly, the proposal would not conflict with Borough Plan N7,
    whose aims are set out above.
20. Drawing all of the above points together, there would be no harm caused to the
    Cannock Chase National Landscape and no conflict with Borough Plan Policy N7.
    However, the height, volume, massing and design of the proposal would result in
    an overly dominant and incongruous form of development that would fail to
    satisfactorily respond to its context and setting and cause harm to the character
    and appearance of the area. Accordingly, the resulting dwelling would conflict with
    Borough Plan Policy C5 f). As the policy requires compliance with all of its criteria
    a) to i), and I have found failure with one, there is no need for me to consider the
    others. The proposal would also conflict with Borough Plan Policy N1, which seeks,
    amongst other things, to ensure that the design of development has regard to the
    local context and should preserve and enhance the character of the area.
Other Matters
21. Interested parties have raised a number of other concerns. However, having
    already concluded in respect of the main issue, a finding on these matters would
    make no difference to my decision.
Planning Balance
22. The proposal would harm the character and appearance of the area and be
    contrary to the development plan. The Council cannot demonstrate a 5 year
    housing land supply. The alleged self-build dwelling would help reduce any shortfall
    in SBCH, but I have not been advised of the quantum of shortfall. However, SBCH
    is one type of housing and as the proposal is for a replacement dwelling there
    would not be any net gain in the number of dwellings. There would be some short
    term economic gain through the construction process, but for a single dwelling this
    would be very modest.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6011888


23. The Council refers to policy S5 of the new Framework, which relates to
    development outside settlements. However, the Council has already described the
    site as being within the village, and I saw this to be the case, and so Framework
    policy S4 would be more relevant as it deals with development within settlements.
    Policy S4:1 states that development should be approved unless the benefits of
    doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed
    against national decision-making policies in the Framework. It goes on to advise of
    a number of circumstances to consider, most relevant of which in this case is
    S4:2.c). This directs that development that fails to comply with one of the decision-
    making policies in the Framework should be refused.
24. Framework design policy DP3:1 states that development proposals should respond
    to their context, including character and features of the site and its setting, so that
    they integrate and enhance their surroundings. I have found the proposal would not
    do this. Policy DP3:3 then directs that development proposals that fail to comply
    with policy DP3.1 without clear justification should be refused. It also directs that
    substantial weight should be given to compliance with relevant policies in the
    development plan when assessing the design quality of proposals. I have found
    that the proposal would fail to comply with development plan policies C5 and N1. I
    have not been provided with any clear justification for the proposal that would
    outweigh conflict with design policies in the Framework. Therefore the proposal
    would not accord with the Framework and should be refused.
25. Even if the development was assessed as an extension, and notwithstanding any
    mathematical calculations regarding the amount of permissible enlargement, the
    design and appearance of the resulting dwelling would still be inappropriate.
26. For the reasons above I conclude that the appeal proposal would not accord with
    the development plan and there are no material considerations, including the
    Framework, sufficient to outweigh this conflict.
Conclusion
27. The appeal should be dismissed.

K Stephens
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
