Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 September 2026
by R Major BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011423
Ivy Cottage, Moss Lane, Beeston, Chester, Cheshire West and Chester CW6 9SU
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Christopher Gorman against the decision of Cheshire West and Chester
     Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/01330/FUL.
•    The development proposed is new single storey pitch roof garage.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. Subsequent to the Council issuing its decision the revised National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. The main parties
   were given the opportunity to comment on the implications of the revised Framework,
   and I have had regard to the revised Framework in reaching my decision.
3. The submissions do not indicate that the proposed garage has been erected on site.
   However, during my visit I noted a pitched roof structure was positioned in the
   approximate location where the proposed garage is due to be sited. This structure
   was completely covered by Perspex sheeting and it was not therefore clear exactly
   what was underneath the sheeting or what this structure was. Nevertheless, I have
   determined this appeal based on the submitted existing and proposed plans.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of
       the area.
Reasons
5.     The appeal relates to a two-storey, semi-detached, red brick cottage which forms
       part of a visually attractive pair of dwellings, which are located within a rural setting
       and appear visually detached from the other built developments on Moss Lane.
6.     I observed that this pair of traditional cottages are set back from the highway with
       both their frontages comprising of lawns and hard surfaced areas used for car
       parking. The front boundary of the appeal property is currently screened by mature
       vegetation, however the adjoining dwelling’s frontage is more open, allowing greater
       views of this property from Moss Lane, especially when observed from the west.
7.     Both the appeal property and the adjoining cottage each have two-storey side
       extensions which are set back slightly from the original front elevation and these

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011423


       side extensions together retain the sense of symmetry to the built form of this pair.
       Additionally, I found the set back of these extensions emphasises the hierarchy of
       the original principal front elevations facing towards the highway.
8.     Overall, I find this visually attractive pair of semi-detached cottages, with their
       traditional appearance and their open, spacious frontage areas provided by the set
       back from the highway, together make a positive contribution to the green and
       verdant character and appearance of this rural area.
9.     The appeal proposal seeks to construct a single-storey, pitched roof, detached
       garage on the lawned garden area to the front of the appeal property. The proposed
       timber garage would be sited close to the back of the highway of Moss Lane.
10. The Council’s Supplementary Planning Document: House Extensions and
    Domestic Outbuildings (2021) (SPD) states that detached domestic buildings, such
    as garages, can have a significant impact on the character of the area.
11. It also explains that the scale and design of detached buildings should reflect the
    style and character of, and be proportionate to, the original dwelling. With this in
    mind, I find the design, scale and materials of the proposed garage would be in
    keeping with the host dwelling and the wider rural setting.
12. However, the SPD goes on to state that outbuildings should be close to the house
    and should not be positioned between the house and a road unless this is
    characteristic of the area, or it can be clearly demonstrated that it would not be
    harmful to visual amenity.
13. In this regard, the proposed garage would represent a significant form of built
    development that would be positioned well forward of the principal elevation of
    both the host dwelling and the adjoining property, in an area where detached
    outbuildings situated between the front elevation and the highway are not a
    defining characteristic. Furthermore, I find the proposed garage would
    unacceptably erode an element of the openness and spaciousness that is
    currently afforded to the front of the appeal property.
14. The detached garage would consequently represent an unsympathetic, dominant
    and incongruous addition at the front of the property, to the visual detriment of this
    pair of traditional cottages and the area in general. The proposal would therefore
    fail to satisfy the relevant guidance contained within the House Extension SPD as
    set out above.
15. In coming to this view, I acknowledge that the existing vegetation at the front would
    provide some screening. However, during my visit I observed there were some
    gaps within this vegetation which would allow partial views of the garage from the
    highway and it is reasonable to assume that in the winter months the existing
    vegetation would become more permeable to views than it was during my site visit.
16. Moreover, there is no guarantee that this existing vegetation to the front of the
    appeal dwelling would be retained in perpetuity as it currently exists. Therefore,
    any potential future removal or trimming of any vegetation at the front would only
    increase the visual prominence of the proposed garage from public vantage points
    along Moss Lane.
17. The appellant has drawn my attention to a number of detached garages forward of
    the main front elevation that have been granted planning permission by the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011423


       Council elsewhere in the borough. However, and notwithstanding that each
       application must be judged on its own individual merits, I found these other
       examples were located a significant distance away and therefore do not form part
       of the same character area as the appeal site. This therefore limits the weight I
       attribute to these other examples in my consideration of this appeal, which I have
       determined based on the evidence before me and my own observations on site.
18. In view of all the above, I conclude that the proposed siting of the garage to the
    front of the appeal dwelling would have a visually detrimental impact upon the
    character and appearance of this attractive pair of cottages and the surrounding
    area in general. The proposal is therefore contrary to Policy ENV6 of the Cheshire
    West and Chester Council Local Plan (Part One) Strategic Policies (2015) and
    Policies DM3 and DM21 of the Cheshire West and Chester Local Plan (Part Two)
    Land Allocations and Detailed Policies (2019), where they together seek to ensure,
    amongst other things, that developments respect local character and achieve a
    sense of place through appropriate layout; contribute positively to the local
    character of the area; respect the prevailing layout; and be in keeping with the
    character and appearance of the wider setting.
19. The proposal would also conflict with the requirements of paragraph 1 of
    Framework Policy DP3 where it states that development proposals should respond
    to their context so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings.
Planning Balance
20. Policy S3 of the Framework states that decisions on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. Neither party
    has presented any evidence as to whether or not the appeal site is located within a
    settlement. Therefore, based on my on-site observations of the rural nature of the
    appeal site and its separation from any built-up areas, I find that the appeal site is
    not located within a settlement as defined within Annex B of the Framework.
    Consequently, I conclude that Policy S5 of the Framework is applicable.
21. It has not been put to me that the proposal would fall within the list of
    developments that should be approved outside settlements as detailed within
    Policy S5 and in such circumstances development should only be approved in
    exceptional circumstances. I find that no such exceptional circumstances exist.
22. Nevertheless, even in the scenario whereby the proposal did fall within the list of
    developments that should be approved outside settlements, Policy S5 goes on to
    state that such development should be approved unless the benefits of doing so
    would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects when assessed against
    the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
23. In this regard, the appellant has not put forward any specific benefits that would
    arise from the appeal proposal. However, I find that there would be some personal
    benefits to the occupiers of the dwelling through the provision of the garage, as
    well as some economic benefits associated with the construction. Nevertheless,
    given the scale of the development I attribute very limited weight to these benefits.
24. In terms of the adverse impacts, for the reasons given, I find the harm to the
    character and appearance of the area arising from the proposed development
    would be considerable and enduring, and the proposal therefore fails to comply
    with paragraph 1 of Framework Policy DP3. Consequently, I conclude that even in

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011423


       the scenario whereby the proposal did fall within the list of developments that
       should be approved outside settlements, the identified benefits of granting
       planning permission would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects I
       have identified.
Conclusion
25. The proposal conflicts with the development plan taken as a whole and there are
    no material considerations, including the Framework, to suggest the decision
    should be made other than in accordance with the development plan. Therefore,
    for the reasons given, and having regard to all other matters raised, the appeal is
    dismissed.



R Major
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
