Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 September 2026
by Paul Martinson BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011198
16 Howard Court, Norfolk Street, North Shields NE30 1NZ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Robin Birkett against the decision of North Tyneside Council.
•    The application Ref is 26 00240/FUL.
•    The development proposed is Replacement of windows.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The appeal site lies within the Northumberland Square Conservation Area. I have
       therefore had regard to section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
       Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act).
3.     I have taken into account the national decision-making (DM) policies contained
       within the new National Planning Policy Framework (‘the Framework’), as
       published on 17 August 2026. Any reference to the Framework below is therefore
       a reference to this new version.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is whether the proposed windows would preserve the character or
       appearance of the Northumberland Square Conservation Area (the CA).
Reasons
5.     The area comprising the CA developed in late Georgian times on the bank top at
       North Shields behind development along the river side. It includes Northumberland
       Square, a high quality Georgian development around a central garden and the
       neighbouring streets towards the bank top. Many of the buildings contained within
       its boundary were at the forefront of town planning and architectural fashion at the
       time of construction, particularly in the case of the elegant ashlar faced terrace on
       the north side of the square. Today the CA forms part of the town centre of North
       Shields. The CA has a varied character comprising a mix of residential and
       commercial properties primarily dating to the late eighteenth and nineteenth
       centuries with a reasonably high proportion of development in the twentieth
       century, some of which has been harmful.
6.     The CA is characterised by attractive terraces of stone or brick fronting onto the
       pavement. Windows typically have vertical proportions and the majority of these
       are sliding sashes. Timber is a highly dominant window material, and this extends

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011198


       even to more recent development. On the site visit I saw that whilst present in
       some twentieth century properties within its setting, uPVC windows are rare within
       the CA. This is reflected in the Northumberland Square Conservation Area
       Management Strategy Supplementary Planning Document (2024) (the CAMS)
       which sets out that ‘Fenestration is a key element in maintaining the character of
       the conservation area. Traditional windows should be retained and restored
       wherever they have been changed from this. uPVC is unacceptable in most
       properties of the age and style in this conservation area.’
7.     The CAMS was prepared to support the delivery of the High Streets Heritage
       Action Zone (HAZ) scheme for the CA. The HAZ scheme has led to recent
       physical improvements to the historic and built environment, and these are evident
       in the high-quality paving, street furniture and the exterior of the various historic
       buildings within the CA. These have led to a high-quality public realm and
       contribute positively to the CA.
8.     Having regard to the above, the significance of the CA, insofar as it relates to this
       appeal, derives from the high-quality architecture, the prevalence of terraces and
       the nature of the fenestration, typically comprising of timber windows.
9.     The appeal relates to a flat within the appeal building, a terraced block of flats.
       This is a relatively recent development but has been constructed in a traditional
       style using traditional materials and is reflective of the nineteenth century terraces
       that characterise the CA. Its windows are a consistent mix of white painted timber
       casements and sliding sash windows. The windows of the appeal property are
       located on the first floor and include a casement window on a full height bay and a
       casement window in a turret addition to the corner of the building.
10. Although the block of flats is of relatively modern construction, its use of traditional
    materials, including timber windows and their consistent use across the floors of
    the building help to reinforce the significance of the CA in line with the aims of the
    CAMS.
11. The appeal proposal would involve the replacement of the existing single glazed
    timber casement windows with double glazed uPVC in a ‘woodgrain’ finish. The
    windows are described as ‘like-for-like’ in terms of ‘fenestration, style, location and
    size’. Whilst the proposed elevation drawings appear to show no change in the
    depth of the frames of the windows compared to the existing, my experience is
    that double glazing, such as the 28mm thick glazing proposed, requires more
    substantial frames than the reasonably narrow frames that currently exist.
12. I am provided with more detailed drawings showing the profiles of the windows
    and the glazing depth, but there are no comparable existing profile drawings which
    limits my ability to undertake a meaningful assessment. Moreover, whilst the
    proposed and existing drawings are entitled the same, the drawings appear to me
    to show more substantial frames to the individual opening casements than are
    present in the existing building. This is particularly evident when comparing the
    thickness of the frame to that of the casement in both the drawing and on the
    building itself and leads me to doubt the assertion that the existing and proposed
    elevations would be exactly the same.
13. Given the positive contribution that the consistency in the fenestration of the
    building makes to the CA, even a small change in casement thickness would stand
    out alongside the remaining timber framed casements across the other floors and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011198


       flats within the building. Such a fragmentation in terms of the appearance and
       composition of the elevation would impact negatively on the character and
       appearance of the CA.
14. I am provided with little detail in terms of the appearance of the joints or
    construction of the windows, but uPVC windows typically fail to reproduce the
    joinery and craftsmanship that are present in the existing windows. The windows
    would outwardly appear as uPVC replacements and stand out alongside the
    timber windows in the existing building and across the rest of the CA which is
    characterised by a strong presence of timber windows. This would add to the
    fragmentation and the harm that I have set out above.
15. I am also mindful of the guidance contained within the CAMS, highlighting the
    importance of fenestration and that uPVC is unacceptable in properties of the age
    and style of the CA. Noting that the architectural style of the appeal building
    reinforces the character and appearance of the CA, the CAMS supports my above
    assessment.
16. Whilst I accept that the replacement in the windows of a single flat is a relatively
    small alteration, and that the harm to the CA would, overall, be low, it is these
    incremental changes to key features which contribute to and positively reinforce
    the character and appearance of a conservation area, that have potential to dilute
    and undermine an area's special interest.
17. On the site visit I saw that windows at a nearby building, Stephenson Court, had
    been replaced with uPVC. These appear to be very similar to those proposed as
    part of the scheme before me. Whilst I sympathise with the appellant in this regard,
    this building is located outside of the CA. Furthermore, whilst within its setting, it
    does not reflect the architecture or character of the CA in the manner of the appeal
    building. Moreover, I would note that evidence of existing harm to a conservation
    area is rarely justification for additional harm.
18. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude that the proposal would fail to
    preserve the character or appearance of the CA. This would be contrary to the
    requirements of section 72(1) of the Act. As such, the proposal would cause harm
    to the significance of this designated heritage asset.
19. When considering the impact of proposed development on the significance of a
    designated heritage asset, the Framework sets out that great weight should be
    given to the asset’s conservation. It makes clear that the more important the asset,
    the greater the weight should be. This is irrespective of the degree of harm that
    would occur.
20. Framework Policy HE6 sets out that where a development proposal would harm
    the significance of a designated heritage asset, the effect on the asset and its
    significance should be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the
    proposal. Important public benefits can include securing the long-term reuse of a
    vacant or underused listed building and enabling energy efficiency and low carbon
    heating measures to be employed.
21. The proposal would incorporate double-glazing. This would likely represent an
    improvement in terms of energy efficiency when compared to the existing single
    glazing. Such improvements carry substantial weight as set out at DM Policy CC2:
    2, albeit being limited to a single flat rather than the whole building. I am also

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011198


       mindful that such improvements in energy efficiency could also arise from double
       glazed timber windows, that would likely be less harmful in heritage terms.
22. Whilst the appellant sets out that timber windows are approximately 80% more
    expensive than uPVC windows, it is unclear if the costs of repair of the existing
    windows has been investigated, or whether the provision of brushes and seals that
    can eliminate draughts has been considered. I note that the CAMS sets out that
    money can be wasted through replacing windows that only need minor repairs.
23. The appellant is seeking uPVC windows to avoid the need for scaffolding required
    for future painting, however, it appears that the mullions that divide the bay
    windows and potentially the render of the bay itself would also continue to need
    painting.
24. Overall, whilst I have given the improvements to energy efficiency substantial
    weight, this is not sufficient to outweigh the considerable importance and weight I
    am required to attach to the low level of harm to the significance of the designated
    heritage assets.
25. For the above reasons, the proposal would fail to preserve the character or
    appearance of the CA and would be harmful to its significance. This would be
    contrary to the requirements of section 72(1) of the Act and the provisions within
    the Framework which seek to conserve and enhance the historic environment. The
    harmful impact would also be contrary to Policies S6.5, DM6.6 and DM6.1 of the
    North Tyneside Local Plan (2017) which together seek to conserve and enhance
    heritage assets through ensuring high-quality design that reinforces local
    distinctiveness.
26. There would also be conflict with the guidance contained within the CAMS and the
    Design Quality Supplementary Planning Document (2018) which guides that within
    historic environments, materials should be high quality and reflect prominent and
    established locally used materials.
Other Matters
27. Reference is made in the appellant’s submission to pre-application advice with the
    Council. However, my role is to assess the proposal before me and nevertheless,
    any pre-application advice received from the Council is not binding.
28. I have had regard to the letter of support from an occupier of another flat within the
    appeal building, however, support for a proposal is not necessarily an indicator of
    a lack of harm.
Conclusion
29. For the reasons given, having considered the development plan as a whole, the
    requirements of the Act and the Framework, along with all other relevant material
    considerations, I conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

Paul Martinson
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
