 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 29 August 2026
 by J D Westbrook BSc(Hons) MSc MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 10 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011472
 14 Clayton Road, Bradford, BD7 2LT
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr M Iqbal against the decision of the City of Bradford Metropolitan District
      Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/01002/FUL.
 •    The development proposed is the construction of a single-storey front extension.



Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the construction of a
   single-storey front extension at 14 Clayton Road, Bradford, BD7 2LT, in
   accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 26/01002/FUL, and the plans
   submitted with it, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: 10434/02, 10434/03.
     3)       The materials to be used in the construction of the external side surfaces of
              the extension hereby permitted shall match those used in the existing
              building.
Main Issue
2. The main issue is the effect of the proposed extension on the character and
   appearance of the area along Clayton Road.
Reasons
3. No 14 is an end property in a short row of retail units at the eastern end of Clayton
   Road. The row is set back several metres from the road and all of the other units
   have metal bollards surrounding the forecourt area. It is a food takeaway outlet and
   the proposed development would involve the construction of a 3 metre deep
   extension across the frontage. The extension would enable the bringing forward of
   the existing counter and waiting area. It would be around 3.5 metres high with a flat
   roof and side elevations constructed of stone. The front elevation would consist of
   aluminium-framed windows and door, with a signage panel above and a brick-style,
   powder-coated roller shutter for security.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6011472


4. The Council contends that the proposed extension would cause harm to the
   appearance of the property and its contribution to the wider street scene by
   unbalancing the uniform appearance of the attached row of commercial units and
   by virtue of its poor design and relationship with the host building.
5. Policy DS1 of the Council’s Core Strategy (CS) indicates that development
   proposals should contribute to achieving good design by, amongst other things,
   being informed by a good understanding of the site/area and its context.
6. The Council’s Shopfront Design Guide (SDG) indicates that new shopfronts in
   existing buildings should be integrated with the form, style and character of the
   building façade and its neighbours, respecting its proportions and details, using
   materials appropriate to the building, and not detracting from the character or
   appearance of the shopfront or the streetscape. In addition, when internal security
   is needed, the most appropriate and visually sensitive solution is an internal lattice
   or brick-bond grille.
7. The existing row of commercial properties consists of 5 units, set well back from the
   road and well behind the front elevation of the adjacent properties at No 16
   onwards. It would appear that the middle three units were at one time a single
   outlet and have a largely uniform appearance, although they now comprise a single
   and a double unit. The corner property at the eastern end is significantly different in
   appearance, having a lower entrance and frontage and a deep, boarded fascia.
   The appeal property, at the western end, has some similarities with the central
   units, but has a noticeably different shop frontage, with internal blinds, and is
   situated outside of the bollards that delineate the forecourts of the other units.
8. On the opposite side of Clayton Road, there are heritage assets, including
   Oddfellows building and an adjoining short row of houses. However, due to the
   degree and nature of the separation of the appeal site from these buildings, the
   Council accepts that the proposal would have no additional impact on their setting,
   and I concur with that viewpoint.
9. With regard to the setting of the appeal property, I find that there is little uniformity
   in the overall appearance of the row of units of which No 14 is a part and, in
   particular, the two end properties appear as out of character with the central three
   units. The proposed extension would remain set well back from the front elevation
   of the neighbouring No 16 and would not be readily visible when approaching from
   the west. The existing side elevation of the appeal property is constructed of stone,
   as is the side elevation of No 16, and the stone side elevations of the proposed
   extension would respect the character and appearance of the host building and the
   prominent east elevation of No 16. The new shopfront would retain some similarity
   in form, style and character with that of the three neighbouring units to the east,
   while the security blind would conform to the guidelines in the Council’s SDG.
Conditions
10. I have attached a condition above relating to plans because it is necessary that the
    development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved plans for the
    avoidance of doubt and in the interests of proper planning. I have attached a
    further condition relating to materials in the interests of the visual amenities of the
    surrounding area.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
 Appeal Decision 6011472


Conclusion
11. In conclusion, I find that the proposed front extension would not be harmful to the
    character or appearance of the surroundings of the appeal property along Clayton
    Road. On this basis, it would not conflict with Policy DS1 of the CS, or with
    guidance on shopfronts in the SDG. Accordingly, I allow this appeal, subject to the
    conditions set out above.



J D Westbrook
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
