Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by D Harris-Watkins BA(Hons) PgD MRICS
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 4th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011077
63 Bougainvillea Drive, Northampton, West Northamptonshire NN3 3XD
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr. Chris Stobart against the decision of West Northamptonshire Council.
•    The application Ref is 2025/4359/FULL.
•    The development is described as erection of an outbuilding at the end of the back garden.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for erection of an
       outbuilding at the end of the back garden at 63 Bougainvillea Drive, Northampton,
       West Northamptonshire NN3 3XD in accordance with the terms of the application,
       Ref 2025/4359/FULL, and the plans submitted with it: BDR/DWG/001: Page 01
       (Proposed Floor Plans & Elevations), BDR/DWG/001: Page 02 (Existing Proposed
       Site Plans), Unique plan reference: p2f/uk/1334370/1788417 (unnamed location
       plan dated 3rd November 2025).
Preliminary Matters
2.     The application form states the development has been completed, and I observed
       this during my site visit. I have determined the appeal on this basis.
3.     On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published. Those parts of the Framework most relevant to this
       appeal have not been significantly amended. As a result, I have not sought further
       submissions. I have referred to the latest version of the Framework where relevant
       in this appeal.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is the effect of the development on the living conditions of the
       occupants of 61 and 65 Bougainvillea Drive, with regard to privacy, outlook and
       light.
Reasons
5.     Bougainvillea Drive comprises detached dwellings in tight rows. The properties
       have reasonably sized rear gardens, and Nos.61, 63 and 65 Bougainvillea Drive’s
       rear gardens back onto a woodland. Though several of the properties in the row
       have been extended, none have outbuildings to the rear, such that there are
       currently no views facing directly towards the rear of the properties. Due to the
       proximity of the dwellings to their boundaries, and modest height of dividing close
       boarded fencing, there is an existing mutual level of overlooking between

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011077


         neighbouring properties to either side. The outlook of the windows on the rear
         elevations of the properties face directly onto their gardens framed by close
         boarded fencing.
6.       The appeal development is an outbuilding located at the back of the rear garden of
         No.63. The building covers nearly the full width of the garden and extends in
         height above the fenceline on either side.
7.       Despite the outbuilding extending above the fencelines, as a result of its siting at
         the back of the garden and its modest depth, I do not find harm in relation to the
         outlook of either No.61 or No.65.
8.       Due to the siting of the building and its orientation in relation to No.65, the
         outbuilding has a limited effect of overshadowing to its rear garden, as it is not
         located between the dwelling and the sun during key daylight hours. The
         outbuilding results in overshadowing on a section of the garden of No.61 closest to
         the outbuilding in the late afternoon, however due to the modest height and depth
         of the building the effect is limited. As a result of the distance between the
         outbuilding and the neighbouring dwellings there is also no overshadowing to the
         dwellings themselves. Consequently, the development does not give rise to, or
         contribute to, an unacceptable level of access to daylight and sunlight for
         neighbouring residents and occupiers, in accordance with the National Planning
         Policy Framework.
9.       All the windows and doors on the building are on the front elevation facing towards
         No.63. The top of the windows are higher than the fenceline on either side. The
         proximity of the outbuilding to No.63 is such that the views from inside the building
         towards the neighbouring dwellings on either side are at an obtuse angle, and
         when set back from the windows within the outbuilding the views of the
         neighbouring properties are restricted even further. Due to the lower height of the
         fenceline on the side of No.65, it has greater potential to be affected. However, the
         room to this side of the outbuilding is for storage use which is a low intensity use.
         The layout of the room, with a single door for access, also restricts the usable
         space at the front of the room, minimising the likelihood that someone would be
         located close to the door for a prolonged period.
10. Furthermore, as the use is for a home office/gym and a storage room, these are
    domestic uses. The same space could be occupied by garden furniture or other
    domestic paraphernalia that is frequently used where the same views would be
    afforded back towards the dwellings on either side. Consequently, the
    development does not result in a materially harmful effect on the occupiers’
    privacy, and I find the appeal development is in therefore in accordance with the
    the Residential Extensions and Alterations Design Guide: Supplementary Planning
    Document 2011, in respect of outbuildings effect on neighbouring properties. The
    matter the outbuilding has not been constructed under the limitations of GPDO1
    powers does not mean the effects of the appeal development are harmful.
11. For the reasons above, I find the development has an acceptable effect on the
    living conditions of the occupants of 61 and 65 Bougainvillea Drive, with regard to
    privacy, outlook and light. The development accords with policy Q2 of the
    Northampton Local Plan Part 2: 2023, which seeks to protect a high standard of
    living conditions for occupiers.
1
    Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) Order 2015 (as amended)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               2
Appeal Decision 6011077


Other Matters
12. I have taken account of the concerns raised by interested parties, including in
    relation to biodiversity, character and appearance. The Council have not raised
    any concerns in relation to these matters and based on the information before me I
    see no reason to come to any other conclusion. I have also not been directed to
    any development plan or national policy that requires the appeal development to
    provide public benefits.
13. The fact the building has been erected without permission is not a reason in itself
    to dismiss the appeal. Whether the outbuildings meet building regulations is
    outside of my jurisdiction in determining this appeal, so have not influenced my
    decision. Concerns have been raised in relation to a dormer window on the appeal
    property. This does not form part of the current appeal development and whether it
    falls under the limitations of the GPDO or requires planning permission is a matter
    for the Council’s enforcement team to resolve.
14. The other properties in the row have varying garden sizes, boundary treatments
    and relationships with neighbouring properties. Each application and appeal must
    be determined on its own merits, and the neighbouring properties each have their
    own site-specific context; therefore, I give little weight to the issue of precedent.
15. Concerns have been raised that the building is used for alternative uses and that
    the use of the building has resulted in noise and disturbance that has affected a
    neighbouring occupier’s quality of life. I observed the building in the applied for
    uses (gym/home office and storage) during my site visit. These uses are incidental
    uses to the use of the main dwellinghouse. The internal layout and permanence of
    the construction of the outbuilding is also not a determinative factor of whether the
    buildings use is incidental or not to the main dwelling. There is no substantive
    evidence to demonstrate that the uses applied for result in harmful noise and
    disturbance. I note the Council have not found any harm in relation to these
    matters either, and on the basis of the evidence before me I have no reason to
    consider otherwise. Therefore, this consideration of this matter carries little weight.
Conditions
16. The Council have provided a list of suggested planning conditions, which I have
    considered against the six tests outlined in the Framework, and advice contained
    in the Planning Practice Guidance.
17. I have not added a condition in relation to obscure glazing as I have found the
    effect on privacy to be acceptable. Due to the access, siting, scale, layout and
    level of facilities afforded to the building, which limit its occupation, I am also
    satisfied a condition restricting its use is not necessary.
18. The Framework outlines development proposals should be assessed on the basis
    of whether they would be an acceptable use of land, and decision makers should
    assume that other regulatory regimes will operate effectively, unless there is clear
    evidence to the contrary. Any nuisance caused to neighbouring residents is a
    matter for the Council’s Environmental Health department to consider. External
    lighting within residential gardens is a common fitting. There are already external
    lights both on the main dwelling on the appeal site and the neighbouring dwellings’
    to either side, facing towards the gardens and woodland. I therefore have not


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011077


       found it reasonable or necessary to impose a condition in relation to external
       lighting.
Conclusion
19. Representations were made to the effect that the rights of an adjoining occupier
    under Article 8 as set out in the Human Rights Act 1998 would be violated if the
    appeal were allowed. I have found that the development does not result in
    unacceptable harm to the occupiers of neighbouring properties living conditions.
    Nor does the development conflict with Policy Q2 of the LP2. I am satisfied that a
    grant of planning permission would not unacceptably interfere with the occupier’s
    right to a private and family life and home. It is proportionate in the circumstances
    to allow the appeal.
20. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.

D Harris-Watkins
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
