Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 27 August 2026
by D Harris-Watkins BA(Hons) PgD MRICS
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011227
Land west of The Charters, Greatford Road, Uffington, Stamford PE9 4UD
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr. P Hirst of Hirst Farms against the decision of South Kesteven District
     Council.
•    The application Ref is S25/1912.
•    The development proposed is residential development (outline).

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The appeal scheme relates to an outline proposal, with access to be considered at
       this stage, and with all other matters reserved for future consideration. I have
       considered the appeal accordingly. Insofar as submitted plans provide indications
       of potential appearance, layout, scale and landscaping, I have considered them as
       indicative only of how the appeal site could be developed.
3.     In determining this appeal, as the site is located within the Uffington Conservation
       Area (the CA) I have had special regard to section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed
       Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990.
4.     The application was determined at the Council’s Planning Committee and was
       refused contrary to the planning officers’ recommendation. The Planning
       Committee as decision makers are not bound to accept the recommendation of
       their planning officers, nor am I. The Council’s formal decision was to refuse the
       application, and I have determined the appeal based on the evidence before me.
5.     The appellant has raised whether the existing lawful use of the appeal site is
       residential. Within the context of an appeal under section 78 of the Act, it is not
       within my remit to formally determine the lawful existing use of the land. If the
       appellant wishes to ascertain whether the existing lawful use, they may make an
       application under section 191 of the Act.
6.     On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published. The main parties have been invited to comment on the
       relevance of the Framework to the appeal, I am therefore satisfied they have not
       been prejudiced. Consideration has been given to those comments received in
       reaching the appeal decision.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011227


Main Issue
7.     The main issues are:
         •     the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area, and
               to what extent it would preserve or enhance the character or appearance of
               the CA; and,
         •     whether the appeal site is a suitable location for the proposed development,
               with regard to the relevant development plan policies.
Reasons
Character and Appearance
8.     The CA covers an area encompassing the historic core of the village and Uffington
       Park to the south. The historic core of the village has a low density of development
       and is focused on the main throughfare Main Road. To the north side of Main
       Road, detached houses, farmsteads and terraced cottages directly address the
       highway with views directly onto Uffington Park and large narrow plots to the rear,
       which are important elements of the historic plan form of the village. There are a
       considerable number of listed buildings within the CA, and their relationship with
       the range of greens and open spaces within the CA provide a spacious and rural
       character. Boundary walls also play an important role connecting spaces and built
       form within the village and contribute positively to its character and appearance.
9.     Given the above, I find that the significance of the CA, insofar as it relates to this
       appeal, to be primarily associated with its historic settlement pattern, the spacious
       verdant character, and the CA’s collection of historic buildings and their
       relationship with the surrounding landscape.
10. The appeal site is a long narrow plot to the rear of Main Road and to the west of
    The Charters, a modern estate style development. The southern section of the
    appeal site contains a former tennis court, vegetable garden and has the general
    appearance of a garden. It is bordered by stone walls, mature hedgerows and
    trees. The northern section has the appearance of a grass paddock, with a field
    shelter and has little vegetation to its borders.
11. Though historic mapping demonstrates the subdivision of the site has changed
    over the years, as has the lands relationship with the properties on Main Road to a
    degree, the external boundaries have nevertheless consistently framed a long
    narrow undeveloped piece of land. The lack of development located to the north of
    the properties facing onto Main Road in the appeal sites section of the village,
    allows an appreciation of the historic linear form of the village. Consequently, the
    undeveloped nature of the site contributes positively to the character and
    appearance of the CA and the wider area.
12. The development would result in loss of openness and increase in domestication
    of the appeal site. Though the northern boundary is contiguous with the
    neighbouring residential properties boundaries, the development would result in
    the extension of built form into an otherwise undeveloped area, extending the built
    confines of the village outwards. The southern access point will also result in a
    loss of a section of the stone boundary wall. The indicative site layout shows
    however the site can be developed with 6 dwellings with minimal loss to the
    surrounding visible tree canopy.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011227


13. Though there are limited viewpoints from the public domain, there is intervisibility
    from private properties around the appeal site and long-distance views from the
    north into the CA, where a loss of the open and verdant character of the site would
    be experienced from. My statutory duty in respect of conservation areas also
    applies to the whole of the area, as a result the proposal’s effect on the
    significance of the designated heritage assets are not negated due to lack of public
    visibility.
14. The development would also result in the further subdivision of the site beyond
    what has occurred previously, resulting in a loss of appreciation of the historic
    settlement pattern of the CA and its significance. Though there are examples of
    development behind properties facing onto Main Road1, these have been for
    single dwellings and are set much closer to Main Road, whilst the current proposal
    is of much greater scale and would lead to a greater loss of the legibility of the
    historic settlement pattern. Though additional planting to the northern boundary
    would help mitigate the visual effects from the north, it would not lessen the harm
    to the historic settlement pattern.
15. The Charters was granted permission in the 1990s prior to the current planning
    regime, and its effects have consequently meant the land has been removed from
    the CA. Furthermore, I have been provided with little details of the other
    developments referenced to assess whether they are comparable to the appeal
    before me now. Consequently, I do not accept that they create a precedent for the
    appeal proposal. I have determined the appeal on its own merits and site-specific
    context.
16. I find the proposal would harm the significance of the designated heritage asset.
    The harm would be localised within the CA, and the site form’s part of the CA’s
    significance collectively together with the rest of the CA rather than individually,
    therefore the harm would be at the lower end of the spectrum, but nonetheless of
    considerable importance and weight. Where a development proposal would harm
    the significance of a designated heritage asset, the effect on the asset and its
    significance should be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the
    proposal, with substantial weight given to the asset’s conservation.
17. The proposal would make effective use of land contributing towards housing
    supply, where there is currently a shortfall. The proposed development would also
    result in long and short term economic and social benefits, both through the
    construction process and through the future occupiers’ use of services and
    facilities within the area. As matters of design are reserved and no method
    securing any of the dwellings as affordable dwellings has been proposed, I do not
    find these weigh in favour of the appeal.
18. Even taken together, the public benefits would not outweigh the substantial weight
    to be attached to the conservation of the designated heritage asset. Consequently,
    the proposal does not accord with policy HE6 of the Framework.
19. For the reasons above, the proposed development would have a harmful effect on
    the character and appearance of the area, and it follows it would not preserve or
    enhance the character or appearance of the CA. Consequently, the proposal
    conflicts with the aims of policy EN6 and DE1 of the South Kesteven District
    Council Local Plan 2020 (the LP), which seek amongst other things to protect the
1
    S23/1187, S23/0096 & APP/E2530/W/23/3324934


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          3
Appeal Decision 6011227


       historic environment, and that development should be of a high design quality and
       not have an adverse impact on the settlement pattern.
Location of Development
20. The Council’s spatial strategy is based upon the settlement hierarchy in SP2 of the
    LP. The Sub Regional Centre of Grantham is at the top of the hierarchy followed
    by three market towns of Stamford, Bourne and the Deepings, and then Larger
    Villages. Uffington is categorised as a Smaller Village which is the fourth tier of the
    hierarchy. In such locations development will be supported in accordance with
    policies SP3 and all other relevant policies, and where development will not
    compromise the village’s nature and character.
21. Policy SP3 of the LP provides an allowance for infill development provided certain
    location criteria are met. Though the appeal site is bordered by dwellings and their
    considerable gardens on three sides, as a consequence of the lack of surrounding
    built form to the north and west, and a significant portion of the site is a grass
    paddock, the construction of dwellings on the site would extend built form
    outwards towards where there is none currently. Furthermore, though the access
    point is located between two dwellings, the site itself is not between them,
    therefore the site is not within a substantially built-up frontage or within the main
    built-up part of the settlement. Moreover, I have also found the proposal would
    have a harmful effect on the character and appearance of the area.
22. For the reasons above, the appeal site would not be in a suitable location for the
    proposed development with regard to the relevant policies of the development
    plan. The proposal would conflict with policy SP3 of the LP, which seeks to control
    the location of development in relation to infill development, and the development
    would be harmful in that the strategy for the distribution of housing would be
    undermined.
Planning Balance
23. I have found the proposal harms the character and appearance of the area and the
    CA; it would also undermine the Council’s spatial strategy. The conflict I have
    identified with policies EN6, DE1, and SP3 of the LP, results in a conflict with the
    development plan read as a whole.
24. Policy SP3 of the LP provides more restrictive location criteria for infill
    development within settlements, whereas policy S4 of the Framework does not
    and is more broadly supportive of development within settlements. As a result, the
    conflict with this part of the policy is given very limited weight in accordance with
    the Annexe A of the Framework. Notwithstanding this, the identified character and
    appearance harm remains, and the requirement for development to have an
    acceptable impact on the character of the area is consistent with the Framework
    and consequently there is still conflict with policy SP3 of the LP.
25. Policy S3 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. Where a development proposal falls partly within and partly outside
    a settlement, policies S4 and S5 of the Framework should be applied to the
    relevant parts which are inside or outside of the settlement boundary (as
    appropriate), before coming to an overall view on the proposal.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6011227


26. The southern section of the site is bordered by dwellings relatively close to the
    southern section’s boundaries on three sides, this results in a sense that it is
    located within the settlement. In terms of the northern section of the site, the rear
    gardens to the west have little development within them, other than a tennis court
    that is not visible from the appeal site due to intervening mature vegetation.
    Despite its northern boundary being relatively short and contiguous with the
    neighbouring residential properties, the minimal boundary treatments to the
    northern section of the site, and its visible appearance as a grass paddock, results
    in the northern section appearing visually and physically as outside the settlement.
27. Policy S4 of the Framework states development proposals within settlements
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in this Framework.
28. Policy S5 of the Framework states certain forms of development should be
    approved outside of settlements unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects. This includes under criterion (j)
    where the development would address an evidenced unmet need, such as where
    the local planning authority cannot demonstrate a five-year supply of deliverable
    housing sites. It is agreed that the Council does not have a five-year housing land
    supply.
29. Though the appeal development would result in character and appearance harm, it
    is physically well related to the settlement. The explanatory text for policies SP2 of
    the LP, state that no more than 3 dwellings would generally be allowed in smaller
    villages, however the Council accepts 6 would not be unreasonable in the appeal
    site’s location. There is an outstanding objection from Anglian Water, with regards
    to connecting the proposal into the foul network due to capacity constraints and
    pollution risk. However, the Council acknowledge the option of using private
    treatment works when connection to the public sewer is not available.
    Consequently, I find the proposal accords with criteria (j)(i) and (j)(ii) of policy S5 of
    the Framework. Due to the lack of surrounding built form to the north and western
    boundaries the northern section of the site would not comprise infilling within
    groups of houses.
30. Policies S4 and S5 of the Framework outline circumstances in which the benefits
    of approving development proposals are likely to be substantially outweighed by
    adverse effects include, but are not restricted to, situations where the development
    proposal would fail to comply with one of the national decision-making policies
    which state that development proposals should be refused in specific
    circumstances.
31. Policy DP3 of the Framework states development proposals should be refused if,
    without clear justification, they do not respond to their context, including the
    history, character and features of the site and their setting, so that they integrate
    with and enhance their surroundings; such as through the arrangement of
    development plots and buildings.
32. As set out above, I have found harm to the character and appearance of the area
    and the CA, which is also in conflict with national decision-making policy HE6 of
    the Framework, which requires substantial weight is given to the preservation of
    designated heritage assets. Even taken together, I find the benefits of approving


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6011227


       the development proposal would be substantially outweighed by the adverse
       effects. As such, the presumption in favour of sustainable development does not
       apply.
Conclusion
33. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    Therefore, the appeal should be dismissed.

D Harris-Watkins
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
