Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 17 July 2026 by R Pankhurst LLB, MSc
Decision by L McKay MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011387
20 Cockspur Street, London, SW1Y 5BL
•   The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
    Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
    consent.
•   The appeal is made by Infinity Outdoor Ltd against the decision of City of Westminster Council.
•   The application Ref is 26/02156/ADV.
•   The advertisement proposed is display of 1 advertisement measuring 8m (height) x 6m (width) set
    within a 1:1 façade replication for a temporary period of 9 months.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. The control of advertisements is exercisable only in the interests of amenity and
   public safety. Regulation 3 states that powers in this regard shall be
   exercised taking into account the provisions of the development plan, so far as they
   are material, and any other relevant factors.
4. The appellant in their appeal documents refers to the proposed advertisement as
   being externally illuminated, stating that lights are shown on one of the submitted
   drawings. However, no illumination is mentioned in the description of the
   advertisement, and the question on the application form regarding illumination was
   not completed. The Planning Statement submitted at application stage does not
   refer to illumination when describing the proposed scheme, only mentioning it once
   when referring to public safety. No details of the type or luminance of any external
   lighting have been provided. It is only shown as three rectangles on the proposed
   east elevation and no lights are shown as projecting from the other elevation.
5. The appellant sets out that the Council’s change to the description of the proposal
   to include ‘non-illuminated’ was not agreed. However, it is unclear whether this was
   raised with the Council during the application process, as the Council determined
   the proposal on the basis that it would not be illuminated. Consequently, it has not
   been demonstrated that external illumination formed part of the original application.
6. Even if it had, there is insufficient information before me or other parties to assess
   its impacts, and the nature of the appeal process does not allow for the Council or

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011387


     interested parties to consider that information. Therefore, in the interests of fairness
     I have considered the appeal on the same basis as the Council, namely that the
     proposed advertisement would not be illuminated.
7. The Council has concluded that the advertisement would be acceptable in terms of
   public safety and, from the evidence before me, I have no reason to disagree.
Main Issue
8. The main issue is therefore the effect of the proposed advertisement on amenity.
Reasons for the Recommendation
9. The appeal site is a Grade II listed building which occupies a prominent position at
   the edge of the St James’s Conservation Area (SJCA), forming part of the transition
   between the more formal townscape of St James’s and the civic setting of Trafalgar
   Square. Its location at the junction of Cockspur Street, Pall Mall East and Warwick
   House Street means that it is experienced in numerous local views including views
   towards Nelson’s Column from Cockspur Street. This reflects the significance of the
   area as a point of arrival and transition between Trafalgar Square and St James’s.
   The site therefore makes a significant positive contribution to the character and
   appearance of the SJCA.
10. The site is currently scaffolded and shrouded with a 1-1 representation of the
    building. This follows previous temporary consents for shrouds with a 1-1 image but
    incorporating a smaller inset advertisement than is proposed here. The site has
    been shrouded for several years while work to refurbish and repair the building has
    been taking place. The appellant advises that work has ceased and that the
    previous advertisement was removed at the end of the most recent temporary
    consent, but the shroud remains.
11. The proposed shroud would continue to shield the proposed building work from
    public view and mitigate the potential negative visual impact of the
    scaffolding. The 1:1 representation of the building provides some visual interest
    and an indication of the historic building behind. However, it obscures the building,
    diminishing its contribution to the SJCA and the historic interest of the listed
    building itself. Consequently, the existing shroud results in some harm to amenity,
    albeit not as much as plain scaffolding would.
12. In this location, the upper storeys of historic buildings are generally free from
    commercial signage and other visual clutter. The introduction of a substantial
    advertising inset at high level would therefore appear conspicuous and out of
    keeping with the established character of the streetscene. While the proposed
    advertisement would only be on the end elevation, it would be a prominent and
    dominant feature in views towards the appeal site along Cockspur Street.
13. Accordingly, the scale and siting of the proposed advertisement would harm the
    character and appearance of the building, detract from its special interest and
    setting and the appearance of this part of the SJCA. It would therefore harm
    amenity.
14. Moreover, the inset advertisement would cover a substantial portion of the 1-1
    image on the prominent elevation facing the junction. This would reduce the
    contribution of the 1-1 image to both visual amenity and the way the listed building


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011387


     is experienced. Consequently, the benefits of the 1-1 image would not outweigh the
     harm resulting from an advertising inset of the scale and siting proposed.
15. The proposed advertisement is sought for a period of nine months, therefore their
    harmful impact would be temporary and reversible. However, the harm would
    endure for the duration of the display and the temporary nature would not
    satisfactorily mitigate the harm identified.
16. The appellant contends that the appeal scheme is necessary to unlock funding for
    further essential works to the building, and that refusing consent would remove this
    funding mechanism. There is no dispute that further work is needed to the building,
    and for the reasons set out above it would be undesirable to leave the building
    obscured for even longer than it already has been. However, there is no
    mechanism before me to ensure that the advertising revenue would be used to
    fund the repairs or to unlock the required funding.
17. Furthermore, I have not been provided with evidence to show that listed building
    consent has been granted for the roof works referred to, or a schedule of works and
    timescales for completion. Therefore, even if there were a funding mechanism in
    place, I cannot be certain that the works could be completed within the temporary
    period for which the advertisement is sought.
18. Moreover, no substantive evidence has been provided to show that the proposed
    advertisement is the minimum size needed to secure the funding for the remaining
    works, and I note that previous consents were for markedly smaller advertisements.
    Accordingly, the need for further works and funding does not justify the scale of the
    proposed advertisement and resulting harm.
19. Overall, therefore, the proposal would be more harmful to amenity than retention of
    the existing shroud, even recognising the harm resulting from the building being
    obscured. Furthermore, it has not been demonstrated that allowing the appeal
    would result in the benefits of completing works to the listed building and the
    removal of the shroud. These matters do not therefore justify the harm identified.
20. The appellant also suggests that a plain mesh shroud is a realistic alternative for
    the site. However, it has not been explained why the existing 1-1 representation
    would be removed and replaced with a plain shroud, given the expense already
    incurred to produce it. There is also no substantive evidence before me that the
    condition of the existing shroud necessitates its replacement. Therefore, I find that
    this alternative scenario is unlikely to occur and it does not weigh in favour of the
    appeal scheme.
21. The proposal differs from those previously approved, most notably in terms of the
    scale and resulting visual presence of the proposed advertising inset.
    Consequently, the balancing factors and conclusions reached in respect of earlier
    schemes cannot be applied directly to the current proposal. Whilst I have had
    regard to the earlier decisions in the interests of consistency, they do not outweigh
    my assessment of the proposal before me.
22. I have had regard to the examples of shroud advertisements at Marble Arch
    referred to by the appellant. However, they differ from the appeal proposal in terms
    of their size, positioning and relationship to the host building, as well as their impact
    on the surrounding townscape. Furthermore, there appears to have been a direct
    relationship between the sponsorship provided by the advertisements and the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011387


     restoration works to Marble Arch. Consequently, I do not regard them as
     comparable to the appeal proposal, and they do not justify the harm I have
     identified.
23. Other examples referred to were found acceptable as the alternative was a plain
    shroud, which is not the case here. Therefore, the balance of considerations would
    have been different to the scheme before me, and these other consents do not
    justify allowing the current appeal.
24. It is proposed that the advertisement would not feature moving images, flashing
    lights or other such features. However, the lack of harm in these respects does not
    mitigate the harm resulting from the size and siting of the proposed advertisement.
25. I have taken into account Policies 44 and 45 of the Westminster City Plan 2019-
    2040 (January 2026) which seek to protect amenity, heritage assets and the
    characteristics of the area and so are material in this case. Given that I have
    concluded that the proposal would harm amenity, the proposal conflicts with these
    policies.
26. The Council has also referred to Policies 42 and 48 of the City Plan, however these
    specifically refer to development. As advertisements are not development, these
    policies are not directly relevant to the proposal before me. These policies have
    therefore not been determinative in my recommendation.
27. I have also taken into account Westminster’s Streets and Spaces Public Realm
    Guidance Supplementary Planning Document (August 2025) (SPD), which
    explicitly refers to advertisement shrouds and advises that large advertisements
    above ground level are generally discouraged. The SPD indicates that
    advertisements should usually be confined to the ground floor and that significant
    advertising on scaffold shrouds will generally be resisted. It also states that large
    displays above ground-floor level are not normally appropriate, particularly in
    sensitive heritage locations. In my view, the proposal conflicts with this guidance
    and this weighs against the proposal in my assessment.
28. For the above reasons, the proposal would harm the character and appearance of
    the SJCA. Consequently, the proposed advertisement would harm amenity. There
    are no relevant factors that outweigh the harm identified.
Conclusion and Recommendation
29. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I
    recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

     R Pankhurst
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
30. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

L McKay
INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
