 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 14 August 2026
 by Mrs Chris Pipe BA(Hons), DipTP, MTP, MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 28 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011372
 40 Ings Road, Redcar TS10 2DF
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
     to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Matthew Crust against the decision of the Redcar and Cleveland Borough
     Council.
     The application R/2026/0129/FF.
 •   The development proposed is described as hip to gable loft conversion including rear dormer
     extension with Juliet balcony.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. The Council changed the description of development from that referenced in the
   application form. The revised description is more accurate than that proposed. In
   the interests of clarity, I have adopted the revised description of development.
Main Issue
3. The main issue in this appeal is the effect of the development on the character and
   appearance of the host property and area in general.
Reasons
4. The appeal property is a two-storey semi-detached property occupying an unusual
   wedge-shaped corner plot at the junction of Ings Road and Greenlands Road. It is
   physically attached to No. 1 Greenlands Road, with the two properties reading as a
   pair despite their unusual orientation. The surrounding area is predominantly
   characterised by semi-detached properties, with pairs sharing common design
   features, including hipped or gable roof forms. The streets have a grass verge tree-
   lined appearance. However, the presence of trees does not diminish the
   prominence of the appeal property.
5. The appeal property has been historically extended and is already somewhat
   individual in its form and relationship to the surrounding properties. Nevertheless,
   the existing hipped roof provides an important element of visual cohesion between
   the appeal property and its attached neighbour. The proposed hip-to-gable
   alteration would remove this shared roof form and introduce a full gable to the
   appeal property. This would disrupt the existing symmetry and visual relationship
   between the two attached properties. Given the prominent corner location, this



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6011372


     change would be particularly apparent and would result in an incongruous addition
     to the streetscene.
6. The proposed dormer would further add to the visual impact of the roof alterations.
   Its substantial size, relatively low position within the roof slope and ridge height
   matching that of the existing main roof would result in a bulky and visually dominant
   addition to the property.
7. I have taken into account that there are examples of other properties within the
   locality where hip-to-gable alterations and dormers additions have been
   undertaken. However, such alterations are not a prevailing characteristic of the
   immediate street scene, and their presence does not justify the appeal proposal.
8. The appellant places considerable emphasis on the proposition that the works
   could have been undertaken as permitted development and argues that a planning
   application would not have been necessary had the relevant requirements been
   satisfied. There is no Lawful Development Certificate before me establishing that
   the proposal, or an equivalent scheme, would constitute permitted development. I
   therefore give little weight to this fallback argument in assessing the planning merits
   of the proposal before me.
9. The appellant places considerable weight on the identification of the principal
   elevation and argues that the roof slope containing the dormer is regarded as a
   rear elevation. The precise terminology used to describe the elevations does not
   alter my assessment of the proposal's effects. The Redcar & Cleveland Local
   Development Framework, Residential Extensions and Alterations SPD (2013) (the
   SPD) confirms that dormers should be carefully designed to fit the overall design of
   the house and the character of the area. The appeal property occupies a
   prominent corner position and the roof slope containing the proposed dormer is
   readily apparent in views from the streetscene. I find that the proposed hip-to-
   gable extension and dormer would result in an incongruous and visually dominant
   alteration to the property.
10. I conclude that the proposed development would harm the character and
    appearance of the host property and area in general.
11. There is conflict with Policy SD4 of the Redcar and Cleveland Local Plan (2018)
    which seeks amongst other things to ensure developments are designed to a high
    standard, respecting the character of the site and its surroundings.
12. There is also conflict with the SPD which amongst other things seeks to protect the
    character and appearance of existing properties and the surrounding area.
Conclusion
13. For the above reasons I conclude that this appeal should be dismissed.

Chris Pipe
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
