Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 26 August 2026
by K Lancaster BA (hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011451
8 Lynwood Close, Darras Hall, Ponteland, Newcastle upon Tyne NE20 9JG
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Mr Darab Rezai against the decision of Northumberland County Council.
•      The application Ref is 26/01165/FUL.
•      The development proposed is a ground floor rear extension, alterations to front elevation and roof,
       and new access.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
         August 2026. As this could affect the issues and matters in this case, the Council
         and the appellant were invited to make further comments. My decision reflects the
         latest version of the Framework, and the responses received on it.
3.       The appeal submission includes additional evidence which was not before the
         Council at the time of its decision. This includes a Daytime Walkover Survey. The
         Procedural Guide states that it is important that what is considered by the
         Inspector is essentially what was considered by the local planning authority, and
         on which interested people’s views were sought.
4.       I have considered this additional information taking into consideration the
         principles established by the Courts in Holborn Studios Ltd1. In this case, the
         additional information provides further evidence in relation to the Council’s reasons
         for refusal, rather than significant amendments to the proposal. For this reason, I
         consider that there would be no prejudice to any party, and I have therefore
         determined the appeal on the basis of this additional information.
Main Issue
5.       The main issues are the effect of the proposed development on:
              •   the character and appearance of the host property and surrounding area;
                  and
              •   protected species.



1
    Holborn Studios Ltd v The Council of the London Borough of Hackney [2017] EWHC 2823 (Admin)

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011451


Reasons
6.     The appeal site, 8 Lynwood Close, comprises a detached, chalet style bungalow.
       The surrounding area is characterised by detached dwellings, predominantly
       chalet bungalows and two-storey houses, set within generous, well-landscaped
       plots. Despite some variation in building form and appearance arising from
       extensions and redevelopment, the area retains a spacious, verdant and low-
       density suburban character, with mature vegetation and generous spacing
       between properties making an important contribution to its appearance.
7.     The proposal comprises the extension and substantial remodelling of the existing
       dwelling, including a two-storey front extension, a single-storey rear extension,
       alterations to the vehicular access and frontage, and the replacement of the
       existing roof with a new multi-gabled roof structure. Taken together, these works
       would materially increase the scale, bulk and visual prominence of the dwelling. As
       a result, the proposal would fail to respect the relatively simple form and
       proportions of the host property and would appear unduly dominant within the
       street scene.
8.     Whilst extensions, alterations and redevelopment are not uncommon on Lynwood
       Close and within Darras Hall more widely, the scale and extent of the proposed
       works would transform the host dwelling to such a degree that it would bear little
       resemblance to its original design or to comparable neighbouring properties. As a
       result, the proposal would result in an incongruous and unsympathetic form of
       development.
9.     My attention has been drawn to examples of two-storey houses, including 2
       Lynwood Close and 48 Lindon Close both of which are close to the appeal site.
       However, whilst this is not disputed, the appeal site sits within a row of similarly
       designed chalet style bungalows. These examples of two-storey properties are
       located close together and where there is greater variety in both the height and
       style of the dwellings. Accordingly, the presence of two-storey dwelling within the
       wider area does not alter my above findings.
10. The appellant states that significant weight should be afforded to the existence of
    permitted development rights, which could allow substantial extensions or
    outbuildings to be erected without the need for planning permission. However, no
    substantive evidence has been provided to demonstrate that development which
    could be carried out under permitted development rights would result in a similar or
    greater degree of harm than the appeal proposal. Consequently, I attach only
    limited weight to this consideration.
11. I acknowledge the appellant’s desire to provide enlarged accommodation for his
    extended family and improve the condition of the dwelling. However, there is no
    substantive evidence before me to demonstrate that these objectives could not be
    achieved through a less harmful form of development.
12. For these reasons, I find that the proposal would cause unacceptable harm to the
    character and appearance of the host property and surrounding area. Accordingly,
    the proposal would be contrary to Policies HOU 9 and QOP 2 of the
    Northumberland Local Plan 2016-2036, which, amongst other matters, require
    development to preserve local character and for residential extensions to respect
    the design of the host dwelling and remain subordinate in scale and massing.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011451


13. It would also conflict with Policies PNP 2 and PNP 4 of the Ponteland
    Neighbourhood Plan, which seek high-quality development that makes a positive
    contribution to its surroundings and respects the established character and
    appearance of Darras Hall.
Protected Species
14. The Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended) (the
    Habitats Regulations) impose a duty on me to consider whether European
    Protected Species, including bats, would likely be affected by the proposed
    development.
15. A Daytime Walkover Survey has been provided with the appeal which identified
    the appeal property as having moderate suitability for bats and negligible suitability
    for nesting birds. On this basis, it recommended that two bat presence/absence
    surveys should be undertaken in the period May to September with at least one of
    the surveys between May and August. These surveys have not been undertaken.
16. The appellant has suggested that the recommend surveys could be secured by
    condition and has provided suggested wording. However, Government guidance2
    makes clear that the presence or absence of protected species, together with the
    likely effects of a proposal upon them, should be established prior to the
    determination of a planning application. In the absence of such information, there
    would be a risk of granting planning permission without a proper understanding of
    the proposal's ecological implications, contrary to the precautionary approach
    embodied in the Habitats Regulations.
17. Consequently, in the absence of the further ecological surveys recommended in
    the Daytime Walkover Survey, the potential impacts of the development on
    protected species has not been adequately assessed. Therefore, it has not been
    demonstrated that the proposal would avoid harm to protected species. Thus, the
    proposal would not comply with Policies ENV1 and ENV2 of the NLP, which
    require amongst other things, development proposals to properly assess impacts
    on protected species and their habitats, avoid harm where possible, and apply the
    mitigation hierarchy where impacts cannot be avoided.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
18. Policy S3 of the Framework establishes a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. As the site lies within a settlement, Policy S4 indicates that
    development should be approved unless its benefits are substantially outweighed
    by adverse effects when assessed against the Framework's national decision-
    making policies.
19. The development would facilitate the substantial extension and remodelling of an
    existing dwelling, resulting in a modernised home with associated improvements to
    its energy efficiency and environmental performance. The development would also
    provide additional accommodation, enabling the property to better meet the needs
    of its occupants. However, these benefits relate primarily to the living conditions
    and circumstances of the occupiers and therefore attract only limited weight in my
    overall assessment.


2
    ODPM Circular 06/2005, Biodiversity and Geological Conservation (Paragraph 99)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 3
Appeal Decision 6011451


20. Against this, I have found that the proposal would harm the character and
    appearance of the host property and surrounding area. This is contrary to Policy
    DP3(1) of the Framework, which states that development proposals should
    respond to their context (the history, character and features of their site and its
    setting), so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings. Policy DP3(3)
    of the Framework states that development proposals should be refused if they
    conflict with these principles. Therefore, I attach substantial weight to this harm.
21. Furthermore, it has not been demonstrated that the proposal would avoid harm to
    protected species. As such, the proposal would conflict with Policy N2(1)(f) of the
    Framework, which requires development to minimise adverse effects on
    biodiversity and support priority and threatened species. I attach substantial weight
    to this harm.
22. Taking these points together, the benefits of granting planning permission would
    be substantially outweighed by adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies of the Framework.
23. Consequently, the proposed development would conflict with the development
    plan taken as a whole. There are no material considerations of sufficient weight
    which indicate a decision should be made other than in accordance with it.
    Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.

K Lancaster
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
