    Appeal Decision
    Site visit made on 30 August 2026
    by J Somers BSocSci (Planning) MA (HEC) MRTPI IHBC
    an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
    Decision date: 18 September 2026


    Appeal Ref: 6011095
    Land 7608 Adjacent Crowcastle Lane, North of Kirtlington Allotments, Kirtlington, OX5
    3HP
    •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
        to grant planning permission.
    •   The appeal is made by Mr J Gammage against the decision of Cherwell District Council.
    •   The application reference is 25/03350/F.
    •   The development proposed is detailed on the Council’s Decision Notice as ‘RETROSPECTIVE -
        Retention and re-location of an existing storage container, which is to be timber clad, and retention of
        existing permeable hardstanding.’



Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. Throughout the planning process it appears that the address has been changed
   from ‘Easting 449811, Northing 220067’ on the Application Form to ‘Land 7608
   Adjacent, Crowcastle Lane, Kirtlington’ which is detailed on the Council’s Decision
   Notice, and on the Appellant’s Appeal Application the words ‘north of Kirtlington
   Allotments’ is added. I have therefore taken ‘Land 7608 Adjacent Crowcastle Lane,
   North of Kirtlington Allotments, Kirtlington, OX5 3HP’ as the property address as
   this provides more accuracy to the site than the address stated on the Application
   Form. I shall make my decision on this basis.
3. Upon my site visit I noticed that there was a shipping container in situ located
   towards the rear of the plot. According to the appeal documents, this container
   would be relocated to the south-east corner of the appeal site and clad in timber. I
   have assessed the scheme taking into account existing conditions but apply my
   decision in relation to what is proposed on the submitted plans.
4. There appears to be dispute between the parties with regards to the legal planning
   use class of the appeal site which then triggered the Council to identify whether
   there is a need for the shipping container which is being applied for which is
   generally the case in agricultural situations. The Application Form states that the
   existing use of the site is a paddock, and the appeal documents refer to a planning
   consent1 for ‘Change of use of land for the keeping of horses and erection of timber
   clad stable and tack room storage’ which is a material consideration to this planning
   appeal. Whilst the Appellant comments that the planning consent has been
   implemented, there is no supporting evidence within the appeal documents as to

1
    Council Planning Ref: 24/01846/F

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               1
 Appeal Decision: 6011095


     whether this use or development under this consent has been implemented as
     there was no timber shed or horses grazing on my site visit, and the surfacing
     treatment also appears to be different from what was consented. However, I note
     that this existing consent is still able to be implemented given the expiration date in
     2027. Whilst it is not for me under a Section 78 appeal to determine the current
     correct and legal use class of the appeal site, to me it would appear that the
     existing consent has not yet been implemented and therefore the site has the
     appearance of being related to agriculture. To that end it is open to the Appellant to
     implement the existing consent or apply for a determination under sections 191/192
     of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 if they believe the lawful use is
     different and my determination of this appeal under s78 does not affect the issuing
     of a determination under s191/192 regardless of the outcome of this appeal.
5. The Council’s Reason for Refusal covers two topics, one being the character and
   appearance of the proposal and the other being whether there is an established
   need for the proposal. For clarity and the avoidance of doubt, as these are different
   planning topics, I will deal with these separately.
6. The appeal documents reference the National Planning Policy Framework 2025
   (the Framework). Since the submission of the appeal, the 2025 version of the
   Framework has been superseded by the 2026 version which was published on the
   17 August 2026. Whilst the structure and format of the Framework has changed,
   the wording of the relevant policies of the new Framework in relation to this appeal
   remain largely unchanged and therefore did not require to be reassessed by either
   party in relation to this appeal. As such I have considered the appeal on this basis
   and refer only to the updated 2026 Framework within my decision.
Main Issues
7. The main issues are:
    •    The effect of the shipping container upon the character and appearance of the
         site and the greater locality; and
    •    Whether there is an evidenced need for the shipping container to support rural
         activities.
Reasons

Character and appearance
8. The settlement of Kirtlington is a relatively small village where the historic core of
   the village is located further south around St. Marys Church and the Kirtlington Park
   estate. The buildings are of vernacular construction to the locality with course
   limestone for construction of buildings and boundary treatment, and are functionally
   designed buildings which contributes to an understanding of the former form and
   function of the historic village and its layout and how the buildings are experienced,
   reinforcing their rural location, identity and setting.
9. It appears that the settlement has then expanded northwards during the twentieth
   and twenty-first century with a number of cul-de-sacs extending from Hayford
   Road, extending to Crowcastle Lane as the western most component of the village.
   There is no further built development west of Crowcastle Lane, other than an
   allotment gardens and the appeal site which are experienced amongst the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         2
 Appeal Decision: 6011095


     agricultural fields beyond Crowcastle Lane. The road itself has a rural and tranquil
     experience, being a narrow unsealed track taking infrequent traffic with no kerbs or
     street lighting, with wide grass verges and which provides access to a handful of
     dwellings along this carriageway. The road ends in a cul-de-sac a little further past
     the appeal site which is lined with a combination of hedgerows, stone boundary
     walls and mature vegetation.
10. The appeal site is experienced as part of the agricultural fields west of Crowcastle
     Lane where long distance views where the overriding character and appearance is
     that of rural countryside and vegetated surrounds which have a tranquil and quiet
     feeling as opposed to the built up nature of the village further south. These are
     some of the positive elements that contribute to local distinctiveness and the
     character and appearance of the area
11. In undertaking development, the Cherwell Local Plan (LP) Policy ESD15 and
    Cherwell Local Plan 1996 (CLP) Saved Policy C8 are design-led policies
    specifically related to the built environment and seeks that development is expected
    to complement and enhance the character of its context through sensitive siting,
    layout and high quality design, amongst others. LP Policy ESD13 is related to
    landscape protection and enhancement where development should respect and
    enhance local landscape and avoid causing harm to open countryside, the historic
    value of landscape, undue visual intrusion, amongst others. The Appeal site is
    located with the Mid-Cherwell Neighbourhood Plan (NP) area where Policy PD5 is
    a design-led policy where proposals should reduce the impact of built form, and be
    in-keeping with the existing rural character of the village.
12. Given the positive elements of the character and appearance of the locality, the
    installation of a shipping container in situ presents more of an industrial aesthetic to
    the area. Unfortunately it appears that the existing hedgerow to the front of the
    appeal site has been removed, and a gate installed which has exposed the site
    together with hardstanding and a shipping container which has a detrimental impact
    upon the character and appearance and experience of the area.
13. I can appreciate that there is a need for secure storage particularly for agricultural
    machinery, however there may also be other ways of improving the security of the
    site, such as CCTV etc. Shipping containers are rarely an accepted style of
    development when it comes to assessing appropriate materials and installations in
    a rural environment. I disagree with the Appellant’s Statement of Case (SoC) that
    shipping containers are viewed in the context of rural paraphernalia or an accepted
    form within a rural area. The shipping container has a very defensive and harsh
    appearance which is unlike sheds, stables, garages and storage facilities
    commonly found within a rural environment which seek to be more subservient to
    the surrounding open landscaped context. The presence of this shipping container
    and associated hardstanding elevates the status and hierarchy of the site from a
    rural environment to an exposed commercial appearance which would not be in
    keeping with the character and appearance of the area.
14. I can appreciate that there is a willingness to clad the container in timber, and also
    to plant mature hedgerows and screening around the site to attempt to hide the
    development from view. However, LP Policy ESD15, CLP Saved Policy C8 or NP
    Policy PD5 does not limit harm or impact towards character and appearance to
    purely the public realm or what can be seen. The container is experienced in a
    negative way within this rural environment, with proposed mitigation measures to

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
    Appeal Decision: 6011095


       reduce impact or re-site the container not being able to overcome the poor
       appearance and experience of the shipping container in this location.
15. Taking the above into account, the installation of a shipping container within the
    appeal site is inappropriate and contrary to LP Policy ESD15, CLP Saved Policy C8
    and NP Policy PD5, as described previously.
Need for agricultural activities
16. In assessing the need and placement of activities in the rural area, CLP Saved
    Policy C8 appears to have overarching objectives similar to LP Policy ESD 13 in
    seeking to avoid sporadic development within the open countryside, however
    accompanying text seeks decision makers to demonstrate an agricultural need.2
17. The Appellant’s SoC mentions that they own 2.4 acres of land with sheep and cows
    and that the appeal site is a separate parcel of land utilised for the storage of
    materials for the 2.4 acres of land. The SoC states that there is not the ability to
    store materials on the 2.4 acres of land, however this is not explained. It is unclear
    whether the other land is part of an agricultural business and whether the proposed
    building is therefore essential for these operations. Typically evidence to
    demonstrate a need for example can consist of a CPH number or an SBI number
    (amongst others) which can illustrate a agricultural use and the keeping of animals
    and how they may be connected with the appeal site. Based on the information
    before me, it has not been sufficiently demonstrated the purpose of the proposal
    and whether it supports agriculture.
18. In conclusion of this matter, it has not been demonstrated that there is an
    agricultural need for the proposal and therefore would result in sporadic
    development within the countryside. As such the proposal would be made contrary
    to CLP Policy C8 as described previously.


Other Matters
19. I note that the Council Officer Report mentions that there is a Grade II listed
    building (Winter Cottage) opposite the appeal site. However, there does not appear
    to be any discussion which would discharge the duty under Section 66 of the
    Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (PLBCA) with
    regards to assessing harm (if any) towards the significance of a building of national
    historic and architectural significance from development within its setting. Winter
    Cottage is a small thatched cottage with rubble stone construction that fronts
    Crowcastle Lane and appears to have once been an isolated workers dwelling
    which was likely constructed as part of an agricultural landholding. Whilst the
    building will have its own significance relevant to its listing, with regards to setting,
    over the centuries the setting of the building has been severely reduced so that it is
    experienced amongst the dwellings along Crowcastle Lane. Whilst the surrounding
    agricultural land is part of the experience of how the cottage is appreciated, I feel
    that the proposal would cause neutral harm to the significance of the listing from
    development within its setting.



2
    ‘Agriculture’ is taken to mean the definition at section 336(1) of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                       4
 Appeal Decision: 6011095


Conclusion
20. Taking this into account, I conclude that the appeal be dismissed.



J Somers
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      5
