Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 22 September 2026
by L Francis BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011324
2 Claremont Road, Walthamstow E17 5RJ
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Albert Suen against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
       Waltham Forest.
•      The application Ref is 260914.
•      The development proposed is the construction of a two storey dwellinghouse (1 bedroom) (Use class
       C3) including landscaping and ancillary refuse and cycle storage.

Decision
1.      The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.      In the banner heading above, I have used the Council’s description of
        development as it better reflects the scheme applied for than the description on the
        planning application form.
3.      There is an extant planning permission1 for the construction of a single storey
        building for office use. The appellant presents this as a fallback position in terms of
        a comparison of the appeal scheme with the extent of approved built development
        on the appeal site. I am satisfied that there would be a reasonable prospect of this
        being completed as a fallback scheme and as such it is a material consideration.
Main Issues
4.      The main issues are the effect of the appeal proposal on:
             •   the character and appearance of the area;
             •   the living conditions of future occupiers with particular regard to outlook and
                 privacy;
             •   sustainable transport with particular regard to cycling and car free
                 development.
Reasons
Character and Appearance
5.      The appeal site is located to the side of 2 Claremont Road, where it meets Higham
        Hill Road. The area is characterised by densely developed two storey terraces,

1
    Reference 260120

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011324


       punctuated by more modern infill development. The proposal involves the erection
       of a new two storey house attached to 2 Claremont Road. Whilst the proposed
       dwelling would continue the established building line along Claremont Road, the
       two-storey side elevation would abut the footway of Higham Hill Road, projecting
       considerably further towards the road than other surrounding buildings. Buildings
       fronting Higham Hill Road have a fairly consistent building line and are set back
       from the footway behind small front gardens or forecourts. Consequently, the
       proposed dwelling would appear as a highly incongruous feature, disrupting the
       established building line to Higham Hill Road. The proposed dwelling would fail to
       relate successfully the surrounding pattern of development.
6.     I have been referred to an extant planning permission for a single storey extension
       at 2 Claremont Road in the position of the appeal proposal. Whilst I appreciate this
       would extend beyond the established building line on Higham Hill Road, it would
       be confined to a single storey and would not have the same bulk or height as the
       appeal scheme. The fallback position presented by the extant scheme does not
       indicate to me that the appeal proposal should otherwise be acceptable. As set out
       above, the appeal scheme would have a harmful effect on the street scene, both
       compared to the existing situation and compared to the extant permission.
7.     There is no dispute regarding the detailed design or use of materials for the
       proposed dwelling and I see no reason to disagree. Nevertheless, the harm I have
       identified to the character and appearance of the area would run contrary to the
       aims of Policy 53 of the Waltham Forest Local Plan 2024 (Local Plan). This policy
       seeks to achieve, amongst other things, well designed buildings which reinforce or
       enhance local character and distinctiveness, taking into account patterns of
       development and local context.
Living Conditions
8.     The bedroom window would be on the side elevation abutting the pavement of
       Higham Hill Road and is labelled on the drawings as being obscure glazed. With
       obscure glazing in place, whilst there might be privacy, there would be no outlook
       from the room.
9.     Were I to apply an amending condition requiring the window to be clear glazed,
       then there would be limited privacy and an awkward relationship with the street.
       The lack of defensible space in front of the ground floor window on a relatively
       busy street would in my view mean occupiers would be less inclined to open
       windows or blinds; this would not be conducive to any outlook from the room.
10. Consequently, even if I added a condition to remove the obscure glazing, the
    position of the bedroom window relative to the street would not provide acceptable
    living conditions for future occupiers with particular regard to outlook or privacy. It
    would conflict with Local Plan Policy 57 insofar as it aims for new development to
    respect the amenity of future occupiers.
Sustainable Transport
11. Local Plan Policy 61 and Appendix 1 set the minimum requirements for cycle
    parking for new developments at 1.5 cycle space per one-bedroom dwelling. The
    Council state that the proposed ‘Sheffield’ style cycle storage provision would not
    be sufficiently secure or enclosed and would not therefore promote a modal shift or
    reduce opportunities for theft or anti-social behaviour. The provision of enclosed

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011324


       cycle storage would be appropriate in this regard, but I see no reason why this
       could not be secured by a suitably worded planning condition which would be
       reasonable and necessary to make the development acceptable. Subject to this
       condition, the proposal would be in line with the aims of Local Plan Policies 58 and
       61 insofar as they seek a shift to active transport modes and to improve
       community safety.
12. Policy 66(k) sets out that a car-free agreement within legal agreements will be
    required, restricting new residents from accessing parking permits within existing
    Controlled Parking Zones (CPZs).
13. The appeal site is within a CPZ. Although it is in a highly accessible location close
    to shops and services, I note future occupiers of the dwelling may choose to park a
    vehicle on the highway for those occasions where a car would be preferable. The
    additional dwelling would therefore potentially add to existing parking stress within
    the CPZ should the future occupier(s) have a car. A planning obligation to restrict
    occupiers’ eligibility to apply for a parking permit would be an appropriate way to
    secure this mitigation.
14. In the absence of an obligation, the proposal would be contrary to Policies 60 and
    66 of the Loal Plan. Taken together, and amongst other things, these policies seek
    to support active travel, deliver car-free development to reduce car dominance in
    terms of congestion and excessive parking on the street, and require the car-free
    development to be secured through legal agreement.
Other Matters
15. The Council is satisfied that the proposal would be acceptable in relation to other
    matters, including its effect on the living conditions of neighbouring residents and
    compliance with the Nationally Described Space Standard, and I see no reason to
    disagree. Nevertheless, this carries neutral weight in the planning balance.
16. The appeal site falls within the 6.2km Zone of Influence of the Epping Forest SAC,
    which is protected under the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations
    2017 (as amended) (the Habitats Regulations). It is designated primarily for its
    value in respect of its deciduous woodlands and heathland. The SAC conservation
    objectives are to ensure that the integrity of the site is maintained or restored as
    appropriate, and ensure that the site contributes to achieving the Favourable
    Conservation Status of its Qualifying Features and Species.
17. The Council has identified two pathways of impact that are adversely affecting the
    health of the SAC, which are recreational impact from new residential development
    as well as air pollution. The appeal proposal would result in a net increase of one
    dwelling. Ordinarily it would be necessary for me as the Competent Authority in the
    context of this appeal, to carry out an Appropriate Assessment (AA) pursuant to
    the Habitats Regulations prior to securing any necessary mitigation. Regulation
    63(1) of the Habitats Regulations indicates that a requirement for an AA is only
    necessary where the competent authority is minded to grant permission for the
    proposal. As I am dismissing the appeal for other reasons, it is not necessary here
    for me to undertake an AA. I do not need to consider this matter further as it could
    not lead me to a different conclusion.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011324


Planning Balance
18. The proposal would provide an additional residential unit and it would be an
    efficient use of land on a small brownfield site, for which there is support within the
    Loal Plan and the Framework. The location of the proposal is highly accessible
    and there would be some limited socio-economic benefits through construction
    and subsequent spend in the local economy.
19. Taken together, the above benefits would be limited due to the small scale of
    development. They would not outweigh the harm I have identified to the character
    and appearance of the area, living conditions of future occupiers and harm to
    sustainable transport due to the absence of a legal agreement to secure car-free
    development.
Conclusion
20. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

L Francis
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
