 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 17 August 2026
 by K Winnard LL.B Hons Solicitor
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 28 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011143
 88 Trysull Road, Wolverhampton, WV3 7JF
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Florian against the decision of City of Wolverhampton Council.
 •   The application Ref is 26/00235/FUL.
 •   The development proposed is roof alterations, loft conversion and single storey extension with loft
     rooms.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. Whilst revised plans were submitted during the course of the application, on the
   information before me these were not considered by the Council. I have therefore
   made my decision on the plans originally submitted with the application.
3. There have been changes to the National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) since the determination of the planning application. Both parties have
   therefore been given the opportunity to comment on whether they are any
   implications for the appeal. I have had regard to the position of both parties in
   making my decision and in so doing I am satisfied that no party has been
   prejudiced by my consideration of this issue.
Main Issue
4. The main issue in the appeal is the effect of the development on the character and
   appearance of the host building and the area.
Reasons
5. The appeal property is a detached dwelling sited on a prominent corner plot at the
   junction of Trysull Road and Bamber Close in a predominantly residential area. It
   retains simple roof lines and a compact form, and is enclosed on its north eastern
   boundary with Bamber Close by substantial landscaping. This makes for a softly
   landscaped boundary which contrasts strongly with the otherwise suburban
   character of the area.
6. The proposed development would raise the height of the roof significantly, with a
   ridge orientated in the opposite direction to the existing and extending upwards to
   include dormer windows in the rear and roof lights in the front. Substantial bulk
   would be added to the roof plane which would, due to its prominent position, be

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6011143


    visible from both Trysull Road and Bamber Close. The addition of a side extension,
    rising to the eaves levels of the existing dwelling and incorporating rooflights and a
    rear dormer, would add to its bulk. The extensions and the rear dormers, by virtue
    of their scale and design would fail to achieve an appropriate degree of
    subservience to the host dwelling with the effect that the character and form of the
    original building would be lost.
7. The Council have expressed concern as to the potential loss of the landscaping at
   the northern eastern boundary of the appeal property. The hedge is substantial and
   would be likely, in my view, to be reduced at the least, if not partially removed in
   order to accommodate the side extension in the position proposed. The harm I
   have identified would become more apparent were the existing landscaping to be
   cut back or removed. On the information before me and my observations on site, I
   am not convinced that sufficient land would remain available to accommodate a
   landscaping scheme capable of adequately mitigating the visual effects of the
   proposal.
8. I appreciate that some aspects, but not all, of the development would adhere to
   parts of the Council’s Extensions to Houses Supplementary Planning Document No
   4 (SPD) such as rooflights instead of front dormers, and the retention of rear
   amenity space. However, achieving some criteria does not necessarily equate to an
   acceptable development and each site needs to be considered on its own merits.
   The SPD is clear that a primary aim for all development is that extensions should
   respect the design of the existing house and not stand out obviously as an
   extension, which would not be the case in this instance.
9. The proposal seeks to extend and refurbish the existing property as much as
   possible and allowing for an improvement in layout and room sizes, including the
   creation of loft accommodation, to create a more functional family house. The
   Framework is clear that substantial weight should be given to the benefits of a
   development proposal which creates additional floorspace. The appeal site is a
   street corner plot and the Framework indicates that it could be appropriate to have
   a larger building on a street corner plot which would not be consistent with the
   overall street scene. The Framework also provides that development within
   settlements should be approved unless adverse effects substantially outweigh the
   benefits.
10. Whilst the proposal would serve as an orientation feature to the streetscene, the
    overall combination of the roof alterations, rooflights and rear dormers would
    appear incongruous in the context of the streetscene which as a whole does not
    display such features. The Framework also requires that proposals should respond
    to their context so that they integrate and enhance their surroundings. Whilst
    innovation or change, especially where an increased scale of development is
    justified, is not precluded, the Framework is also clear that substantial weight
    should be given to compliance with relevant development plan policies when
    assessing design quality. For the reasons set out above, this would not be the case
    in this instance.
11. Therefore, for the above reasons, I conclude that the proposal would have an
    unacceptably harmful effect on the character and appearance of the host dwelling
    and the area. It would therefore conflict with Saved Policies D4, D7, and D8 of the
    Wolverhampton Unitary Development Plan (2006) which seeks to ensure that
    developments are of a height, scale and appearance that responds positively to the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
 Appeal Decision 6011143


    surroundings. It would also fail to comply with Policy ENV3 of the Black Country
    Core Strategy (2011) which promotes high quality design that is influenced by its
    context and to the overall design aims set out in the SPD.
12. Policy S4 of the Framework also refers to development taking place within
    settlements. S4(1) states that development proposals within settlements should be
    approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any
    adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in
    the Framework. Whilst there would be benefits flowing from the proposal including
    enhancement of the living accommodation for family needs and limited economic
    benefits, I consider that the total benefits would be substantially outweighed by the
    harms I have identified above.
13. For the above reasons I hereby dismiss the appeal.




K Winnard
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
