Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 20 August 2026
by Eleni Marshall BSc (hons) MSc FRICS FAAV MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011023
60 King Edward Road, Coventry, CV1 5BJ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
    to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Jagmohan Chaggar against Coventry City Council.
•   The application Ref is PL/2026/0000340/FUL.
•   The development proposed is change of use from dwellinghouse (C3) to 5-person house in multiple
    occupancy (C4) with erection of rear-facing dormer extension and single storey infill extension.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. Since the determination of this application the Government issued the new revised
   version of the National Planning Policy Framework 2026. On this occasion I do not
   consider there any need to revert to the main parties regarding this because the
   new policies for decision making do not substantially alter matters relating to the
   main issues which are the subject of this appeal.
3. I have utilised the Council’s description as I find it describes the proposal more
   appropriately than that on the application form.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are i) the principle of development, character of the area, housing
   choice and highway safety ii) residential amenity with regard to loss of light and
   sense of enclosure.
Reasons
5. The appeal site is a mid-terraced dwelling, located within a residential area, with a
   double-bayed frontage and two-storey outrigger to the rear. At the time of my site
   visit the property was undergoing building works with the property, internally,
   having been completely stripped out and uninhabitable. It is noted that the
   appellant applied for prior approval for the erection of a 6m extension
   (PL/2025/0002342/PAH) for which the Council deemed prior approval was not
   required, however, this had not been constructed at the time of my site visit.
Principle, character of the area, housing choice and highway safety
6. The appeal site is situated within the St Michael’s Ward to the east of Coventry City
   Centre which is a ward with an Article 4 Direction removing permitted development
   rights for the change of use from C3 (Dwelling Houses) to C4 (Small Homes in
   Multiple Occupancy). It is for this reason, therefore, that a formal grant of planning

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011023


     permission is required for the change of use. Coventry City Council Local Plan
     2017 (LP) Policy H11 outlines that the conversion of existing homes to large homes
     in multiple occupation (HMOs) will not be permitted in areas where the proposal
     would materially harm the matters listed within a) to d) inclusive. In addition to the
     LP Policies, the Council also has an adopted HMO Development Plan Document
     2023 (DPD) which confirms it is not the aim of the LP or the DPD to reduce overall
     HMO numbers or to stop further HMO proposals coming forward, but to ensure that
     potentially harmful concentrations do not arise which is where the choice of housing
     available no longer provides for the needs of different groups within the community.
7. The Council set out, in relation to DPD Policy HMO2, that within a 100-metre radius
   of the appeal site there is a concentration of HMOs equating to in the region of
   11.4%. This is, therefore, above the permissible 10% concentration referenced in
   DPD Policy HMO2. The appellant’s appeal argument does not challenge this. In
   addition, the objective of DPD Policy HMO3 is to prevent unacceptable adverse
   impacts on amenity to avoid exacerbation or creation of new concentrations. 63
   King Edward Road and 67 Coronation Road, located opposite and to the rear of the
   appeal site, are noted at the Council as being HMOs. The proposal would,
   therefore, result in the sandwiching of the property opposite the appeal site (67
   King Edward Road), and to the rear (65 Coronation Road) as per the definition of
   sandwiching outlined in the second bullet of DPD Policy HMO3. Again, the
   appellant’s appeal argument does not challenge this.
8. Based upon the above assessment, the principle of the change of use to a 5-
   person HMO would be unacceptable when assessed against the guidance set out
   within DPD Policies HMO2 and HMO3, respectively. The relevant policies, and
   guidance, seek to ensure potentially harmful concentrations, seek to prevent
   unacceptable adverse impacts on amenity as appropriate and maintain housing
   choice available for the needs of different groups. The first refusal reason also
   raises issue with regard to the proposed extensions in terms of their size and
   massing detrimentally impacting upon neighbouring residential amenity. For ease
   of reference, and efficiency, I will deal with matters relating to neighbouring
   residential amenity under the second main issue below.
9. The first refusal reason also refers to insufficient information having been provided
   to demonstrate lack of harm to highway safety as a result of increased demand for
   on-street parking. In this case, no parking survey has been provided to
   demonstrate that there is sufficient space in the locality to accommodate the
   additional demand for parking. At the time of my site visit there were parking
   spaces available in close proximity to the appeal site, however, my site visit was
   only a snapshot in time in the middle of a Thursday morning.
10. I also noted signs suggesting that the site stands within a restricted parking zone.
    The consultee comments confirm this and outline that occupants of HMOs are not
    eligible to apply for residents parking permits albeit they could park within the
    permit zone outside operating hours. The proposals would represent a net
    increase in parking demand, and a parking survey should reasonably be required to
    demonstrate where that additional demand could be accommodated without
    detrimental impact to highway safety. The appellant’s appeal argument does not
    challenge this. Based upon the evidence before me the proposal would be contrary
    to LP Policy AC3 which requires proposals to be assessed on the basis of parking
    standards set out in appendix 5.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
Appeal Decision 6011023


11. In relation to residential amenity of future occupiers of the appeal site, as a 5-
    person HMO, the proposed extensions (regardless of whether they were
    constructed as a result of a grant of planning permission or as a result of permitted
    development (prior approval not required)) would encroach on a significant
    proportion of the existing amenity space. The extensions within this proposal go
    beyond that within PL/2025/0002342/PAH due to the proposed infill section. The
    rear amenity space available to future occupants would extend to in the region of
    19 square meters which I consider to be insufficient for all the relevant amenities
    listed in DPD Policy HMO4 e) which seeks to include access to outdoor amenity
    space (which should, reasonably, be usable for five occupants in this case).
12. The proposal would be contrary to LP Policy H11 which seeks to avoid harm to the
    amenity value and living standards of future occupants of the property having
    specific regard to garden/amenity space as well as DPD Policy HMO1 which
    requires proposals to demonstrate there would be no demonstrably adverse impact
    on the character of the area by way of character (due to concentration and
    sandwiching), highway safety and parking.
Residential amenity
13. As outlined above, the first refusal reason made reference to the proposed
    extensions by way of their size and massing, detrimentally impacting upon the
    residential amenity of the adjoining neighbour. This issue is reiterated within the
    second refusal reason with specific regard to impact upon 58 and 62 King Edward
    Road respectively due to loss of light and sense of enclosure.
14. As noted above it is acknowledged that application PL/2025/002342/PAH resulted
    in the Council deeming prior approval was not required for the erection of a 6-metre
    extension. The appellant has shown on the plans the 6-metre extension in
    question, which has not been constructed, though it is noted that the extensions
    within this proposal also go beyond permitted development due to the infill section.
    The Council have assessed the proposed extension against the Householder
    Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document which has resulted in the
    conclusion that the proposed extensions would have an overbearing impact due to
    loss of outlook and result in a sense of enclosure within the rear garden of no. 58
    and 62 (King Edward Road), respectively.
15. Taking into account the relevant 45-degree line and 25-degree rules as
    appropriate, relative to the adjacent properties as appropriate, along with size of the
    proposed single storey infill extension (in relation to no. 58) the proposed
    extensions and alterations by virtue of their size and massing would result in
    unacceptable impact on the amenities of adjoining neighbours due to loss of light
    and sense of enclosure. The proposals, cumulatively, would be disproportionate to
    the plot and the dwelling itself as a result of utilisation of the rear amenity space.
16. Consent gained under a prior approval is not planning permission, however, the
    ability of the appellant to construct a single storey rear extension as set out within
    PL/2025/0002342/PAH cannot be ignored. If this appeal were to fail the appellant
    could reasonably construct the extension in question which would still result in
    similar impacts to no. 62 as the appeal proposal. Construction of the extension, for
    which prior approval was not required, is therefore now beyond the control of the
    Council. Although the possibility of a fallback position happening may be very
    slight, this is still sufficient to make the position a material consideration.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
Appeal Decision 6011023


17. In this case, application PL/2025/0002342/PAH clearly demonstrates the ability of
    the appellant, outside the scope of this appeal, to construct the single storey rear
    extension. It is acknowledged that the infill section, not forming part of the prior
    approval application, has been assessed as unacceptable on its own due to the
    impact upon no. 58 but overall, the previous prior notification should reasonably
    have formed a material consideration. Despite this, taking into account the fallback
    position by virtue of PL/2025/0002342/PAH, even if this were sufficient to support
    the proposal in terms of impact to no. 62 within the rear garden it would not
    overcome, or justify, the impact of the infill section with regard to no. 58.
18. The proposed rear dormer would be L-shaped projecting across the width of the
    roof space and onto the outrigger. The proposal does not meet the guidance set
    out within the design guide with regard to dormers (with the objective of that
    guidance seeking to ensure such proposals are proportionate in scale and
    subservient to the main roof). The appellant acknowledges that the proposal does
    not meet this guidance within their appeal argument. The dormer would dominate
    the rear roof scape and the roof lantern, protruding above the overall ridge, would
    result in a cumulatively poorly designed proposal which would fail to be subservient
    to the main roof, negatively impacting on the host dwelling and the character of the
    street scene. The proposal would fail to enhance the surrounding residential
    environment.
19. I note that the appellant outlines that dormer extensions have been undertaken
    along King Edward Road and that none of those have been subject to planning
    approval. Given that planning permission has not been granted for works of a
    similar scale, I do not find that the examples outlined suggest that the appeal
    proposal should be approved. Each case should be considered on its own merits.
    Whilst I acknowledge that the restricted space within the unconverted loft space
    means that a dormer constructed to be compliant with the guidance, set out within
    the design guide, would not be sufficient for the delivery of a converted loft space
    with a usable floor area – I do not find that this itself is justification for a large
    dormer which would fail to be subservient to the roof of the host dwelling.
20. Given that it is not possible to construct a usable space as a result of a dormer of
    an appropriate scale and size to accord with the guidance within the design guide,
    the principle of a dormer extension, of the nature proposed, is unacceptable and
    the size of such an extension would represent overdevelopment of the plot when
    considering the cumulative proposals before me. The proposal would be contrary
    to LP Policy DE1 which seeks to ensure development proposals respect and
    enhance their surroundings and positively contribute to the local identity and
    character of an area as well as being expected to respond to the physical context of
    the site and LP Policy H5 which seeks to ensure enhancement of the surrounding
    residential environment.
Conclusion
21. For the reasons outlined above, and taking into account all other matters raised, I
    conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

Eleni Marshall
INSPECTOR



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        4
