 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 5 August 2026
 by N McGurk BSc (Hons) MCD MBA MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 28 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011557
 34 Ashville Gardens, Pellon, Halifax, HX2 0PL
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr Shahid Hussain against the decision of Calderdale Metropolitan Borough
     Council.
 •   The application Ref is 26/00100/HSE.
 •   The development proposed is a retrospective 1.8 metre high boundary fence and gates.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. The development the subject of this appeal has already taken place.
3. There is a disagreement between the main parties as to the precise dimensions of
   the development. The Council’s delegated report records the fence as being
   2.007m high, whereas the appellant’s architectural drawing indicates a height of
   approximately 1.700m.
Main Issue
4. The main issue in this case is the effect of the development on the character and
   appearance of the area.
Reasons
5. The appeal property is an end of terrace dwelling within a residential area. It
   occupies a prominent position opposite a T-junction formed by a crescent along
   Ashville Gardens. Further, the opposite side of Ashville Gardens to the appeal
   property includes a large and open expanse of attractive public space, from which
   there are clear views towards the appeal property.
6. The surrounding area is characterised by a variety of boundary treatments,
   including walls, fencing, railings, hedging and vegetation. However, during my site
   visit, I observed that the treatments close to the appeal site predominantly comprise
   attractive hedgerows, low wooden fences and low stone walls; and that together
   with the presence of grass verges, street trees, small front gardens and public open
   space, these boundary treatments contribute positively to the area’s green and
   spacious qualities.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
    Appeal Decision 6011557


7. Also, these lower, attractive boundaries provide for views and glimpses of front
   gardens and the planting within them, contributing further to local character.
8. During my site visit, I noted that the development comprises a run of fencing in
   white rock-faced gravel board with a decorative balustrade topper, together with
   black metal double gates and a pedestrian gate, both incorporating a decorative
   acrylic pattern. The fence and gates sit forward of the dwelling, enclosing the front
   garden and appear as prominent visual features, widely visible from the
   surrounding area.
9. As noted above, the parties disagree as to the precise height of the fence, the
   Council recording 2.007m and the appellant’s architectural drawing indicating
   approximately 1.700m; the gates are recorded at between 1.800m and 1.981m on
   the parties’ respective figures.
10. However, having regard to my own observations, I do not consider it necessary to
    resolve this dispute precisely. Even adopting the lower height relied upon by the
    appellant, the fence and gates remain substantially taller and more solid than the
    low wooden fences, stone walls and vegetated boundaries that predominate in the
    immediate vicinity. Combined with the colour and decorative detailing of the gates
    and the light, textured appearance of the gravel board fencing, the development
    draws the eye as a prominent and unusually assertive feature relative to its
    surroundings, to the point of appearing as a stark, incongruous and unduly
    dominant feature.
11. This harmful effect is exacerbated by the development’s prominent siting, such that
    its scale, solidity and materials are widely visible, and by the marked contrast the
    development presents with the lower, greener and more open boundaries that
    otherwise prevail in the surrounding area.
12. Taking all of the above into account, I find that the development harms the
    character and appearance of the area, contrary to the National Planning Policy
    Framework and to Policy BT1 of the Local Plan1, which amongst other things,
    seeks to protect local character.
Other Matters
13. The appellant states that the fence section of the development could be reduced to
    a height of 1.2 metres. However, there is no substantive evidence before me to
    demonstrate that this would result in a form of development that would address the
    harm identified.
Conclusion
14. For the reasons given above, the appeal does not succeed.

N McGurk
INSPECTOR




1
    Calderdale Local Plan (2023).


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
