Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 August 2026
by J Bowyer BSc(Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 18 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011498
Woodstock House, Mole Street, Ockley, Surrey RH5 5PB
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
    planning permission under section 73 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) for
    the development of land without complying with conditions subject to which a previous planning
    permission was granted.
•   The appeal is made by David Jones against Mole Valley District Council.
•   The application Ref is MO/2026/00517.
•   The application sought planning permission for ‘erection of 2 No. dwellings following the demolition of
    the existing buildings on the site’ without complying with conditions attached to planning permission
    Ref MO/2021/1000/PLA, dated 19 November 2021.
•   The conditions in dispute are Nos 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10 and 11 which are listed, along with their reasons,
    in the attached Schedule 1: Disputed Conditions.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed and planning permission for ‘erection of 2 No. dwellings
   following the demolition of the existing buildings on the site’ without complying with
   conditions attached to planning permission Ref MO/2021/1000/PLA, dated
   19 November 2021 is refused.
Preliminary Matters
2. The appellant has confirmed that the application reference stated on the planning
   application form was an error and that the proposal relates to permission granted
   under application reference MO/2021/1000/PLA (‘the Original Permission’). This is
   the basis on which the Council considered the proposal and I have determined the
   appeal accordingly.
3. The Government published a revised version of the National Planning Policy
   Framework (‘the Framework’) in August 2026. The main parties have had the
   opportunity to address the change in written comments and I have determined the
   appeal having regard to the comments received and the updated Framework.
Background and Procedural Matters
4. The Council did not determine the application within the prescribed period. As part
   of the appeal, it has provided and officer report and statement which indicate that it
   would have refused the application. Following the lodging of the appeal however,
   the Council had no jurisdiction to determine the application and while the appellant
   suggests that the Council had published the application as ‘refused’, this does not
   constitute a formal decision.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011498


5. Under s73 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) (‘the Act’),
   planning permission may be granted for the development of land without complying
   with conditions subject to which a previous planning permission was granted.
   Where such an application is made retrospectively, s73A of the Act provides that
   permission may be granted including development already carried out without
   complying with some condition subject to which planning permission was granted.
6. In this case, Condition 2 of the Original Permission specified the approved plans. A
   number of other conditions included requirements for specified details to be
   submitted and approved either prior to the commencement of development, before
   above ground works commenced or prior to occupation. No application to
   discharge these conditions was made, although I saw that dwellings on the site
   were now occupied.
7. The appellant is now seeking to ‘vary’ Condition 2 of the Original Permission in
   order to substitute plans showing development which differs from the approved
   plans including in respect of the position of one of the dwellings and the form and
   appearance of both dwellings. For the most part, the changes reflect the
   development as-built on the site, although the Council notes that there are some
   differences including in the detail of fenestration. For the avoidance of doubt, I have
   considered the appeal on the basis of what is shown on the submitted plans save in
   respect of materials which are the subject of Condition 3.
8. As well as seeking revision to the approved plans, the appellant has provided
   details in respect of the matters subject of Conditions 3, 4, 5, 9, 10 and 11 for which
   they seek approval. Ultimately however, there is no power under s73/s73A of the
   Act to approve details reserved by conditions, and s73(2) of the Act requires only
   consideration of the question of what conditions a grant of planning permission
   should be subject to. Should the appellant wish to have the merits of the submitted
   schemes considered, it would have been necessary for an appeal to be submitted
   under s78(1)(b) of the Act. There is no such appeal before me.
9. In determining the appeal that is before me, I have therefore considered whether
   these disputed conditions satisfy requirements for conditions set out at Policy DM6
   of the Framework and continue to serve a useful planning purpose.
10. The appellant’s evidence additionally includes reference to Condition 12 of the
    Original Permission which essentially requires that space for vehicles to park and
    turn is provided in accordance with the approved plans and thereafter retained and
    maintained. However, the planning application form did not identify a request to
    vary or remove this condition. Moreover, the accompanying submissions refer to an
    access route to the development, and include a marked-up version of a location
    plan showing an access route in black which the appellant’s evidence suggests is
    partly new. No clear details of parking or turning within the site are provided. In
    practice, it therefore seems to me that the submission would more properly be
    considered as part of the proposal to ‘vary’ Condition 2. This is how the Council has
    considered the proposal and I have determined the appeal on the same basis.
11. S73(4) of the Act provides that s73 does not apply if the previous planning
    permission was granted subject to a condition as to the time within which the
    development was to be begun and that time has expired without the development
    having been begun. In this case, the Council considers that the as-built
    development differs materially from that approved under the Original Permission


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011498


     such that the development does not constitute lawful implementation of the Original
     Permission. In that situation, the Original Permission would have lapsed and there
     would be no valid extant permission to vary through the appeal scheme.
12. However, it is not within my remit in an appeal made under s78 of the Act to
    formally determine whether the Original Permission development has been lawfully
    implemented. My consideration of this appeal does not affect the issuing of a
    determination of lawfulness under s191 of the Act, and whether or not to pursue
    enforcement action against the existing development on the site would be a matter
    for the Council. Given too my findings on the main issues, I have not found it
    necessary to consider this matter further in my decision.
Main Issues
13. The main issues are:
      i) the effect of the proposed variation of Condition 2 on the character and
          appearance of the area; and
      ii) whether or not Conditions 3, 4, 5, 9, 10 and 11 satisfy the tests for
          conditions set out at Policy DM6 of the Framework and continue to serve a
          useful planning purpose.
Reasons
Condition 2
14. The appeal site is located within an area designated as ‘Countryside Beyond the
    Green Belt’ by the Mole Valley Local Plan 2024 (‘the LP’) where Policy EN2 of the
    LP provides that the rural character and largely undeveloped nature of the
    countryside will be protected for its own sake. It is also part of an Area of Great
    Landscape Value (‘AGLV’). The Council further advises that there is a proposal to
    extend the boundary of the Surrey Hills National Landscape which would
    encompass the appeal site. However, no decision to confirm the extension has yet
    been made. At the current time, the site is not within the National Landscape and I
    have considered the appeal on that basis.
15. For the most part, the area around the appeal site comprises open fields and
    woodland parcels, amongst which are occasional isolated properties or clusters of
    buildings which are generally in residential or agricultural uses. Buildings are of
    typically traditional rural vernacular style and materials with pitched or hipped tiled
    roofs and brick, tile hanging or render finishes common. As a result, there is a
    distinctly rural quality to this part of the countryside which I find contributes
    positively to the landscape character and scenic beauty of the AGLV.
16. The appeal proposal would continue to provide two dwellings on the site as was
    approved under the Original Permission. The alterations now proposed include a
    change to the position of Unit 1. Given however that it remains within the red line
    boundary established by the Original Permission and in relatively close proximity to
    former buildings on the site, I agree with the Council that this change would not in
    itself adversely affect the undeveloped character of the countryside over and above
    the Original Permission development. Changes to the design of the front gables
    would also be minor and I agree with the Council that this element would be
    acceptable.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011498


17. However, the Original Permission indicated that the development would have
    shared access from the highway with Woodstock House via a relatively short
    connection from the main part of the site to the existing driveway to this property. In
    contrast, the access route now indicated would extend from the east side of the
    main part of the site before running north along the boundary with Volvens Farm to
    join the driveway significantly closer to the highway. Much of this route would fall
    outside of the red line boundary established by the Original Permission.
18. Moreover, while the appellant’s evidence suggests that the route existed and was
    used before the present development, use is referred to as occasional and to allow
    tractor and bailer access or for cesspit cleaning. The appellant comments that the
    route was part shingle and became heavily overgrown, and aerial photographs
    within the evidence of both the Council and the appellant certainly suggest that any
    route did not stand out against the surrounding undeveloped field. Even if it follows
    a route that has historically been used for occasional access, the development now
    proposed results in a significant length of new surfacing between the site and the
    driveway to Woodstock House which the appellant accepts is now much more
    clearly visible. This would be significantly more urbanising than the short
    connection to the existing driveway approved through the Original Permission and
    would in my assessment harm the rural character and largely undeveloped nature
    of the countryside here.
19. In addition, the Original Permission development included two dormers to the south
    roofslope of Unit 1 and the west roofslope of Unit 2. However, as small, pitched roof
    features of limited width which were positioned significantly below the ridge and
    back from the elevation below, these would form very modest features in the host
    roofslopes. Under the appeal proposal, the dormers would be replaced by large,
    flat-roof features of significant height, width and depth with no meaningful set down
    or set back from the elevation below. They each have considerable bulk and mass,
    the appearance of which is further increased by the very wide cheeks around the
    windows. As a result, the dormers are highly dominant features against the host
    roof. They cause the dwellings to appear top-heavy and unbalanced and the
    addition of significant bulk and mass to the upper level significantly exacerbates the
    visual presence of the dwellings and their effect on the openness and undeveloped
    quality of the countryside here. Moreover, the scale, flat-roof design and bulky
    cheeks of the dormers gives them a notably suburban quality which sits awkwardly
    and unsympathetically against the design of the dwellings and their rural context.
20. I find as a result that the dormers are incongruous and disproportionate additions
    which are urbanising and which detract notably from the character and appearance
    of the dwellings and the rural quality of the area with consequent detriment to the
    character and scenic beauty of the AGLV. The site is set back from Mole Street, but
    there are some views of the development from the street, and it is more prominent
    in views from nearby footpaths. The adverse effects of the development would
    therefore be publicly appreciable.
21. In reaching this view, I have noted the appellant’s reference to examples of
    permissions granted for dormers or prominent roof forms. Very limited detail is
    provided, but it appears from the appended photographs that these sit within
    built-up areas. The surrounding context is therefore markedly different to the appeal
    site which sits within countryside. These examples may be more visible from the
    street scene, but their circumstances are not therefore directly comparable to the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6011498


     appeal proposal and they do not in my view offer meaningful support for the
     development before me.
22. Taking the above matters together, I conclude that the proposed variation of
    Condition 2 would cause unacceptable harm to the rural character and appearance
    of the area in conflict with Policy EN2 of the LP. There would also be conflict with
    Policies EN4 and EN8 of the LP insofar as they include requirements for high
    quality design which makes a positive contribution to local character, development
    of an appropriate scale, height, massing, proportion and form and which does not
    harm the distinctive character or scenic beauty of the AGLV.
Conditions 3, 4, 5, 9, 10 and 11
23. Framework Policy DM6 outlines that planning conditions should only be attached
    where they are necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms,
    relevant to the development and to planning considerations generally, sufficiently
    precise to make them capable of being complied with and enforced and reasonable
    in all other respects.
24. The reasons given for Conditions 3, 4, 5, 9, 10 and 11 broadly relate to ensuring
    that the development is acceptable in terms of its effects on the character and
    appearance of the area, living conditions, flood risk, and climate change and
    sustainability. There is no compelling evidence before me that these matters would
    no longer be relevant to the development and to planning considerations generally.
    Nor that any of the conditions would be insufficiently precise.
25. The remaining requirements of Policy DM6 of the Framework are that conditions
    are necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms and
    reasonable in all other respects.
     Condition 3
26. Condition 3 relates to details of external materials. Given the significant effect that
    materials can have on the character and appearance of a building and area and
    from the information before me, I consider that control over external materials as
    sought by Condition 3 is necessary and reasonable.
27. Moreover, details submitted by the appellant indicate timber cladding to the walls of
    the dwellings which would be kept in its natural finish and a dark synthetic slate
    roof. Weatherboarding is often found in rural areas. However, while dark roofs may
    not in themselves be uncharacteristic and I have noted examples cited by the
    appellant of approvals given for slate roofs, I saw that the synthetic slate at the
    appeal site has a somewhat shiny quality and a flatness which results in a clearly
    artificial appearance. This notably distinguishes it from natural slate and is
    markedly at odds with the traditional materials that are typical nearby and the clay
    tiles that were indicated on the plans approved under the Original Permission.
28. In my assessment, the roof material appears conspicuous and out of place in the
    rural area and AGLV and would be contrary to requirements in Policies EN4 and
    EN8 of the LP for high quality design which makes a positive contribution to local
    character and which does not harm the distinctive character or scenic beauty of the
    AGLV. It is also contrary to the Framework insofar as it includes requirements for
    proposals to respond to context so that they integrate with and enhance their
    surroundings; and to create visually attractive, distinctive and characterful


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6011498


     development to establish or maintain a strong sense of place including through a
     coherent palette of materials.
29. I am not therefore satisfied that the indicated roofing material would be acceptable
    and the details provided as part of the appeal do not lead me to find that Condition
    3 of the Original Permission is no longer necessary or reasonable.
     Condition 4
30. Condition 4 relates to the details of hard surfacing within the site. Given the
    potential for significant effects on the character and appearance of an area or
    implications for flooding and drainage and from the information before me, I
    consider that control over hard surfacing as sought by Condition 4 is necessary and
    reasonable.
31. Moreover, details submitted by the appellant refer to the completed development as
    incorporating grassed areas, shingle surfacing, York stone patio areas and retained
    hardstanding. The Council does not raise concerns with these materials in
    principle, and based on my observations, they would be generally appropriate to
    their context.
32. However, I consider that it would be necessary to require that hard surfacing is
    retained in accordance with any approved details as is the case under the terms of
    Condition 4 currently in order to ensure that there would not be changes which
    might result in adverse effects. No clear plan illustrating the locations and types of
    hard surfacing on the site has been provided and without this, there is an
    unacceptable lack of clarity about details of hard surfacing on the site. It would not
    therefore be possible to properly secure retention of hard surfacing in accordance
    with approved details.
33. The details provided as part of the appeal do not therefore lead me to find that
    Condition 4 of the Original Permission is no longer necessary or reasonable.
     Condition 5
34. Condition 5 relates to details of surface water drainage at the site. The appellant
    has not argued that the condition would in principle be unnecessary, and I consider
    it reasonable to ensure that sufficient details of drainage are provided to enable
    assessment of whether the provision would be adequate and appropriate having
    regard to the requirements of LP Policy INF3 for development to avoid, reduce or
    mitigate flood risk.
35. Details submitted by the appellant suggest that drainage infrastructure has been
    installed serving both dwellings and that surface water is directed to an existing
    drainage ditch serving the wider site. However, while a very small scale plan has
    been provided marking storm drains and a ditch and I note comments highlighting a
    reduction in hard surfacing, technical details of the installed features are limited and
    no performance calculations or assessment of the capacity of the ditch to
    accommodate flows have been provided. Notwithstanding the appellant’s assertion
    that the drainage system has been functioning following construction and
    successfully accommodated significant rainfall events without flooding, it is not
    therefore possible to determine that the drainage would function effectively in all
    design storm events. Nor is there any information on measures to prevent pollution
    to receiving ground and/or surface water as is required by Condition 5 currently.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6011498


36. The details provided as part of the appeal do not therefore lead me to find that
    Condition 5 of the Original Permission is no longer necessary or reasonable to
    ensure that there would not be unacceptable flood risk or drainage effects arising
    from the development.
     Condition 9
37. Condition 9 relates to details of measures to reduce carbon emissions of predicted
    energy use by at least 10% through on-site decentralised and renewable or low
    carbon energy sources. The appellant has not argued that the condition or its
    requirements would in principle be unnecessary or unreasonable, and I consider
    from the information before me that it would continue to serve a useful planning
    purpose in ensuring suitable measures to mitigate climate change as now sought
    by Policy EN13 of the LP.
38. The details submitted by the appellant refer to insulation of 150mm thickness and
    installation of air source heat pumps to each dwelling which have Ofgem approval. I
    have noted the specifications of the heat pumps and have no firm reason to doubt
    that these measures would contribute to sustainability objectives. However, while
    the appellant’s final comments included a Building Regulations England Part L
    Compliance Report, the declarations have not been completed and it covers only
    one of the dwellings. The details submitted do not therefore fulfil the requirements
    of the condition to demonstrate a reduction in carbon emissions of predicted energy
    use by at least 10% which I have no firm reason to find would no longer be
    reasonable or necessary.
39. The details provided as part of the appeal do not therefore lead me to find that
    Condition 9 of the Original Permission is no longer necessary or reasonable.
     Condition 10
40. Condition 10 relates to details of boundary treatment. Given the potential effects of
    boundary treatment on the character and appearance of the area and implications
    for living conditions and from the information before me, I consider that control over
    boundary treatment as sought by Condition 10 is necessary and reasonable.
41. Moreover, the details submitted by the appellant include a plan which is said to show
    a beech hedge between Woodstock House and the development, and trees to screen
    the site from neighbouring property. However, the plan shows 15 trees positioned
    towards the boundary with the neighbouring Volvens Farm as well as a tree within
    the main part of the site which may represent an existing large tree that I observed at
    my visit. This is inconsistent with the written submission which refers to 19 Lombardy
    Poplar, 5 Silver Birch and 4 Chestnut trees. The level of tree planting is accordingly
    unclear and no details of species are shown on the plan. The detail of what
    landscaping is actually proposed to provide boundary treatment is therefore
    ambiguous. In addition, while the appellant advises that approval for picket fencing is
    sought, no firm details of the location or design of such fencing have been provided.
42. I therefore consider that there remains an unacceptable lack of clarity about details
    of boundary treatment on the site and the details before me do not lead me to find
    that Condition 10 of the Original Permission is no longer necessary or reasonable.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6011498


     Condition 11
43. Condition 11 relates to provision for electric vehicle charging with fast charge
    sockets. The appellant has not argued that the condition or its requirements would
    in principle be unnecessary or unreasonable, and I consider from the information
    before me that it would continue to serve a useful planning purpose in addressing
    requirements outlined at Policy INF2 of the LP.
44. The details submitted by the appellant indicate that electric vehicle charging has
    been installed and I note that the Local Highway Authority has now advised that the
    details would comply with the requirements of Condition 11. However, I have noted
    above that there is no power under s73/s73A of the Act to approve details reserved
    by conditions.
45. Moreover, I consider that it would be necessary to require that charging
    infrastructure is retained and maintained in accordance with approved details as is
    currently the case under the terms of Condition 11 in order to ensure that there
    remains provision in accordance with the development plan. However, the charging
    has been installed in locations alongside the development as built and I have found
    under the first main issue that the differences from the Original Permission that
    would result from the variation of Condition 2 cause unacceptable harm to the rural
    character and appearance of the area.
46. The installed electric vehicle charging infrastructure may in itself be acceptable, but
    insofar as the variation of Condition 2 which includes changes to the position of one
    of the dwellings would not be acceptable, I am not satisfied that it would be
    appropriate to vary Condition 11 to require that electric vehicle charging as has
    been installed is retained and maintained.
47. The details before me do not therefore lead me to find that Condition 11 of the
    Original Permission is no longer necessary or reasonable.
     Conclusion on Main Issue
48. I acknowledge the information submitted by the appellant in respect of Conditions
    3, 4, 5, 9, 10 and 11 and that they have sought to provide additional clarification
    where it was requested. For the reasons above however, I find in the
    circumstances of this appeal that these conditions remain reasonable and
    necessary.
49. Given too my findings on the first main issue, I do not consider that it would be
    appropriate to allow the appeal and impose varied versions of conditions 3, 4, 5, 9,
    10 or 11 referring either to the submitted details or updated requirements for
    submission of outstanding technical details. In this case, imposing such conditions
    would not make the overall development applied for acceptable.
50. Overall, I conclude that conditions 3, 4, 5, 9, 10 and 11 satisfy the tests for
    conditions set out at Policy DM6 of the Framework and continue to serve a useful
    planning purpose in accordance with requirements of Policies EN4, EN8, EN13,
    INF2 and INF3 of the LP.
Other Matters
51. The appellant advises that the proposal results from their having misunderstood
    parts of the planning process and that there was no attempt to avoid the planning

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6011498


     system. I have no firm reason to doubt this, nor that the appellant sought to work
     positively with the Council and respond to requests for information. However, these
     are not factors which alter my assessment of the planning merits of the proposal.
Planning Balance
52. I have found that the proposed variation of Condition 2 would cause unacceptable
    harm to the character and appearance of the area and would conflict with Policies
    EN2, EN4 and EN8 of the LP. Disputed Conditions 3, 4, 5, 9, 10 and 11 also satisfy
    the tests for conditions set out at Policy DM6 of the Framework and continue to
    serve a useful planning purpose in accordance with requirements of Policies EN4,
    EN8, EN13, INF2 and INF3 of the LP. From the information before me, the relevant
    parts of these policies of the LP would be broadly consistent with the Framework
    and I have no firm reason to reduce the weight that I afford to them. Taking these
    matters together, I find that the proposal would conflict with the development plan
    when it is read as a whole.
53. The appeal site is located outside of any settlement where Policy S5 of the
    Framework indicates that only certain forms of development which are listed at
    S5(1.) should be approved. It continues that these forms of development should be
    approved, unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any
    adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in
    the Framework.
54. Even if I were to find that the proposal would be a form of development listed at
    Policy S5(1.), the adverse effects of the proposal on the character and appearance
    of the area would be contrary to national decision-making policies in the
    Framework. In particular, requirements within Policy DP3 for proposals to respond
    to context so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings; and to create
    visually attractive, distinctive and characterful development to establish or maintain
    a strong sense of place.
55. On the other hand, the appellant advises that the dwellings are not speculative
    development and are intended to provide homes for family. Be that as it may, the
    proposal would not deliver additional dwellings beyond what was previously
    approved under the Original Permission. I also note a comment that the access
    under the Original Permission was unworkable and would have presented danger
    to children due to sight lines. However, no firm evidence has been provided to
    substantiate this assertion or indicate that issues could not be resolved, for
    example by some form of low-level boundary along the access.
56. The Council does not argue that the access route now proposed would be harmful
    to highway safety and I have no firm basis to disagree or to doubt the appellant’s
    assertion that the route is practical and safe. I am also satisfied that there would not
    be unacceptable harm to neighbouring living conditions or harm to the significance
    of heritage assets. However, these are neutral factors which do not weigh in favour
    of the proposal.
57. From the information before me, I do not find clear evidence to demonstrate that
    the proposal would offer meaningful benefits beyond those which would have been
    delivered through the Original Permission. In that context, I find that the benefits of
    the proposal would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
Appeal Decision 6011498


58. Material considerations do not therefore indicate that a decision should be made
    other than in accordance with the development plan.
Conclusion
59. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

J Bowyer
INSPECTOR


                                           Schedule 1: Disputed Conditions
Condition 2

The development hereby permitted shall be carried out and completed in all respects
strictly in accordance with the submitted documents and plan numbers
210212_R2_001_r.0 Rev R.0, 210212_R1_200_r.0 Rev R.0 and 210212_R1_201_r.0
Rev R.0 contained within the application and no variations shall take place.

Reason: To accord with the terms of the submitted application and to ensure minimal
impact on local amenity and the environment in accordance with Mole Valley Core
Strategy policy CS14 and Mole Valley Local Plan policy ENV22
Condition 3

Before any above ground works commence, details of the materials to be used in the
construction of the external surfaces of the development hereby permitted shall be
submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. Development
shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details.

Reason: To ensure the development harmonises with its surroundings in accordance
with Mole Valley Local Plan policy ENV22 and policy CS14 of the Mole Valley Core
Strategy.
Condition 4

Before any above ground works commence, details of the hard surfacing to be used
within the site shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
Authority. The details shall indicate either porous materials or the provision of a direct
run-off from the hard surface to a permeable or porous area. All hard surfacing shall be
carried out in accordance with the approved details, completed prior to the first
occupation of the development hereby permitted and thereafter, permanently retained
as such.

Reason: To preserve the visual amenity of the area and prevent the increased risk of
flooding, in accordance with Mole Valley Local Plan policy ENV25 and policies CS14
and CS20 of the Mole Valley Core Strategy.
Condition 5

Prior to the commencement of the development hereby permitted, surface water
drainage details shall be submitted for the approval in writing by the Local Planning

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           10
Appeal Decision 6011498


Authority. Such details shall include an assessment of the potential for the disposal of
surface water by means of a sustainable drainage system in accordance with the
principles set out in the National Planning Policy Framework.

The assessment shall provide information of the design storm period and intensity
(typically a 1 in 100 year storm of 30 minutes duration with an allowance for climate
change), the method employed to delay and control the surface water discharged from
the site and the means to prevent pollution of the receiving groundwater and/or surface
water. Where applicable, the details shall include infiltration tests, calculations and
controlled discharge rates. If the development is to discharge water into the ground in
any form, then a full BRE Digest 365 infiltration test (or falling head test for deep bore
soakaways) will have to be submitted to the Local Planning Authority prior to
commencement of any works on site. The suitability of infiltration methods should be
verified (i.e. possible contaminated ground).

The approved drainage scheme shall be implemented prior to the first occupation of the
development

Reason: The Local Planning Authority is satisfied that it is fundamental to the
development permitted to address this issue before development commences and that
without this safeguard planning permission should not be granted and, in the interests
of sustainable development, in accordance with the advice contained in the National
Planning Policy Framework and policy CS20 of the Mole Valley Core Strategy.
Condition 9

Prior to any above ground works commencing, details to reduce the carbon emissions
of the predicted energy use of the development hereby permitted by at least 10%
through the on-site installation and implementation of decentralised and renewable or
low-carbon energy sources shall be submitted and approved by the Local Planning
Authority and be implemented prior to the first occupation of the development.

Reason: To optimise renewable energy and its conservation, in accordance with policy
CS19 of the Mole Valley Core Strategy.
Condition 10

No occupation of the development hereby permitted shall take place until there has
been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority a plan
indicating the positions, design, materials and type of boundary treatment to be
erected/retained. The boundary treatment shall be completed prior to the first
occupation of the development, shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
details and thereafter permanently retained as such.

Reason: To preserve the visual amenity of the area and protect neighbouring
residential amenities in accordance with Mole Valley Local Plan policy ENV22 and
policy CS14 of the Mole Valley Core Strategy.
Condition 11

The development hereby approved shall not be occupied unless and until each of the
proposed dwelling(s) are provided with a fast charge socket (current minimum


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   11
Appeal Decision 6011498


requirements - 7 kw Mode 3 with Type 2 connector - 230v AC 32 Amp single phase
dedicated supply) in accordance with a scheme to be submitted and approved in writing
by the Local Planning Authority and thereafter retained and maintained to the
satisfaction of the Local Planning Authority. The charging provision shall thereafter be
permanently retained as such.

Reason: To accord with the sustainability objectives of the NPPF.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   12
