Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 2 September 2026 by Ellie Nutman BA (Hons)
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011567
Unit 16, Wesley Square, Goole DN14 5DE
•   The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
    Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
    consent.
•   The appeal is made by Wildstone Estates Limited against the decision of East Riding of Yorkshire
    Council.
•   The application Ref is 26/00405/PAD.
•   The advertisement proposed is removal of one poster advertisement and upgrade of existing 48
    sheet advert to support digital poster.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Main Issue
3. The control of advertisements is exercisable only with respect to amenity and public
   safety. These are the main issues of the appeal with, in respect of the former,
   specific regard to the Goole Conservation Area (CA). The development plan is not
   determinative, but a material consideration relevant to the consideration of effect.
Reasons for the Recommendation
Amenity
4. The significance of the CA derives in part from its origins as a planned nineteenth-
   century inland port settlement established by the Aire and Calder Canal Company.
   It is an important example of early planned urban development, with an historic
   street pattern, nineteenth-century buildings, and the distinctive townscape created
   through its layout and architectural detailing. The appeal building is nodal and
   obviously modern in a mix of yellow brick tones with contrasting banding. It is on
   the corner of Edinburgh Street and the pedestrianised Boothferry Road and in use
   as a restaurant. The elevation concerned is blank, save for two large poster style
   billboards. The evidence suggests these are not consented.
5. The building is not of any evident historic value. The blank brick elevation that
   would host the scheme does not contribute a great deal to the CA’s significance.
   That said, advertising in the immediate town centre area is markedly understated

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011567


     and limited, in the main, to ground floor commercial fascia signage. This gives
     adverts a recessive presence in the street scenes of the local area, allowing clearer
     appreciation and legibility of some of the more historic architecture both along
     Boothferry Road and Mariners Street.
6. On the understanding the existing adverts are not lawful, the scheme would
   introduce a large and high mounted digital display which, over and above even the
   existing ones should they be taken into account, would present as obvious and
   visually intrusive, detrimentally affecting the immediate area’s historic townscape
   and the quality of its consistency where less obvious advertising is concerned.
7. Whilst luminance levels, digital imagery and changing displays could be controlled
   through planning conditions, the scheme would nevertheless remain a prominent
   feature during periods of darkness and would draw attention to itself to a greater
   degree than the existing situation. With this and the above in mind, the proposal
   would unacceptably affect the significance of the CA, failing to either preserve or
   enhance its character or appearance.
8. Having regard to the separation distance between the appeal site and the grade II
   listed Police Station, the presence of intervening buildings and structures and the
   location and orientation of the proposed display, there would be very limited
   intervisibility. There would not therefore be an adverse effect on the setting of a
   listed building. The introduction of a digital poster would nonetheless have a
   harmful impact on amenity, thus failing an assessment of such against the
   regulations.
9. As far as they are material, this would not meet with the aims of Policies ENV1 and
   ENV3 of the East Riding Local Plan Strategy Document Update 2025 (LP), which
   require proposals to respect the diverse character and appearance of the area
   through their design, and seek to support proposals that positively and proactively
   conserve and enhance the East Riding’s historic environment and heritage assets.
Public Safety
10. The appeal site occupies a gateway location opposite Goole Railway Station and
    adjacent Wesley Square Shopping Centre. The two areas are connected by a
    signal-controlled pedestrian crossing immediately beside the site.
11. The crux of the Council's concerns relate principally to the submitted reference to a
    luminance level of 5000 candella per square metre. However, the evidence before
    me indicates that this figure represents the maximum daytime capability of the
    display rather than its operational brightness at all times. The display would be
    controlled by ambient light sensors and illumination levels would vary according to
    prevailing conditions, with a substantially lower level during hours of darkness. The
    display would show only static advertisements with instantaneous transitions at
    intervals of no less than 10 seconds.
12. Whilst the information submitted during the application process appears to have
    given rise to some misunderstanding regarding the proposed levels, I am not
    persuaded that the display would result in unacceptable distraction or hazard to
    highway users with the appellant’s assurances and the controls that can be
    asserted in mind. Subject to appropriately worded conditions controlling levels and
    the manner in which advertisements are displayed, the scheme would be
    acceptable on public safety grounds.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011567


13. Insofar as they are material, this would satisfy Policies ENV1 and EC4 of the LP
    which require proposals to promote equality of safe movement for all within the site,
    including access, egress and minimising highway safety risks.
Other Matters
14. Whilst the cited examples demonstrate that digital advertisements may be
    acceptable in some locations, for the reasons I have explained above, in regard to
    the first main issue, they would not be here. My assessment has had regard to the
    specific characteristics of the appeal site and the effect of the scheme with regard
    to the significance of the CA.
Conclusion and Recommendation
15. For the reasons given above, the scheme would fail an assessment against the
    aforementioned regulations. My findings on the second main issue would be a lack
    of harm and would not make the scheme acceptable. I therefore recommend that
    the appeal should be dismissed.

Ellie Nutman
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
16. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
