Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by J Buxton BA(Hons) DipArch ARB RIBA
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011217
Four Winds, The Common, Melbourne DE73 8DH
•        The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
         against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•        The appeal is made by Mr David Westwood against the decision of South Derbyshire District
         Council.
•        The application reference is DMPA/2026/0030.
•        The development proposed is permission in principle for the erection of a self-build dwelling.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and permission in principle is granted for the erection of
   residential development comprising a minimum of one and a maximum of one
   dwelling at Four Winds, The Common, Melbourne DE73 8DH in accordance
   with the terms of the application, reference DMPA/2026/0030, dated 4 January
   2026.
Preliminary Matters
2. The Government published a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) on 17 August 2026. The main parties were provided with an
   opportunity to comment. I have had regard to the 2026 version of the
   Framework in my decision and references hereafter relate to the new version.
3. The proposal is for Permission in Principle (PiP). Planning Practice Guidance
   (PPG) advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission
   for housing-led development. The PiP consent route has 2 stages: the first
   stage (or PiP stage) establishes whether a site is suitable in-principle, and the
   second (Technical Details Consent) stage is when the detailed development
   proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first of these 2 stages.
4. The description of development in the banner heading has been taken from the
   description of development in the application form. The PiP procedure requires
   the minimum and maximum number of dwellings to be specified. I have,
   therefore, included the words minimum and maximum numbers in my formal
   decision.
5. The application form also indicates that PiP is sought for a self-build dwelling.
   However, as there is no mechanism before me that would secure the delivery
   of the development as a self-build dwelling, I have determined the appeal on
   the basis of residential development comprising a minimum of one and a
   maximum of one dwelling, rather than a self-build dwelling.

    1
        PPG Permission in Principle Paragraph: 012 Reference ID:58-012-20180615

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011217


6. The scope of the considerations for PiP is limited to location, land use and the
   amount of development permitted1. All other matters are considered as part of
   a subsequent Technical Details Consent application if PiP is granted. I have
   determined the appeal accordingly and treated any details related to a
   Technical Details Consent as being illustrative only. There is no disagreement
   between the parties with regard to land use and amount of development and
   so my deliberations centre on whether the site is a suitable location for the
   proposed development.
Main Issue
7. Taking into account the above, the main issue is whether the site is a suitable
   location for the proposed development.
Reasons
8. The appeal site forms part of the residential curtilage associated with Four
   Winds, located on The Common to the west of Melbourne. The site lies outside
   the defined settlement boundary of Melbourne and comprises part of the
   existing side garden serving the dwelling. The land is bounded by established
   vegetation, the gardens of the existing property and woodland. Direct access
   from The Common to the site is available via the driveway to the Four Winds.
Suitable location
9. Policy H1 of the South Derbyshire Local Plan Part 1 (SDLP P1) directs housing
   growth to the district’s most sustainable settlements. Whilst Melbourne is
   identified as a Key Service Village, the appeal site lies outside its defined
   settlement boundary and therefore within the Rural Areas. In addition, Policies
   SDT1 and BNE5 of the South Derbyshire Local Plan Part 2 (SDLP P2) and
   Policy DP1 of the Melbourne Neighbourhood Plan (NP) seek to direct
   development to defined settlements and restrict inappropriate development in
   the Rural Areas. As the proposal would result in an additional dwelling outside
   Melbourne’s settlement boundary, it conflicts with the spatial strategy of the
   development plan. There is no substantive evidence before me that leads me to
   a different conclusion.
10. Policy BNE5 also identifies a number of forms of development that may be
    acceptable within Rural Areas, including infill development within small gaps in
    otherwise substantially developed frontages. The Council's reason for refusal
    states that the proposal does not fall within any of the categories of
    development supported by the policy and does not amount to acceptable infill.
    Having regard to the appeal site's position within the side garden of Four Winds
    and its relationship to the surrounding pattern of development, I agree that the
    proposal does not fall within the category of infill development envisaged by
    Policy BNE5(iv). Nor is there evidence before me that the proposal would fall
    within any of the other forms of development expressly identified by that policy.
    Consequently, I find that the proposal does not accord with the forms of
    development envisaged by Policy BNE5 for the Rural Areas.
11. Nevertheless, Policy BNE5 also seeks to ensure that development within the
    Rural Areas does not unduly affect landscape character and quality. Whilst
    detailed considerations of design and layout fall beyond the scope of this PiP
    appeal, I have had regard to the physical characteristics of the site in assessing

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011217


     its suitability for residential development. The site forms part of the established
     domestic curtilage of Four Winds and is enclosed by existing garden land and
     vegetation. Consequently, the proposal would be contained within an existing
     residential plot and would not extend into the wider countryside. Nor is there
     persuasive evidence that it would erode an important gap between groups of
     dwellings or otherwise harm the character and setting of Melbourne. I am
     therefore satisfied that the proposal would have little effect on rural character
     and would not materially undermine the landscape objectives of Policy BNE5.
12. Drawing these matters together, whilst the proposal would have limited effect on
    rural character, it would nevertheless result in an additional dwelling outside the
    defined settlement boundary of Melbourne. As such, it conflicts with Policy H1 of
    the SDLP P1, Policies SDT1 and BNE5 of the SDLP P2 and Policy DP1 of the
    NP, which seek to direct housing development to sustainable locations within
    defined settlements and restrict inappropriate development in the Rural Areas.
Other Matters
13. Derbyshire Wildlife Trust raises no objection to the principle of development but
    recommends that ecological assessment work be undertaken at the Technical
    Details Consent stage. Likewise, the County Archaeologist and Environmental
    Health Officer raise no objections in principle. These matters do not alter my
    conclusion on the suitability of the site.
14. I have also had regard to concerns regarding the effect of the proposed
    development on the character and appearance of the area, residential amenity,
    drainage, biodiversity and access arrangements. However, these detailed
    matters would be considered through any subsequent Technical Details
    Consent application and as such they do not materially affect my assessment.
Planning Balance
15. Policy S3 of the Framework states that decisions on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. As the site is
    located outside of a settlement, Policy S3 states that Policy S5 is applicable.
16. Policy S5(1)(d) of the Framework indicates that development proposals outside
    of settlements involving the redevelopment of previously developed land should
    be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed
    by any adverse effects, when assessed against the decision-making policies of
    the Framework.
17. The appellant contends that the appeal site falls within the Framework definition
    of previously developed land, a position disputed by the Council. The
    Framework defines previously developed land as including the curtilage of
    developed land, subject to specified exclusions. Whilst the site forms part of a
    residential garden, the exclusion relating to residential gardens applies only
    within built-up areas. As the site lies outside the defined settlement boundary
    and there is no evidence before me that it forms part of a built-up area, that
    exclusion is not engaged. Accordingly, I find that the site comprises previously
    developed land for the purposes of the Framework.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011217


18. Policy HO7 of the Framework states that the substantial weight should be given
    to the benefits of providing homes which contribute towards meeting identified
    housing needs. In this case, the proposal would provide a single dwelling.
    However, whilst limited in scale, the proposal would nevertheless make a
    meaningful contribution towards the Framework’s objective to support the
    delivery of a substantial increase in the supply of homes, and I attach
    substantial weight to this benefit.
19. The appellant also relies upon the self-build nature of the proposal and refers to
    Framework Policies HO1 and HO7, together with evidence of an identified
    shortfall in self-build plot provision within the district. However, the appeal before
    me is made in the form of PiP, which establishes only the location, land use and
    amount of development. It does not secure the identity of the future developer,
    the method of delivery or occupation of the dwelling. Consequently, there is no
    mechanism before me which would ensure that the development would come
    forward as a self-build dwelling. Whilst the proposal has the potential to
    contribute towards self-build provision, that benefit remains uncertain and I
    therefore attach only limited weight to it.
20. The appeal site is well related to Melbourne and benefits from established
    pedestrian connections to the village centre. The village contains a range of
    services and facilities capable of meeting day-to-day needs. I also noted that a
    bus stop is located immediately outside the site. Consequently, future occupiers
    would have opportunities to access services and facilities by a combination of
    walking and public transport. Whilst private car use would inevitably form part of
    travel patterns, I do not find that the site is isolated from services, facilities or
    public transport provision. This is also consistent with the conclusions of the
    Highway Authority, which raises no objection to the proposal in principle. This
    weighs in favour of the proposal.
21. The proposal would also generate temporary economic benefits during
    construction and a limited degree of ongoing support for local services through
    household expenditure. I attach limited weight to those benefits given the
    modest scale of the proposal.
22. Against these benefits, the proposal would result in an additional dwelling
    outside the defined settlement boundary. Consequently, it would conflict with
    development plan policies which seek to direct housing development to the
    most sustainable settlements and restrict inappropriate development in rural
    areas. I have had regard to the appellant's submissions concerning Annex A of
    the Framework. However, I find that Policies H1, SDT1, BNE5 and DP1 are not
    materially inconsistent with national decision-making policies of the Framework
    in that they seek to direct development to sustainable locations and support only
    certain forms of development outside settlements. Accordingly, I do not consider
    that Annex A reduces the weight to be afforded to those policies.
23. Nonetheless, given the site’s accessibility, its relationship with Melbourne, its
    previously developed status and the limited effect on rural character, I find that
    the harm arising from this conflict would be limited.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6011217


24. Taken together, I find that the benefits of the proposal would not be substantially
    outweighed by the adverse effects. Accordingly, the proposal satisfies the
    requirements of Policy S5(1)(d). In these circumstances, the Framework
    indicates that PiP should be granted.
Conditions
25. The PPG makes it clear that it is not possible for conditions to be attached to a
    grant of permission in principle. The terms of the application already include,
    site location, type of development and amount, and the amount has been
    expressed in the decision paragraph, as required by the PPG.
Conclusion
26. For the reasons given above, the benefits of the scheme and the provisions of
    the Framework mean that, although the development conflicts with the
    development plan, the material considerations indicate that a decision should be
    made other than in accordance with it. Therefore, the appeal is allowed.

J Buxton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
