 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 20 August 2026
 by Sarah Colebourne MA, MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date:08 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011352
 298 Dogsthorpe Road, Peterborough, PE1 3PL
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr Z Hussain against the decision of Peterborough City Council.
 •   The application Ref is 26/00145/HHFUL.
 •   The development proposed is a two storey side and rear and single storey rear extension.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary matter
2. Since the application was determined, a revised National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework) was published in August 2026. However, as any
   policies that are material to this decision have not fundamentally changed, I am
   satisfied that this has not prejudiced any party. I have had regard to the latest
   version of the Framework in reaching my decision.
Main Issue

3. The main issue in this case is the effect of the proposed development on the living
   conditions of the neighbouring occupier/s, in particular those at 300 Dogsthorpe
   Road with regard to light and outlook.
Reasons

4. The appeal site comprises a traditional two storey semi-detached house with a
   driveway to the side in a residential area. A detached garage to the side/rear of the
   dwelling and a small single storey rear projection would be demolished under this
   proposal. The wrap around extension proposed would comprise three elements, a
   two storey side extension, a two storey rear extension and a single storey rear
   extension. It would extend along the side boundary with no 300 by some 13.8m
   according to the plans. The two storey part would be some 11.8m or so in length,
   partly set in from the side boundary by 0.8m. It would have a hipped roof, the rear
   part of which would be stepped down to create a lower ridge height.
5. The Council has objected to the effect of the proposal on both the amenity space
   and the kitchen window of the neighbouring detached house at 300 Dogsthorpe
   Road. At my visit I also viewed the site from that property. There is a paved sitting
   out area adjacent to the main rear elevation of that dwelling which is sited adjacent
   to the other side boundary furthest from the appeal site and would be separated
   from the proposed extension by a small attached rear projection. The position of

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6011352


     that sitting out area, therefore, is such that there would not be a significant loss of
     outlook or light from the proposal to the amenity space of that property.
6. However, the proposed side elevation of the extension would be in very close
   proximity to the side elevation of no 300 and would substantially reduce the
   separation between the two dwellings. At my visit I noted that no 300 retains its
   original layout with its kitchen having only one window, positioned in the side
   elevation and facing the appeal site. There are two separate habitable rooms, one
   facing to the rear and one to the front.
7. Although the appellant’s appeal statement refers to another appeal in which the
   inspector considered a kitchen to be a non-habitable room, there is no single legal
   definition of ‘habitable room’ as its use and meaning is subject to context. In this
   case, the kitchen is likely to be used for considerable periods of time for the
   purposes of cooking and cleaning and could potentially provide a limited eating
   space. It can therefore be considered as a habitable room. From that kitchen
   window, the length and height of the two storey part of the proposal would make it
   unduly overbearing due to its siting and close proximity, resulting in a poor outlook.
8. As the proposal would be sited to the south of no 300 and given the size and scale
   of the two storey element, there would also be a significant loss of sunlight and
   daylight to that kitchen. As the occupiers currently experience a reasonable degree
   of separation, outlook and light in a room in which it is likely that they spend much
   time, the impacts I have identified would significantly harm their living conditions.
9. An extension nearby at no 306 referred to by the appellant differs significantly from
   this case because the two storey element does not project beyond the original
   dwelling and the extension is sited to the north of the neighbours’ side kitchen
   window. Therefore, the impact in terms of outlook and light would be less than
   would be the case here. That planning permission does not, therefore, provide
   justification for the harm that would be caused by this proposal.
10. In regards to the adjoining property at no 296, the proposed two storey rear
    element would be set in from the shared boundary and the proposed single storey
    rear extension would not project significantly beyond an existing rear extension at
    that dwelling. The Council has not objected to the impact on that property and I
    agree that it would be acceptable in that regard.
11. However, I conclude that the proposal, by reason of its siting, scale, height and
    massing, would result in significant harm to the living conditions of the neighbouring
    occupiers at 300 Dogsthorpe Road in terms of outlook and light. As such, it would
    be contrary to development plan policy LP17 of the Peterborough Local Plan (2019)
    which requires that development does not result in an unacceptable impact on the
    living conditions of existing occupiers. The Framework has a similar objective.
Conclusion
12. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the proposed development would be
    contrary to the development plan and there are no material considerations that
    would outweigh that. The appeal should be dismissed.

Sarah Colebourne
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          2
