Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 20 August 2026
by N Bowden BA(Hons) Dip TP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 9 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011803
126 Toms Lane, Kings Langley, Hertfordshire WD4 8NR
    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Biesinger against the decision of Three Rivers District Council.
    The application Ref is 25/2202/FUL.
    The development proposed is demolition of existing building and construction of replacement and
     infill dwellings.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
      17 August 2026. As the changes to the Framework could be considered material
      to the outcome of the appeal, I consulted the parties in relation to this and have
      taken these comments, where made, into account in my decision here.
3.    I have used the description of development given on the application form in the
      banner heading above. I have adjusted this to remove reference to the existing
      building being a “rental dwelling” as this is not an agreed position by the parties
      and it is not my role in the context of this s78 appeal to determine the veracity of
      this.
Background and Main Issues
4.    The appeal site is within the Green Belt however the parties are in agreement that
      the proposal is not inappropriate development having regard to policy GB7 of the
      Framework. Therefore, the main issues are:
               the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of
                the area,
               the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of the
                occupants of 126a Toms Lane having particular regard to overlooking and
                whether the development would appear overbearing or visually intrusive,
                and
               whether the proposed development would provide satisfactory living
                conditions for the future occupants considering whether there would be
                overlooking between the two dwellings.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011803


Reasons
        Character and appearance
5.      The appeal site comprises a detached chalet bungalow style dwelling which
        addresses Toms Lane. The property is set on a wide plot and features a deep rear
        garden which slopes to the rear and leads to an existing detached barn style
        structure. Toms Lane is a long road which links Kings Langley to Bedmond. It is a
        highly linear form of development with the majority of homes addressing Toms
        Lane itself. Homes are commonly detached, with some semi-detached examples,
        with long rear gardens extending to the rear. There are, nevertheless, exceptions
        to this form of linear development and these include Seabrook Road and Hilltop
        Road, High View Mobile Home Park and various other consolidations of farming
        complexes which have been converted to residential or commercial uses. Even so,
        the general impression of Toms Lane remains one of a linear form of
        predominately 20th century development.
6.      The proposal seeks permission to construct two additional detached homes to the
        rear of the existing dwelling. These would be laid out in a tandem fashion with both
        new homes having their principal elevations facing north west, towards Toms
        Lane. These would be accessed by way of an existing gravel drive which serves
        the existing barn structure towards the back of the site.
7.      This tandem layout would not follow the pattern of development in the area which
        is almost exclusively in a linear format. I find this tandem form of development
        would be alien in appearance and would not be in keeping with development
        patterns in the area. I have considered the existence of other forms of backland
        development in the area. However, the majority of these are markedly different in
        terms of their character. Hilltop Road, Seabrook Road and the unnamed and
        unmade drive to the rear of 136 to 140 Toms Lane are different as these are much
        larger areas. In any case, the dwellings that address these roads all have homes
        directly addressing them and this is consistent with the character of the remainder
        of Toms Lane. The mobile home park to the west is a substantially larger area and
        a wholly different form of development that is not comparable to the appeal
        proposal.
8.      I do accept that there are smaller examples of backland development. 124 Toms
        Lane appears to be a former farm whose origins appear to predate the
        development of much of Toms Lane. It appears to me that the same rationale also
        applies to other similar examples at land to the rear of 152 and 172 Toms Lane.
        The developed parts of these sites are also set a greater distance away from
        Toms Lane such that they are viewed in a different context. This differs to the
        appeal site which is an area of garden land that adjoins other similarly deep
        gardens.
9.      A number of appeal decisions have also been brought to my attention. Those
        along Toms Lane1 are all set in slightly different contexts. Indeed, from the
        information provided, these sites all proposed development that was largely
        surrounded by established built forms on at least three sides. Whereas this site is
        largely undeveloped to three sides where it is set adjacent to neighbour’s gardens
        or fields. The other appeal examples cited in Maple Cross and Chorleywood are


1
    APP/P1940/W/20/3257184, APP/P1940/W/22/3305196 and APP/P1940/W/24/3350428


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          2
Appeal Decision 6011803


       likely to be too distant to draw a meaningful comparison as an areas character can
       vary substantially depending on context.
10. Accordingly, I find that the proposal for two detached dwellings in this location
    would result in tandem development that would not be in keeping with the pattern
    of development in the locality. The tandem layout would form an alien addition to
    the area that would be harmful to its character and appearance contrary to policies
    CP1 and CP12 of the Three Rivers Core Strategy (TRCS) and policy DM1 and
    Appendix 2 of the Three Rivers Development Management Policies Local
    Development Document (TRLDD) and policies AL1, AL2, AL3, AL4, AL5 and AL10
    of the Abbots Langley Neighbourhood Plan. This is because it would be backland
    or tandem development that would not protect the character and amenity of an
    existing area. This would further mean that the proposal conflicts with paragraph 1
    of policy DP3 of the Framework as the proposed dwellings would not respond to
    their context such as through the arrangement of development plots and buildings
    in direct conflict with a format of development that is referred to in policy DM1 a) i)
    of the TRLDD.
       Living conditions – 126a Toms Lane
11. The nearest of the proposed dwellings would be located approximately 20 metres
    away from 126a Toms Lane. Whilst I accept that this is a relatively spacious area
    that is characterised by wide outlooks, I am unable to conclude that the either of
    the proposed dwellings would be in such close proximity that they would appear
    intrusive or overbearing.
12. The design of the nearest proposed dwelling, “Garden House,” does not feature
    any first floor windows to habitable rooms. There is one large window that spans
    both floors to this proposed dwelling, and this serves the entrance hall and landing.
    However, the upper floor to this is a void and in any case is not a habitable room.
    Accordingly, being mindful of the distance to 126a, I am not persuaded that there
    would be a significant increase in overlooking towards this neighbour.
13. As such, the proposal complies with policies CP1 and CP12 of the TRCS and
    policy DM1 and Appendix 2 of the TRLDD insofar as it maintains acceptable
    standards of privacy and would not be excessively prominent.
       Living conditions – future occupants
14. The proposed dwellings would be arranged with the rear elevation of the Garden
    House directly facing the rearmost proposed dwelling, “The Barn.” Although the
    barn has no first floor front facing windows to habitable rooms, the Garden House
    would have a number of windows and balconies facing towards the Barn in
    proximity. This would result in a degree of overlooking.
15. However, I am mindful that the proposal is intended for family accommodation,
    and the future occupants would be known to each other. Moreover, any
    subsequent future, potentially unrelated, occupants would be aware of this
    situation. On this basis, while I do retain some concerns that there would be some
    form of overlooking between the two properties, I am not satisfied that there is
    sufficient harm in this instance to warrant objection to the proposal.
16. I therefore conclude that the proposal would comply with policies CP1 and CP12 of
    the TRCS and policy DM1 and Appendix 2 of the TRLDD.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011803


Planning Balance and Conclusion
17. Paragraph 5 of policy S5 of the Framework explains, in summary, that where
    development would not be inappropriate, proposals should be approved unless the
    benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects,
    when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework,
    and applying paragraph 2 of the policy. Paragraph 2 to policy S5 sets out that the
    circumstances in which the benefits of approving development proposals are likely
    to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects. These include, but are not
    restricted to, situations where the development proposal would fail to comply with
    one of the national decision-making policies which state that development
    proposals should be refused in specific circumstances.
18. The Council has expressed that it considers the site to be within the built-up area
    and therefore, that policy S4 of the Framework applies. I do accept that the site
    has strong connections to more built-up areas and its character is not dissimilar to
    a suburban environment. However, the site is designated in the Local Plan as
    being washed over by the Green Belt. Moreover, whilst the homes and area do
    have a suburban character, homes frequently back onto open fields and rural
    areas and this is the case on both sides of the road. Views of fields and rural areas
    are available in fleeting views from the road but are noteworthy when appreciated
    in rear gardens. This means the area’s character is, whilst transitional in nature,
    not one that places it into a built-up area.
19. Even if the area is viewed as a built-up area where policy S4 of the Framework
    would apply, this would mean that the site is not previously developed land in
    accordance with Annex B of the Framework. Nevertheless, my concerns relating to
    conflicts with policy DP3 of the Framework and policies of the development plan
    would remain.
20. The Council accepts that it cannot demonstrate a five year supply of deliverable
    housing land and this proposal would therefore represent a welcome addition of
    two new dwellings. Furthermore, the proposal has been put forward as a form of
    Self-Build and Custom Housebuilding (SBCH) and this would be of assistance in
    ensuring a sufficient supply of this type of accommodation within the current base
    period. These factors, in cumulation give substantial weight to the benefits of
    providing homes. However, the proposal would fail to comply with one of the
    national decision-making policies, namely paragraph 3 of policy DP3, where there
    is a clear conflict with policy DM1 of the TRLDD insofar as it relates to the
    development of backland homes. This policy of the Framework directs that the
    proposal should be refused.
21. As such, the proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material
    considerations do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in
    accordance with it. Therefore, for the reasons given above the appeal should be
    dismissed.



N Bowden
INSPECTOR



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
