Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by K Mee BA(Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 9th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011458
2B Minehead Avenue, Manchester M20 1FW
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr James Nichols against the decision of Manchester City Council.
•    The application Ref is 143665/FO/2025.
•    The development proposed is described as: demolition of existing semi-detached dwelling and
     replacement with 7no apartments.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     During the appeal, the appellant submitted additional information, including a gap
       analysis, amenities map, shadow analysis, design considerations and block plan.
       The parties have had the opportunity to comment on this material, and I am
       satisfied that its consideration would not result in prejudice to any party.
3.     The Government published a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) on 17 August 2026. The main parties were provided with an
       opportunity to comment. I have had regard to the 2026 version of the Framework
       in my decision. References hereafter are to the August 2026 version.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are:
           •    the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of
                the surrounding area;
           •    the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of
                neighbouring occupiers, with regard to noise and disturbance;
           •    the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of the
                neighbouring occupiers of 2 Minehead Avenue (No 2), with regard to
                outlook and light; and
           •    whether the proposed development would provide acceptable living
                conditions for future occupiers, with regard to the provision of private
                amenity space.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011458


Reasons
Character and Appearance
5.     Minehead Avenue is a well-established residential street characterised by interwar,
       2-storey semi-detached and short-terrace dwellings with hipped roofs, set within
       relatively spacious plots and with regular spacing. Whilst there are minor
       variations, including the subdivision of some properties into apartments or
       maisonettes, in general the dwellings have uniform fenestration and footprints
       such that there is a strong sense of rhythm, consistency and coherence in the
       street scene. Although there are isolated examples of short-terrace dwellings with
       front gable features, and corner properties with varying footprints, these do not
       represent the prevailing pattern of development.
6.     The appeal site comprises a pair of semi-detached dwellings with generous rear
       gardens. Although differing in appearance from the prevailing character of the
       area, and featuring a shallower roof pitch, they share the same broadly consistent
       building line and are of a comparable scale to surrounding development. Whilst
       their poor condition makes them more noticeable, their scale and siting are such
       that they remain relatively unassuming within the street scene.
7.     The proposal would comprise a block of 7 apartments with frontage landscaping, a
       side access drive serving a rear communal parking area, and limited rear external
       amenity space. The building would project forward of the prevailing building line,
       with a front gable feature increasing its prominence within the street scene. Its
       substantial depth, being significantly greater than that of surrounding dwellings,
       would amplify its visual presence particularly given the angled orientation of, and
       open side garden to, No 2.
8.     The proposed front gable, incorporating a window, together with the two front
       dormers give the building the clear appearance of a 3-storey structure, at odds
       with the prevailing character of the area. Although the proposed eaves height,
       ridge height and materials would reflect those of neighbouring properties, this
       would not alleviate the harm arising from the siting, design, scale and massing of
       the proposed development. Moreover, and notwithstanding the distance of the
       gaps between buildings being replicated, the substantial footprint and large areas
       of hardstanding would appear as a cramped form of development. For these
       reasons, the proposal would be uncharacteristic of the underlying pattern and
       grain of development locally and would significantly harm the character and
       appearance of the area.
9.     I have considered the examples of flatted developments in the wider vicinity,
       including at Minehead Court and the Johnnie Johnson Housing Trust site.
       However, these developments occupy materially different contexts. Minehead
       Court is set behind Minehead Avenue forming part of a wider cluster of low-level
       residential blocks and serving as a central feature within the locality including a
       community hub. While the Johnnie Johnson Housing Trust building occupies a
       separated position at the end of the street set behind an area of parking and
       landscaping. Neither is experienced within the same context as the prevailing
       character of interwar dwellings on Minehead Avenue. Consequently, these
       examples are not directly comparable to the appeal proposal and do not alter my
       findings above.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011458


10. I acknowledge that the removal of the existing dwellings, which are in a poor
    condition, could enhance the appearance of the site. However, this does not justify
    redevelopment with a scheme that is inconsistent with the street scene.
11. Accordingly, I find that the proposed development would be materially harmful to
    the character and appearance of the surrounding area. It would conflict with Policy
    JP-H1 of the Places for Everyone Joint Development Plan Document 2022-2039
    (March 2024) (the DPD) and Policies SP1 and DM1 of the Manchester City
    Council Core Strategy Development Plan Document (July 2012) (the CS).
    Together, and amongst other things, these seek to secure good quality design and
    high-quality housing which make a positive contribution to neighbourhoods
    including creating well designed places that enhance character, protect and
    enhance the built environment having regard to appropriate siting, layout, scale,
    form, massing, materials and detail.
Living Conditions – neighbouring occupiers
12. The drive running along the common boundary with 2A Minehead Avenue would
    also serve the communal external amenity space and give access to the internal
    bin store. The surrounding area is characterised by spacious private rear gardens
    which, despite the suburban environment, currently enjoy a reasonable degree of
    peace, quiet and privacy. Whilst garden activity inevitably generates some noise
    and disturbance, this would differ materially from the more frequent vehicle
    movements, arrivals and departures associated with the proposed parking area.
    The resulting increase in noise and activity at the rear of the proposed building,
    despite not being constant, would represent a noticeably different environment to
    that currently experienced.
13. This effect would be compounded by the availability and use of the communal
    external amenity space serving the future occupiers of the 7 flats, which could
    accommodate up to 22 people. Although the principal access to the apartments
    would be from the front elevation, the rear of the site would nevertheless remain a
    focus for parking, servicing and outdoor activity. Taken together, these factors
    would lead to an unacceptable level of noise and disturbance for neighbouring
    occupiers.
14. I have been referred to examples of parking courts located adjacent to the rear
    gardens of nearby dwellings, including that at Minehead Court. However, limited
    information has been provided regarding the circumstances of those developments
    or the site context that existed prior to their construction. In any event, the
    existence of such developments elsewhere does not diminish the harm I have
    identified in this case. Nor does the benefit of providing off-street parking,
    notwithstanding existing parking pressures in the area, outweigh that harm.
15. Consequently, the proposed development would result in material harm to the
    living conditions of neighbouring occupiers, with regard to noise and disturbance. It
    would conflict with Policy JP-H1 of the DPD and Policies SP1 and DM1 of the CS
    which together seek to secure good quality and design, requiring development to
    make a positive contribution to the health and wellbeing of residents having regard
    to the effect on amenity.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011458


Living Conditions – occupiers of 2 Minehead Ave
16. The adjacent dwelling at No 2 is a corner plot angled within the street, resulting in
    an irregularly shaped private rear garden area that is smaller than those of many
    neighbouring properties. The proposed building would be positioned closer to the
    common boundary and would introduce a substantial increase in the depth and
    overall height of built form along much of that boundary.
17. Notwithstanding the separation distance between the proposal and No 2, the
    development would still have a significant adverse effect on the outlook from, and
    light available to, that property. The outlook from the rear of No 2 would be
    materially diminished and, owing to the south-westerly siting of the proposal, the
    appellant’s Shadow Study Commentary indicates that substantial overshadowing
    of the rear garden would occur, particularly around the summer solstice, with all of
    the rear garden remaining in shadow around the equinox.
18. Consequently, the proposed development would materially harm the living
    conditions of the neighbouring occupiers of No 2, with regard to outlook and light.
    It would therefore be contrary to Policy JP-H1 of the DPD and Policies SP1 and
    DM1 of the CS which together seek to secure good quality and design, requiring
    development to make a positive contribution to the health and wellbeing of
    residents having regard to the effect on amenity.
Living Conditions – future occupiers
19. The proposal includes areas of landscaping adjacent to the front entrance paths,
    the route to the rear bin store and the habitable room windows of the ground-floor
    apartment 3. The appellant contends that these areas, amounting to approximately
    120sqm and including circulation space, would provide sufficient communal
    amenity space and exceed the minimum standards encouraged within the
    Manchester Residential Quality Guidance (March 2017) (the SPD). However, no
    apartment would benefit from private external amenity space, and the proposed
    communal areas would be fragmented and limited in size, reducing their
    functionality, with those to the frontage also lacking a reasonable degree of
    privacy.
20. Whilst I acknowledge that the appeal site is within easy walking distance of
    attractive public open spaces and sports facilities, the use of public and private
    open space differs. Private outdoor space serves a distinct function, supporting
    day-to-day recreation, social interaction with family and friends, children’s play and
    routine domestic activities such as hanging out washing. Moreover, public open
    space is less conducive to spontaneous use, and younger children would typically
    require direct supervision. On the evidence before me, I am not satisfied that
    access to such facilities would adequately compensate for the shortcomings of the
    on-site provision, particularly given that several of the flats could reasonably be
    expected to accommodate families.
21. The appellant draws attention to the SPD’s acknowledgement that the desirability
    of external amenity space will vary between households, and that some residents
    may prefer not to bear the costs or responsibilities associated with its
    maintenance. However, the SPD also recognises that private outdoor space can
    be an important, and in some cases necessary, component of residential amenity.
    It further emphasises that such space should be appropriately located and usable
    if it is to serve its intended purpose. On the evidence before me, I cannot be

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6011458


       certain that the likely future occupiers would have limited need for private amenity
       space. In any event, neither this argument nor the suggested imposition of
       conditions relating to landscaping and security would overcome the harm I have
       identified.
22. I therefore find that the proposed development would fail to provide acceptable
    living conditions for future occupiers, with regard to the provision of private amenity
    space. It would be contrary to Policy JP-H1 of the DPD and Policies SP1 and DM1
    of the CS which together seek to secure good quality and design, requiring
    development to make a positive contribution to the health and wellbeing of
    residents having regard to the effect on amenity.
Other Matters
23. The appellant refers to compliance with Policy JP-H3 of the DPD which relates to
    the type, size and design of new housing. However, compliance with this policy
    does not outweigh nor address the conflict identified with other policies within the
    development plan as set out above.
24. The appeal site is not in an area of elevated flood risk, does not contain any listed
    or locally listed buildings and is not within or near to a conservation area.
    Furthermore, no concerns have been raised with regards to the privacy of
    neighbouring or future occupiers. However, an absence of harm in these respects
    is a neutral factor.
Planning Balance
25. I have found that the proposal would cause undue harm to the character and
    appearance of the area, materially harm the living conditions of neighbouring
    occupiers, and fail to provide satisfactory living conditions for future residents.
    Consequently, it would conflict with the relevant development plan policies, which
    broadly align with the objectives of the Framework. I ascribe considerable weight
    to these identified harms.
26. The proposal would deliver 7 additional dwellings, contributing to the
    Government’s objective of significantly boosting housing supply. The main parties
    agree that the Council can currently demonstrate a 5-year supply of deliverable
    housing sites, with a confirmed current supply of 7.5 years, and I have had regard
    to their respective submissions on the robustness of that position. Nevertheless,
    irrespective of the Council’s housing land supply position, the presumption in
    favour of sustainable development set out within Policy S4 of the Framework is
    engaged given the appeal site’s location within a settlement. This requires that
    development proposals should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would
    be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects.
27. There is no objection to the principle of the demolition of the existing dwellings.
    The proposal would make effective use of underutilised land, increase housing
    density, and would deliver 7 additional dwellings in a sustainable location with
    good access to services and facilities. It would also provide environmental
    benefits, including through improved energy efficiency and the removal of
    asbestos from the site, and the incorporation of inclusive and adaptable design
    measures. Mindful of the modest scale of the development, I attribute significant
    weight to the benefits arising from it.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6011458


28. Consequently, and mindful of Framework Policy S4(2), the adverse effects of the
    development would substantially outweigh the benefits identified above. As a
    result, the proposal would not benefit from the presumption in favour of sustainable
    development set out under Policies S3 and S4 of the Framework.
Conclusion
29. For the reasons given above, the proposal would conflict with the development
    plan as a whole. The material considerations in this case, including the
    Framework, do not indicate that the decision should be taken otherwise than in
    accordance with the development plan. Therefore, the appeal should be
    dismissed.

K Mee
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
