 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 11 August 2026
 by P D Sedgwick BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 3 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011388
 1 Broomwood Road, Bromley, Orpington BR5 2JH.
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr Horovitz against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
     Bromley.
 •   The application Ref is 25/03584/FPA.
 •   The development proposed is Change of use to form an 8 bedroom HMO (Sui-Generis), with
     additional hardstanding to rear and provision of cycle and refuse storage.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for Change of use to
   form an 8 bedroom HMO (Sui-Generis), with additional hardstanding to rear and
   provision of cycle and refuse storage at 1 Broomwood Road, Bromley, Orpington
   BR5 2JH in accordance with the terms of the application, 25/03584/FPA, and the
   plans submitted with it, subject to the following conditions:
     1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
        date of this decision.
     2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
        following approved plans: E00, P01, P02, P03, P04, P05, P06, P07, P08, P09.
     3) The additional bedrooms hereby permitted shall not be occupied until further
        details of secure and covered cycle storage shall be submitted to, approved in
        writing by the Local Planning Authority and completed, and thereafter retained
        and kept free of obstruction and available for the parking of cycles only.
     4) The additional bedrooms hereby permitted shall not be occupied until further
        details of refuse storage facilities shall be submitted to, approved in writing by
        the Local Planning Authority and completed, and thereafter retained. All refuse
        and recyclable materials associated with the development shall either be stored
        within this dedicated store/area, as shown on the approved plans, or internally
        within the buildings that form part of the application site. No refuse or recycling
        material shall be stored or placed for collection on the adopted highway
        (including the footway), except on the day of collection.
     5) The additional bedrooms hereby permitted shall not be occupied until a HMO
        Management Plan shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
        Planning Authority and adhered to unless otherwise agreed in writing. The
        Management Plan should include up to date contact details of the management
        company and links/details regarding how to raise complaints/concerns. The

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision: 6011388


         approved Management Plan should be updated and re-submitted should any of
         the information provided change.
     6) The occupancy of the HMO hereby permitted shall not exceed 8 persons at any
        one time.
Preliminary Matters
2. A certificate of lawful use or development (CLUD) (Reference 22/03431/ELUD) for
   a 6-person HMO was previously applied for by the appellant but refused because
   the Council considered planning permission was required. The appellant contends
   that the CLUD should have been granted and that the existing use is lawful. It is not
   within the scope of this appeal to determine the lawfulness of the existing use of the
   building, and I note that the appellant could have exercised their right of appeal
   against refusal of the CLUD at that time.
3. Given that there is dispute between the main parties as to whether the use of the
   appeal property as an HMO is lawful, I have taken the description of the
   development in the banner heading above from the Council’s decision notice as
   this removes reference to a change of use from a 6-bed HMO.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are the effect of the proposed development upon:
     • the character of the surrounding area; and,
     • the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers, with particular regard to noise
        and disturbance.
Reasons
Character of the area
5. The appeal property is a detached house with a large front and rear garden with the
   former partly laid to lawn and with a tarmac drive. It is the end property in a
   residential street with a mix of detached and semi-detached houses set back
   behind the pavement and a grass verge. The character of the area is residential
   and suburban.
6. The house is currently sub-divided into a 6-person shared house comprising 3
   ensuite bedrooms with a shared kitchen and 2 shared living spaces on the ground
   floor, 2 ensuite bedrooms and a shared kitchen on the first floor with a kitchen
   shared with a 6th ensuite bedroom in the loft. The proposal is to convert the ground
   floor living areas into 2 additional ensuite bedrooms to create an 8-person house in
   multiple occupation (HMO). The plans indicate 2 parking spaces and a bin
   enclosure at the front of the property and cycle storage for 8 bicycles in the rear
   garden on an area of hardstanding.
7. The Council’s concerns relate to the intensity of the use arising from an increase
   from 6 to 8 individuals and resultant impact on the residential character of the area.
8. There would be an increase in the level of activity arising from 2 additional
   occupants as their work, shopping and recreational activities would lead to more
   coming and going at different times of the day and night and more visitors and
   deliveries to the site. It would also exceed that of nearby houses which appear to

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision: 6011388


     be family homes rather than flats or HMOs. However, there is a drive-in
     MacDonalds collection point and car park next to the appeal site on the junction
     with the A224 Seven Oaks Way, resulting in a greater level of activity than
     elsewhere along Broomwood Road. Also, the appeal site is the last house on
     Broomwood Road where any increase in activity would be less obvious than if it
     was surrounded by housing either side.
9. There would be a need for more waste and recycling storage, but the proposal
   includes a bin storage area which should be less visually intrusive than the
   individually placed bins currently stored along the side wall of the front garden.
   Vehicle movements and parking associated with any additional residents would be
   limited by the available space in the front garden and by double yellow lines which
   prevent vehicles from waiting or parking in front of the property. Also, the Council
   acknowledge that there would be no visual amenity concerns relating to the
   proposed development.
10. Furthermore, notwithstanding that the Council has in place an Article 4 direction
    removing permitted development rights for HMOs, no evidence has been provided
    to me of an overconcentration of HMOs close to the appeal site.
11. Given the above, I do not consider that the activity associated with 2 additional
    occupants would be so significant as to adversely affect the character of the host
    property or the wider area and there would, therefore, be no conflict with Policies 4,
    9 and 37 of the Bromley Local Plan (2019) (BLP) and Policy D3 of the London Plan
    (2021) (LP) which seek to ensure the character and appearance of an area are not
    adversely affected by development.
Living conditions
12. The increased activity associated with 2 additional residents entering and leaving
    the building, using the rear amenity space and accessing the bins and cycle
    storage would lead to additional noise and disturbance. There would also be
    cumulative increases in noise from the extra occupants talking, playing music and
    generally socialising with other occupiers and visitors. However, the building is
    detached so there is no party wall through which noise and vibration can be
    transmitted to the neighbouring house.
13. I note the neighbour’s concern that four of the bedsits would have direct access
    onto the rear garden which could increase noise and disturbance if they were to
    use the space to congregate or enter and leave the house via the side passage
    along the shared boundary. However, I would expect that, for convenience’s sake,
    future occupants would continue to access the house from the front door rather
    than take the longer external route around the side and rear of the house.
    Furthermore, the rooms to be converted are currently used as communal living
    space and already have direct access to the garden which could potentially be
    used by the 6 existing occupants. Their conversion to 2 single bedrooms would
    therefore lessen the number of people able to directly access the garden from
    them.
14. There would be an increase in footfall along the side boundary with No 3, as
    residents of the appeal property access the proposed cycle storage. However, a
    wall and fence along the shared boundary, and the absence of first floor windows
    on the side wall of No 3, would prevent any direct views of activity along the side


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
 Appeal Decision: 6011388


     passage and limit the effects of any additional noise, as would the existing close
     board wooden fence enclosing the appeal site rear garden.
15. Other residents have referred to the potential cumulative impact of noise and
    disturbance from the proposed development and adjacent McDonalds restaurant.
    Whilst I understand their concern, 2 additional occupants at the appeal property
    would not significantly add to the existing activity and background noise associated
    with customers entering, ordering food and exiting the restaurant car park.
16. Overall, I consider that, given the existing level of activity at and adjacent to the
    appeal property, the gap between it and the neighbouring house and those to the
    rear of it, and the screening effect of existing boundary features, the proposed
    development would not cause unacceptable harm to the living conditions of
    neighbouring occupiers by way of noise and disturbance and would not conflict with
    Policies 9 and 37 of the BLP and Policies D3 and D14 of the LP which seek to
    protect the amenity of neighbours.
Other Matters
17. I note concerns raised by local residents over living accommodation standards,
    drainage, waste storage, anti-social behaviour, the lawfulness of existing
    extensions and parking. The Council’s officer’s report explains how the Council’s
    HMO standards have been met. I am satisfied that suitable waste storage can be
    achieved and that a HMO management plan can further address waste
    management issues. Blocked drains and associated odours are a maintenance
    issue. There is no evidence that future occupants would increase anti-social
    behaviour in the area and any unauthorised structures are a matter for the Council
    to consider and do not form part of the appeal proposal before me.
Conditions
18. I have had regard to the conditions suggested by the Council, which have been
    agreed to by the appellant, and made some amendments where necessary to
    make them more concise. In addition to the standard time limit condition, a
    condition specifying the approved plans is necessary to provide certainty. A
    condition regarding external materials is not necessary as the proposed
    development involves internal works. Conditions requiring further details of cycle
    storage and refuse storage are necessary to ensure sustainable transport options
    and to protect amenity, respectively. Conditions regarding the number of occupiers
    and an HMO management plan are necessary to protect the amenity of future
    occupants of the HMO and neighbouring occupiers.
Conclusion
19. For the reasons given above and having regard to all matters raised, I conclude
    that the appeal should be allowed.

P D Sedgwick
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        4
