Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by S Simms BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 15 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011872
Land adjacent to 16 Mill Road, Fen Drayton, Cambridgeshire CB24 4ST
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Lee & Sam Kempton against the decision of South Cambridgeshire
     District Council.
•    The application reference is 26/01273/FUL.
•    The development proposed is the erection of 1 No. single self-build dwelling.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The appeal form indicates that a decision was not received, but the Council has
       supplied a copy of its decision, which is dated before the appeal was made.
       Consequently, I have treated the appeal as made against refusal.
3.     A new version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) and the
       latest Housing Delivery Test results were published on 17 August 2026. I invited
       the main parties to comment on any implications of these for their cases and took
       their responses into account in reaching my decision.
4.     A unilateral undertaking was submitted at the final comments stage, albeit the
       appellant states that it was supplied to the Council during the application process.
       The Procedural Guide: Planning appeals – England is clear that, for written
       representations appeals, an executed and certified copy of the planning obligation
       must be provided at the time of making an appeal. I return to this matter later.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues are:
           •    whether the proposal is in a suitable location, having regard to the
                accessibility of services and facilities;
           •    whether the proposal would deliver on-site experimental or groundbreaking
                forms of sustainable living; and
           •    the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011872


Reasons
Accessibility of services and facilities
6.     The site is part of a former smallholding on the edge of the Fen Drayton Former
       Land Settlement Association (LSA) Estate, west of Fen Drayton. A school, village
       hall and recreation ground are near the village boundary about 600m away, with a
       pub and church about 1.0km and 1.2km away in the centre. The nearest shops are
       a mile or so away in the next village of Fenstanton, which contains other services
       further away. I saw that there is also a filling station closer to the site.
7.     The road fronting the site has footways as far as both villages, but the cycleway to
       Fen Drayton and lighting to Fenstanton are discontinuous. Village bus stops are
       realistically accessible only by cycle, and I have no evidence as to frequencies or
       cycle storage. Whilst there is a guided busway, the nearest stop is further away.
       Overall, flat landscape means that limited local facilities are cyclable, but most are
       not easily walkable. Other facilities and public transport are much less accessible.
8.     I accept that opportunities for sustainable transport solutions vary between urban
       and rural areas. However, future residents would be likely to depend on the car for
       access to most services and facilities. The proposal would therefore conflict with
       Policies S/2, S/7, H/5 and TI/2 of the South Cambridgeshire Local Plan 2018
       (SCLP). These seek to reduce the need to travel, especially by car, and only
       permit uses outside settlements which require a countryside location, or which are
       supported by other policies, including the sustainable redevelopment of redundant
       agricultural buildings within the Fen Drayton Former LSA Estate.
Sustainable living
9.     Few details of proposed on-site experimental or groundbreaking sustainable forms
       of sustainable living were submitted with the application or appeal. However, I am
       satisfied that conditions to require these to be submitted, approved, implemented
       and retained, would meet the policy and legal tests. Subject to such conditions, the
       proposal could comply with that part of Policy H/5 of the SCLP, which requires the
       delivery of such forms of sustainable living on site.
Character and appearance
10. The smallholding, of which the appeal site forms part, contains a stained timber-
    clad two-storey house, detached double garage and flat-roofed outbuilding. The
    house is set towards the rear of the plot, which is shorter and smaller than most,
    and whose side boundary, to the left as seen from the street, adjoins the rear of
    two plots fronting a road at right angles to the site.
11. The plot to the right as seen from the street is narrower still and contains a large
    two-storey house with dual-pitched roof connected to a substantial single-storey
    outbuilding, also with dual-pitched roof, all located nearer to the front. There is little
    evidence of horticultural or other agricultural activity on either plot.
12. The Fen Drayton Former LSA Estate is characterised by rectangular smallholdings
    bounded by hedgerow and tree belts. These contain well-spaced houses mostly to
    road frontages with glasshouses in varying states of repair and use, and piggeries,
    chicken sheds and other buildings to the rear. Some plots are undeveloped, and
    others contain large areas of unused land.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011872


13. The proposal is to subdivide the plot, create a new driveway access and erect a
    timber-clad bungalow, with rooms in its dual-pitched roof. It would be sited roughly
    midway between the existing house and its neighbour to the right, both laterally
    and in terms of their depths within the plot. A double garage with dual-pitched roof
    would be sited near the right-hand side boundary.
14. Whilst the proposed materials would reflect those of neighbouring houses, the
    bungalow form is not characteristic. It would nonetheless be visible from the street
    outside the site as the roof would be sufficiently high to accommodate a further
    storey. The resulting building and its residential nature would therefore change the
    appearance of the site and its context.
15. The Fen Drayton Former LSA Estate is developed, but sparsely so, and whilst the
    proposal would not be in open countryside, nor would it read as rounding off a
    village or cluster of buildings. Rather, it would subdivide plots, reduce spacing and
    intensify both built form and residential use. As it would not replace any existing
    buildings, these effects would harm the character and appearance of the area.
16. I am referred to other dwellings permitted nearby outside the village development
    framework under reference 23/03537/FUL. Whilst I have no details of their design,
    layout or policy basis, they appear to be nearer to the village itself, in an already
    more tightly developed area, and therefore likely to have different impacts.
17. Whilst conditions relating to climate change mitigation and adaptation, carbon
    emissions reduction and water efficiency could secure compliance with Policies
    CC/1, CC/3 and CC/4 of the SCLP, I nonetheless conclude that the proposal
    would harm the character and appearance of the area, contrary to Policies HQ/1
    and H/5 of the SCLP, which require high-quality design and buildings no larger
    than those being replaced within Fen Drayton Former LSA Estate.
Other Matters
18. The appellant considers Greater Cambridge’s housing land supply fragile because
    it relies on large allocations, unfunded infrastructure relocations, doubtful viability
    and unrealistic build rates. However, I have no evidence of under-supply or under-
    delivery, or that market conditions have not been anticipated. Greater Cambridge
    has 5.5-5.6 years’ supply, and the proposal would make little impact on suggested
    shortfalls in larger allocations, even assuming greater likelihood of delivery.
19. There is a shortfall of 456 serviced self-build or custom build plots against demand
    for 843 in the district. The Council is under a statutory duty to permit self-build and
    custom housebuilding on enough serviced plots of land to meet demand in its area
    in respect of each base period. This is an important material consideration.
20. The proposed dwelling is described as self-build, and a draft unilateral undertaking
    to market it as a serviced plot to people on the Council’s self-build register for one
    year was submitted with the appeal. A signed copy was only submitted at the final
    comments stage, and it did not contain a plan to which it referred, showing land it
    related to. In the context, I am nonetheless satisfied that it would be enforceable
    and offer at least some likelihood of delivering a serviced plot.
21. The shortfall is considerable and the proposal would add to the housing supply in
    the local area with a good likelihood of delivery and some likelihood of providing a
    serviced self- or custom-build plot. There would also be economic benefits during


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011872


       construction, and future occupiers would be likely to support local services and
       facilities. However, the proposal is for only one such plot and the requirement to
       market it for a year offers no certainty it would be delivered.
Planning Balance
22. Outside settlements, unless the benefits would be substantially outweighed by
    adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in
    the Framework, then Policy S5 of the Framework requires development which
    would address an evidenced unmet need to be approved if it is physically well-
    related to a settlement and of a scale that can be accommodated.
23. Policy CC2 of the Framework requires development to be located where it can
    support sustainable patterns of movement, enable good accessibility for different
    users, make the most of transport infrastructure and support good access to
    facilities to limit the need to travel. I have found that it would not be so located and
    attach significant weight to this conflict.
24. Policy DP3 of the Framework requires proposals to be refused if they fail to
    respond to their context, conflict with principles for creating well-designed places
    or conflict with any explicit design standards in the development plan. I have found
    that the proposal would harm the character and appearance of the area, contrary
    to design policies. I attach substantial weight to this conflict.
25. Policy HO7 of the Framework requires substantial weight to be given to providing
    homes that meet needs, including for people wishing to commission or build their
    own homes. However, I have found uncertainty as to whether the proposal would
    contribute to meeting that need. Moreover, its scale and economic benefits are
    such that I attach moderate weight to these considerations.
26. The unsuitable location and harm to character and appearance would substantially
    outweigh the benefits of the proposal, despite the shortfall in self- and custom-
    build serviced plots. Furthermore, I have also found that the proposal would not be
    suitably related to a settlement and that its need for access to services and
    facilities could not be accommodated by available infrastructure.
27. Furthermore, in the context of this appeal, Policies S/2, S/7, H/5, HQ/1 and TI/2 of
    the SCLP are not materially inconsistent with the Framework and so should
    continue to be afforded significant weight.
Conclusion
28. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and material considerations,
    including the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other
    than in accordance with it. So, I conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.



S Simms
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
