 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 30 August 2026
 by J Somers BSocSci (Planning) MA (HEC) MRTPI IHBC
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State.
 Decision date: 18 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011522
 108 – 114 Red Lane, Coventry CV6 5EQ
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a
     refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr Ashraf Ally (Al Aqsaa Red Lane Centre) against the decision of
     Coventry City Council.
 •   The application reference is PL/2024/0002558/FULM.
 •   The development proposed is described on the Decision Notice as ‘Demolition of existing
     building and erection of a three and two storey building for a community centre, non-
     residential educational facility and place of worship (Use Class Sui Generis).’

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matter
2. It is noted that the application considers a number of planning topics, however the
   Decision Notice lists only one reason for refusal which relates to parking and
   highway safety. I have no reason to dispute the opinion of the Council that the
   other elements of the scheme are in accordance with the Development Plan. As
   such, this letter will not address any of the other topics in consideration of this
   scheme and will only focus on the matters in conflict between the parties.
3. I note that the appeal documents reference the National Planning Policy
   Framework 2025 (the Framework). Since the submission of the appeal, the 2025
   version of the Framework has been superseded by the 2026 version which was
   published on the 17 August 2026. Whilst the structure and format of the Framework
   have changed, the wording of the relevant policies of the new Framework in
   relation to this appeal remain largely unchanged and therefore did not require to be
   reassessed by either party in relation to this appeal. As such I have considered the
   appeal on this basis and refer only to the updated 2026 Framework within my
   decision.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development upon parking and
   highway safety.
Reasons
5. The appeal site lies along Red Lane, an established road with a mix of residential
   and commercial/industrial premises. The Appeal site appears to have been a
   former industrial premises that is now used as an education centre and Place of
   Worship (PoW). The main built form consists of a main building with Pitched and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             1
 Appeal Decision: 6011522


     gable roof with single storey flat rooved extension located to the east of the site
     fronting Red Lane, and a further building located to the rear of this main building.
     There is a vehicular access along Red Lane at this point which runs along the side
     of the buildings to a small courtyard area with car spaces. Immediately west of the
     building is a small car sales yard, followed by a number of residential terraced
     dwellings (No.s 92-106 even) with small front gardens and designated areas to the
     front of these properties for unrestricted vehicular parking. The appeal site has an
     additional car parking area that runs behind No.s 92-106 Red Lane which is
     accessed by an additional access between No.s 94 and 96 Red Lane. Whilst the
     eastern most access has some visibility to the east when turning into Red Lane, the
     visibility to oncoming traffic from the west is quite poor. The second access
     between the residential dwellings is also noticeably poor due to the restricted
     visibility from on-street parking in both directions in order to access Red Lane.
6. Red Lane is a single carriageway in each direction with a single yellow line in front
   of the appeal site that restricts parking Monday-Friday 9am-6pm. Opposite the site
   is Central City Industrial Estate which contains industrial units set back from the
   street with a relatively wide footpath and double yellow lines opposite from the
   appeal site. Traffic along Red Lane is relatively free flowing with traffic limited to
   30mph in both directions and given the mixed use of the area, traffic consists of
   cars and Heavy Goods Vehicles (HGV).
7. On my site visit (around lunchtime) I noted Red Lane as busy with both cars and
   HGVs, but was relatively free flowing. The carriageway is illuminated by street
   lighting, with a reasonably wide footpath in front of the appeal site. I appreciate that
   the road conditions I experienced on my site visit was only a snapshot of the road
   at this particular time, however I have also considered the evidence submitted by
   main parties and interested parties and, in light of this, I am satisfied that what I
   saw represents typical conditions. Based on what I saw on my site visit and the
   information presented within this appeal I deduce that Red Lane operates with
   some deficiencies which is predominantly caused by on street parking and the
   surrounding uses.
8. Whilst submitted accident data between 2019-2022 confirms that no accidents
   have been registered along this particular section of Red Lane in front of the appeal
   site, there were accident records further along this road which according to the
   Council were beyond the 5 year period and not associated with the accesses of the
   appeal site. Despite this, the absence of formal accident data in front of the appeal
   site does not in itself mean that accidents have not occurred, near misses, or
   indeed that a carriageway is ‘safe.’
9. In assessing the impacts towards highway safety, the Coventry Local Plan (LP)
   Policies AC1, AC2 and AC3, seeks that new development reduces the need for
   travel, especially for the private car, and be readily accessible by walking, cycling
   and public transport, and enable the efficient operation of the highway network,
   mitigating and managing traffic growth, are suitable for their purpose with decisions
   being based upon robust evidence, amongst others. The Framework Policies TR3,
   TR4, and TR6 are relevant considerations to this appeal where there is a need to
   support sustainable patterns of movement ensuring good accessibility is available
   to all modes of transport. The policies also seek that priority is given to walking,
   wheeling and cycling movements, and to minimise conflicts between pedestrians,
   vehicles and cyclists. When assessing transport impacts, sufficient evidence needs


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision: 6011522


     to be provided, and that development proposals be refused if after mitigation that
     there are severe adverse impacts.
10. As noted in the appeal documents, the Appeal Site currently operates 595Sqm of
    floor space and is utilised every day, with typically 30 persons on site at any one
    time. Additionally, there are daily prayers generating 40-50 attendees; classes from
    5pm-7pm Monday to Thursday generating 100 students; and Friday prayers
    between 12pm-2pm generating approximately 300 attendees. Currently the Appeal
    site has 32 parking spaces provided on site within designated car spaces. The LP
    Parking standards in Appendix 5 state that the appeal site should provide 60
    parking spaces. Currently there are patrons of the site that act as parking marshals
    which direct parking whereby the site can informally cater for 65 vehicles, albeit
    parked haphazardly within circulation areas of the car park which would not be in
    accordance with the parking standards.
11. Appeal documents show that during peak times there are also vehicles parked
    along the footpath opposite the site, on the double yellow lines and on the single
    yellow line and part on the footpath along Red Lane in front of the appeal site. This
    situation of cars parked on footpaths and on double yellow lines causes severe
    adverse highway safety problems for pedestrians, cyclists and persons with
    mobility impairments navigating the footpath, as well as vehicles parked illegally
    along the road causing severe adverse impacts towards highway safety which
    disrupts the free flow of traffic. It is clear that the site currently operates over
    capacity in terms of parking requirements within designated car parking spaces and
    this is not limited to the Friday. I am unable to give any benefit or weight to the
    indiscriminate parking of patrons within circulation areas as justification as to how
    many patrons could theoretically be parked on site under the proposed use.
12. The proposed development has a smaller floorspace at 558Sqm, however it is
    proposed to cater for a similar number of persons during normal times and that
    instead of having 300 persons on the Friday at one time, this would be staggered
    over three sessions of 100 persons to reduce demands on parking. The proposed
    design layout and smaller floorspace would mean that some of the existing spaces
    would be taken up reducing the site’s capacity to 29 spaces and would reduce car
    parking requirements in accordance with the LP to 56 spaces. In addition to this,
    during peak times patrons of the site also park in an overflow car park located at
    the Coventry Resource Centre which can provide an additional 82 spaces. A letter
    is attached to the Appellant’s SoC saying that the Centre has been catering, and is
    happy to continue having patrons of the appeal site use their car park of a Friday
    during peak time. This additional overflow parking facility does go some way in
    mitigating the peak parking particularly of a Friday, as does the staggering of
    sessions. However, whilst welcomed, this parking facility does not form part of the
    application, and the letter is not a formalised legal agreement that is enforceable.
    As such, whilst this seems a logical and sensible mitigatory measure I can only give
    this limited weight due to the lack of enforceability of this agreement. It is also
    unclear what impact the parking at the Resource Centre has upon the use and
    parking required for this separate use.
13. It is clear to me that the existing situation is poorly catered for with regards to
    parking and that whilst mitigatory measures are proposed for the new development,
    that the site remains over capacity and would continue to be so under the proposal.
    I acknowledge and appreciate the efforts and willingness to propose measures


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
 Appeal Decision: 6011522


     employed by the Appellant, such as facilitating cycling, car sharing, overspill and
     how the Appeal Site operates in order to reduce parking demands. However, in
     conclusion of this matter, based on the information before me and what has been
     discussed in this letter, the mitigatory measures are insufficient to cater for the
     demand and usage of the site which would still cause severe adverse impacts. The
     proposal would therefore be made contrary to LP Policies AC1, AC2 and AC3, as
     well as Framework Policies TR3, TR4, and TR6 as described previously.
Conclusion
14. Based on the appeal documents, from what I saw on my site visit, the relevant
    planning policies of the development plan, including material considerations, I
    conclude that the appeal be dismissed.

J Somers
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       4
