Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 17 August 2026
by C Cooper-Young MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011565
15 Churchill Close, Sturminster Marshall, Dorset BH21 4BQ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
     planning permission under section 73 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) for
     the development of land without complying with conditions subject to which a previous planning
     permission was granted.
•    The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs R & H Ferrett against Dorset Council.
•    The application reference is P/VOC/2026/01105.
•    The application sought planning permission to demolish the garage, sever land and erect a bungalow
     with shared vehicular access and parking (as amended by Non-material amendment
     P/NMA/2025/05549) without complying with a condition attached to planning permission reference
     P/FUL/2024/01770, dated 23 July 2025.
•    The condition in dispute is No 2 which states that: The development hereby permitted shall be
     carried out in accordance with the following approved plans: Location Plan; 01 A Proposed Floor
     Plans & Elevations; AMENDED - Block Plan Showing Parking.
•    The reason given for the condition is: For the avoidance of doubt and in the interests of proper
     planning.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2.     An application for costs was made by Mr & Mrs R & H Ferrett against Dorset
       Council. This application is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     The appeal is against the non-determination of a planning application. The
       Council’s submission sets out that they would have refused the application for
       reasons relating to the character of the area, and the living conditions of nearby
       residents.
4.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published in August 2026. In the interest of natural justice and to ensure neither of
       the main parties were prejudiced by this matter, I consulted both parties on the
       changes to the Framework and any comments which I have received have been
       considered in my determination of the appeal. Any reference to the Framework in
       this decision is to the most recent version.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011565


Main Issues
The main issues are;
             1. the effect of the development on the character and appearance of the area;
                and
             2. the living conditions of the occupiers of nearby residential properties having
                particular regard to privacy.
Reasons
Character and Appearance
5.      The appeal site is comprised of a parcel of land to the rear of 15 Churchill Close,
        which forms part of a residential terrace on the eastern side of Churchill Close,
        adjacent to the village open space. The site lies within a residential area
        predominantly characterised by two-storey houses, arranged as either semi-
        detached or short linked terraces, with relatively uniform mass and spacing. The
        dwellings are generally set in spacious plots, behind modest front gardens which
        are largely given over to parking.
6.      The appeal site has an extant consent for a single storey dwelling with associated
        parking1.
7.      I observed the existing backland development in the locality during my inspection
        of the wider area. Whilst these dwellings are two-storey and of a design, form and
        materials that do not mirror the characteristics of the surrounding dwellings, they
        retain a meaningful degree of separation due to the surrounding dwellings
        spacious plot sizes. I note that the appeal decision2 allowing four dwellings to be
        constructed pre-dates the Sturminster Marshall Neighbourhood Plan (NP), which
        was made in October 2024.
8.      Policy SMNP9 of the NP set out that development proposals in Churchill Close
        should respect the unique character of the planned 1950s estate, including the
        characteristic building line, height, rhythm and materials.
9.      Policy HE2 of the Christchurch and East Dorset Local Plan, Part 1 – Core Strategy
        (2014) (CS) requires high quality design, reflecting and enhancing local
        distinctiveness.
10. The proposed increase in height would result in a disproportionately large chalet
    bungalow whose roof form would dominate the building's appearance, creating a
    top-heavy and visually intrusive structure. The cropped gable ends, high-level
    obscure-glazed windows fail to provide sufficient architectural interest. The largely
    featureless gable elevations reinforce the perception of excessive bulk and
    massing. Consequently, the development would represent a discordant and
    incongruous addition that would fail to respect the established character, scale and
    appearance of the surrounding built environment.
11. By reason of the restricted plot sizes of dwellings around the proposal, and its
    proposed scale and height, the development would be clearly visible above the
    roofline of the neighbouring single-storey frontage building, through the proposed

1
    Reference P/FUL/2024/01770.
2
    Reference: APP/D1265/W/20/3265628.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6011565


        access, and from neighbouring gardens and dwellings as well as from wider public
        viewpoints.
12. As such, the proposal would introduce a prominent and discordant element into
    the street scene, resulting in visual clutter and eroding the established character
    and visual coherence of the surrounding area. Therefore, the proposal would be
    contrary to Policies SMNP9 and SMNP13 of the Sturminster Marshall
    Neighbourhood Plan (2024), Policy HE2 of the CS.
Living conditions
13. Policy HE2 of the CS requires that new development should seek to minimise a
    general disturbance to the amenity of existing nearby properties. The proposed
    rooflights within the north and south roof slopes would introduce opportunities for
    overlooking that are not present within the approved scheme. Indeed, given the
    elevated position of the first-floor accommodation, the proposal would increase the
    perception of overlooking towards the neighbouring residential properties at Nos
    14 and 16 Churchill Close (No 14 and No 16) to the north and south respectively.
14. In particular, the rooflights serving Bedroom 1 would afford views towards the
    garden and private amenity areas associated with No 14 and No 16. Whilst the
    degree of overlooking may be more limited than that arising from conventional
    dormer or vertical windows, the introduction of additional first-floor openings at roof
    level would nonetheless erode the sense of privacy currently enjoyed by
    neighbouring occupiers.
15. In addition, the rooflights serving Bedroom 1 would also likely introduce views
    towards the nearby neighbouring residential properties on High Street, particularly
    No 91A. Due to the elevated position of these openings, occupants would likely be
    able to obtain views into parts of the neighbouring sites and their associated
    private amenity areas.
16. Consequently, the proposal would give rise to an unacceptable level of actual and
    perceived overlooking, resulting in harm to the living conditions of neighbouring
    occupiers through a loss of privacy.
17. As such the proposal would be contrary to Policy HE2 of the CS.
Other Matters
18. The evidence of the Interested Parties includes an analysis of the judgement in
    Finney v Welsh Ministers [2019] EWCA Civ 1868, where the Court of Appeal held
    that a planning authority cannot use a section 73 submission to change the
    description of development, either directly or indirectly through a planning
    condition. However, in this case the NMA submission3 changed the operative
    description of development on the original permission from bungalow to dwelling.
    A chalet bungalow would constitute a dwelling and therefore the proposal would
    not be inconsistent with the description of development.
19. The site lies within the Impact Risk Zones for Sites of Special Scientific Interest
    (Protected Site). In the event that the appeal were to be allowed, I would be
    required to undertake an Appropriate Assessment in relation to the effect of the
    proposed development on the integrity of the Protected Site, and any mitigation

3
    Reference P/NMA/2025/05549.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011565


       proposed. However, as I am dismissing the scheme on other substantive matters,
       whether or not the development would likely have a significant effect on the
       Protected Site, has not been determinative in my consideration of the appeal.
Planning Balance
20. The Council's housing land supply position is a material consideration and attracts
    weight in favour of residential development. However, planning permission already
    exists for a dwelling on the site. The proposal would not increase the number of
    dwellings delivered and would make no additional contribution to housing supply
    beyond that already permitted. Consequently, only limited weight is afforded to the
    proposal's housing delivery benefits
21. Policy S4 of the Framework provides that development proposals within
    settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies. Where a development proposal is within a
    residential curtilage, Framework Policy L2(1)(d) (i) and (ii) require that proposals
    should be consistent with the overall street scene and character and maintain
    acceptable living standards for residents in terms of privacy. For the reasons given
    above the harm to the character of the area and living standards in terms of
    privacy, are considered to substantially outweigh the limited benefits of the
    proposal.
22. Taken together, the benefits of the proposal would be substantially outweighed by
    its adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-making policies of
    the Framework. As such, Policy S4 of the Framework does not point to permission
    being granted in this instance.
Conclusion
23. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations,
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
24. For the reasons given above the appeal is dismissed.



C Cooper-Young
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
