Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 22 September 2026
by Bhupinder Thandi BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6011342
Land rear of Ship and Anchor, Wood Lane, Dagenham RM8 1DR
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Mark Deans of Roadside Media UK2 Ltd against the decision of the
     Council of the London Borough of Barking & Dagenham.
•    The application Ref is 26/00451/ADVERT.
•    The advertisement proposed is a timber poster advertisement hoarding (non-illuminated) displayed
     within the existing screen fence hoarding.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and express consent is granted for a timber poster
       advertisement hoarding (non-illuminated) displayed within the existing screen
       fence hoarding. The consent is for five years from the date of this decision and is
       subject to the five standard conditions set out in the Regulations.
Main Issue
2.     The main issue is the effect of the proposed advertisement panel on the amenity of
       the area.
Reasons
3.     The appeal site is a vacant public house partially enclosed by fencing and which is
       now in a state of disrepair. It is positioned on the wide and busy junction of Wood
       Lane and Whalebone Lane South. Whilst there is a three-storey block of
       apartments on the western side of Whalebone Lane South the area is distinctly
       commercial defined by retail, community and leisure uses ranging in scale and
       height.
4.     The panel would be visible to users of the carriageway, footways and apartments
       opposite, but this would be in the setting of the wide road corridor and against a
       backdrop of vegetation and existing commercial built form, street furniture and
       signage. It would sit comfortably against the scale of nearby buildings and within
       the commercial street scene.
5.     I acknowledge that the panel would be visible from residences on the opposite
       side of the road. However, given the separation distance and the position of the
       panel not orientated towards them but rather towards oncoming traffic approaching
       the road junction, it would not be visually intrusive when viewed from these
       properties.
6.     I note the presence of other advertisement panels at the site, however, they are
       positioned further south away from the one proposed, orientated towards the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011342


       Wood Lane and Green Lane junction and experienced in a different context. For
       these reasons the cumulative impact of the panels at the site would not undermine
       the visual amenity of the area.
7.     Advertisement panels by their very nature are meant to be noticeable and draw the
       eye. They are also a common feature in urban locations and as proposed, on a
       busy commercial thoroughfare would not result in a prominent feature unduly
       affecting the appearance of the area.
8.     As such, I am satisfied that it would not appear as an incongruous, obtrusive or
       overly dominant feature in the street scene even when considered in combination
       with other displays at the site. Accordingly, the proposed advertisement panel
       would not harm the amenity of the area.
Other Matters
9.     The appeal was not refused on public safety grounds and I note that the Council’s
       Be First Transport team have not objected to the proposal. There is no evidence
       before me to lead me to reach a different conclusion on this matter. Therefore,
       based on the evidence before me, I am satisfied that the proposed advertisement
       panel would not adversely affect public safety.
Conditions
10. The Regulations set out five standard conditions relating to such proposals and I
    see no reason to impose conditions beyond those specified in the Regulations.
Conclusion
11. For the reasons set out above the appeal succeeds.



B Thandi
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
