Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by Nick Davies BSc(Hons) BTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011147
Bluebell Wood, Land southwest of Scawns Mill, St. Keyne PL14 4QS
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the
     Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended)
     (the GPDO).
•    The appeal is made by Janine Vanstone against the decision of Cornwall Council.
•    The application Ref is PA25/08366.
•    The development proposed is conversion of barns to dwelling.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Application for costs
2.     An application for costs was made by Janine Vanstone against Cornwall Council.
       This application is the subject of a separate Decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     A Visual Inspection Report relating to Barn 2 was submitted with the appeal. The
       Council has had the opportunity to comment on it in their appeal statement. I
       therefore do not consider that any party would be prejudiced by my consideration
       of it in my decision.
Background and Main Issues
4.     Class Q of the GPDO permits the change of use of a former agricultural building
       that was (but is no longer) part of an established agricultural unit to a dwelling,
       together with any building operations reasonably necessary to convert the building
       for that purpose. An “agricultural building” is defined by Paragraph X of Part 3 of
       the GPDO as a building used for agriculture and which is so used for the purposes
       of a trade or business. The Council disputes that the barns are former agricultural
       buildings for the purposes of Class Q and, in relation to that, whether the
       requirements of paragraph Q1(b) are satisfied.
5.     Paragraph Q1 sets out a number of other situations where development is not
       permitted by Class Q. Criterion (a) is not relevant, and the Council raises no
       concerns in respect of the proposal complying with criteria Q1 (c)–(i) and (k)–(p).
       The Council considers, however, that even if the barns are former agricultural
       buildings, the development is not permitted by Class Q, because the proposal
       contravenes the requirements of paragraph Q1(j) relating to the extent of building
       operations necessary to provide the dwelling.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011147


6.     Where development is permitted by Class Q, Paragraph Q2 requires developers to
       apply to the local planning authority as to whether prior approval is required for a
       range of factors in (1) (a) to (g), including:
                   (e) whether the location or siting of the building makes it otherwise
                   impractical or undesirable for the building to change from agricultural use
                   to a dwelling; and,
                   (g) the provision of adequate natural light in all habitable rooms of the
                   dwellinghouse.
7.     The Council has determined that, if the proposal was permitted by Class Q, prior
       approval under (e) and (g) would have been necessary, and would have been
       refused, because it has not been demonstrated that the surrounding trees and
       woodland would be unharmed, or that sufficient natural light would be provided to
       habitable rooms in the dwelling.
8.     Therefore, the main issues are whether the proposal would constitute permitted
       development under Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the GPDO and, if it does,
       whether the development would:
           a) be compatible with the retention of nearby trees; and,
           b) provide occupants of the dwelling with adequate natural light.
Reasons
Whether the buildings are former agricultural buildings
9.     The barns are simple open-fronted structures, comprising circular timber columns
       supporting wooden rails, rafters and purlins that are clad in a single skin of
       corrugated metal sheeting on the walls and roofs. They have an L-shaped
       arrangement and are located within an area of woodland. The evidence indicates
       that they were built in 2012 and 2016, and they are the subject of a Certificate of
       Lawfulness for Existing Use or Development (CLD) that was granted in 2025.
10. The application form states that the site is not currently part of an established
    agricultural unit, and was not still part of one on 24 July 2023. It also confirms that
    the site has not been used for any non-agricultural purpose since ceasing to be
    part of an agricultural unit. At the time of my visit the buildings were in use for the
    storage of a tractor, trailer, digger, a car, hay, and animal feed. The adjacent land
    appeared to be in use as an agricultural smallholding, with a modest number of
    animals present.
11. The decision notice for the CLD states that the applicant had discharged their onus
    of proof to demonstrate that, on the balance of probability, the construction of an
    agricultural barn was lawful. There can be no dispute, therefore, that the buildings
    were constructed and used for agricultural purposes. However, the CLD alone
    does not provide conclusive evidence that the buildings were formerly part of an
    established agricultural unit, or that they were used for the purposes of a trade or
    business.
12. The appellant has submitted evidence, in the form of a letter from Mr Lyes, who
    assisted with the construction of the barns. The letter confirms that the building
    was built for wintering cattle and hay storage. It also states that he helped Mr


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
Appeal Decision 6011147


       Roger Vanstone, an agricultural contractor, to build it. Whilst this letter adds weight
       to the evidence that the previous use of the barns was for agriculture, it does not
       provide any evidence of the extent or nature of the agricultural unit they served.
       Nor does it demonstrate that the building was used for the purposes of a trade or
       business. It refers to Mr Vanstone as an agricultural contractor, which could
       indicate that the barns were used in connection with contracting work on other
       farms, rather than an established unit of which the buildings formed a part.
13. The appellant has also provided an email from Patrick Hill, who has visited the
    property many times since 2013 to purchase straw and hay. The email refers to a
    pig house, so, again it points to the surrounding land being in agricultural use. But
    it provides no evidence on the nature of the agricultural unit. Furthermore,
    although it refers to a business transaction, there is no information regarding
    whether the hay/straw was produced on the land, or bought in from elsewhere for
    resale.
14. The Council suggests that the location of the building in a woodland points to a
    previous forestry use, but have produced no evidence to support this hypothesis.
    Aerial photographs have also been provided which, it is suggested, show no signs
    of agricultural activity on the land. However, these are snapshots in time, and are
    at a very small scale. They do not provide a sound basis for concluding that there
    was no agricultural use of the land around the times that the photographs were
    taken.
15. In conclusion, there is no doubt that the barns were erected for the purposes of
    agriculture, and have been used for that purpose. However, no evidence has been
    provided to support the contention that the barns were part of an established
    agricultural unit prior to 24 July 2023. Such evidence might include Land Registry
    ownership records, tenancy agreements, or statutory declarations attesting to the
    extent of land that was controlled and farmed. The email from Mr Hill is the only
    evidence that the barns were used for the purposes of a trade or business.
    However, it does not provide enough detail to conclude that the transactions
    related to the agricultural use of the barns or the holding. No accounts or other
    financial records, such as receipts or VAT records have been provided, nor any
    statutory declarations setting out in detail the nature and scale of the former
    agricultural business.
16. I have carefully considered the limited evidence that has been provided. The
    Council has not provided any firm evidence to disprove the appellant’s case.
    Nevertheless, the evidence provided by the appellant lacks the necessary
    precision and weight for me to conclude, on the balance of probability, that the
    barns were part of an established agricultural unit, or were used for the purposes
    of a trade or business. In the absence of persuasive supporting evidence, I
    conclude that the proposal does not fall within the description of permitted
    development at Paragraph Q(a) of the GPDO, so is not development permitted by
    it.
Extent of building operations
17. The barns are utilitarian buildings of rather rudimentary construction. The main
    supports are circular timber posts, at least some of which are former telegraph
    poles. The floor comprises a layer of compacted hardcore and the buildings are
    entirely open on the inner section of the L-shaped floorplan. The enclosed walls


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011147


       are clad in a mixture of box profile steel sheeting and corrugated iron. The whole
       building is covered by a sloping roof of profile steel sheeting. In view of the open
       nature of two sides of the building, the lightweight enclosure of the remainder, and
       the lack of a solid floor, significant work would be required to enable its use for
       residential purposes.
18. The submitted drawings show the provision of a 4-bedroomed dwelling within the
    existing external dimensions of the building. Substantial external alterations are
    proposed to achieve this, including the enclosure of the open sides of the building,
    and the insertion of extensive window openings in three of the elevations that are
    currently enclosed with steel sheeting. Whilst the drawings appear to indicate that
    the main structural columns would be retained, there are no annotations to indicate
    that this would be the case. Furthermore, there is no indication on the drawings of
    the extent to which the external materials of the existing building would be
    retained, and there is no written specification to clarify how the conversion would
    be carried out.
19. Nevertheless, Class Q(c) permits building operations that are reasonably
    necessary to convert the buildings to residential use. Paragraph Q1(j) indicates
    that such operations can include the installation or replacement of windows, doors,
    roofs, or exterior walls, water, drainage, electricity, gas, or other services to the
    extent reasonably necessary for the building to function as a dwellinghouse; and
    partial demolition to the extent reasonably necessary to carry out the permitted
    building operations.
20. The Planning Practice Guidance (the PPG) provides advice on the interpretation of
    Class Q1. It clarifies that the permitted development right conveyed by Class Q
    assumes that the agricultural building is capable of functioning as a dwelling. The
    right permits building operations that are reasonably necessary to convert the
    building, but it is not the intention of the permitted development right to allow
    rebuilding work which would go beyond what is reasonably necessary for the
    conversion of the building to residential use. Therefore, it is only where the existing
    building is already suitable for conversion to residential use that the building would
    be considered to have the permitted development right. The PPG also advises that
    internal works are not generally development and that, for a building to function as
    a dwelling, it may be appropriate to undertake internal structural works, including
    to allow for a floor, or internal walls, which are not prohibited by Class Q.
21. The Council has drawn my attention to the Hibbitt case2, which held that a building
    must be capable of conversion to residential use without operations that would
    amount either to complete or substantial re-building of the pre-existing structure or,
    in effect, the creation of a new building. I have had regard to that case in coming to
    my decision.
22. The Visual Inspection Reports submitted with the application and appeal were
    compiled by an appropriately qualified expert. They consider the suitability of the
    timber-framed structure to support the proposed conversion and conclude that,
    whilst the timber posts and large mono-pitch rafters are suitable for the proposed
    loading, some additional timbers would be required for a domestic conversion. It is
    notable, however, that there was no inspection of the foundations. Whilst the

1
 Paragraph: 105 Reference ID: 13-105-20180615
2
 Hibbitt and another v Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government (1) and Rushcliffe Borough Council (2) [2016]
EWHC 2853 (Admin)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                4
Appeal Decision 6011147


       author understands that the circular timber posts extend into the ground and are
       set in concrete, no evidence has been provided in the form of trial excavations.
23. The Visual Inspection Reports state that the corrugated tin roof covering appears
    to be in good condition, but that there are some large protrusions caused by
    purlins being installed out of level. It is stated that this could be easily rectified
    when a new roof covering is added. The Visual Inspection Reports envisage that
    new roof purlins would be added to support an insulated roofing system to comply
    with the Building Regulations. There is no indication, however, whether the
    existing steel sheeting would be retained as part of this insulated roofing system or
    whether there would, in fact, be a wholesale replacement of the roof covering.
24. The Visual Inspection Reports advise that a concrete ground bearing slab should
    be poured that is suitable for domestic loadings, allowing for the construction of an
    insulated timber frame wall externally. Under the heading “Recommendations”,
    however, the insulated timber frame is described as a thermal lining to the walls. It
    is therefore unclear whether the insulated structure would sit inside the existing
    corrugated cladding, or whether it would replace it. The drawings are not
    annotated to clarify this point, and the Visual Inspection Reports are silent on the
    condition and suitability of the existing cladding for retention as an external
    weathering material. From my inspection, I saw that the corrugated iron sheeting
    on Barn 2 was in poor condition, and unlikely to be suitable for retention, whilst
    there were large gaps at the corners and along the eaves of Barn 1.
25. Furthermore, numerous window and door openings are proposed in three
    elevations of the building that are currently enclosed, which would have
    implications for the integrity of the original sheeting. Whilst the appellant has stated
    that the external cladding would remain, there is no annotation on the drawings to
    that effect, and no written specification to confirm that it could be retained in situ
    during the conversion works. Indeed, the drawings do not indicate that the existing
    cladding would be re-used at all.
26. There is no evidence to cast doubt on the expert advice contained in the Visual
    Inspection Reports, so I am satisfied that the existing timber frame could provide
    structural support for a scheme of conversion, provided the foundations are
    suitable. However, the submitted drawings do not specify its retention.
    Furthermore, they lack the necessary clarity and detail to persuade me that the
    development would proceed as a conversion. The retention of the existing roof
    covering is not specified on the drawings, and in the absence of constructional
    details, or a written schedule of works, I have significant doubts about the
    feasibility or practicality of retaining the corrugated wall cladding as part of the
    conversion. In the absence of any requirement on the approved drawings to retain
    any of these elements, the dwelling shown on the submitted drawings could be a
    completely new building. At the very least, it is likely that the building would be
    stripped back to the timber frame before new walls, a roof, and a floor are
    constructed. Thus, the starting point for conversion would be a similarly skeletal
    structure to that in the Hibbitt case.
27. Class Q(c) does allow for substantial works, but they must be reasonably
    necessary to convert the building. In this case, the submitted drawings allow for a
    scheme that does not specify the retention of any of the existing structure, and
    could include the construction of entirely new walls and a roof. This goes well
    beyond what could reasonably be described as conversion, and would, instead,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6011147


        constitute rebuilding. I therefore conclude that the submitted scheme would not be
        permitted development under Class Q(c).
28. In coming to this conclusion, I have had regard to the appeal decision 3 that the
    appellant has drawn to my attention, which I also determined. Whilst in that case,
    the building was also open-fronted, the other three walls were of solid masonry
    construction, so there would not have been a similarly skeletal starting point for the
    scheme of conversion. The two cases are not, therefore, directly comparable, so
    the previous appeal carries little weight in my decision.
29. As I have concluded that the proposal would not be permitted development, the
    provisions of Paragraph Q2 relating to prior approval are not relevant.
    Consequently, there is no need for me to consider whether the development would
    be compatible with the retention of nearby trees, or would provide occupants of the
    dwelling with adequate natural light.
Conclusion
30. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.



Nick Davies
INSPECTOR




3
    Appeal Reference: APP/D0840/W/23/3325182


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       6
