    Appeal Decision
    Site visit made on 11 August 2026
    by A Wright BSc (Hons) MRTPI
    an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
    Decision date: 10th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011079
Moonshine Meadow, Cuckfield Road, Ansty, West Sussex RH17 5AL
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Keith Deighton against the decision of Mid Sussex District Council.
•      The application Ref is DM/25/3108.
•      The development proposed is described as ‘full application for a proposed 5 pitch settled Gypsy
       accommodation site including vehicular access permitted under DM/20/1277; revised application
       dealing with residual ecology and arboricultural matters further to appeal ref:
       APP/D3830/W/25/3362298’.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.       A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
         August 2026 which replaces the previous version and the Planning Policy for
         Traveller Sites. I invited the Council and the appellant to consider whether the new
         Framework has relevance to this appeal and have taken account of the responses
         received in my decision.
Main Issues
3.       The main issues in this appeal are whether the site would be a suitable location for
         the proposed development, having regard to:
         •   the accessibility of services and facilities; and
         •   policies concerned with development in areas at risk of flooding.
Reasons
Access to services and facilities
4.       The appeal site lies in the countryside to the west of Cuckfield Road between
         Ansty and Hurstpierpoint. It comprises a paddock with a stable building in an area
         containing large dwellings set in substantial plots with open fields between. There
         is a gated access onto the highway. The proposed scheme is for five pitches
         providing accommodation for Gypsies.
5.       Policy DP33 of the Mid Sussex District Plan 2014 – 2031 (adopted 2018) (DP) sets
         out criteria for assessing proposed new Gypsy sites. Amongst other things, this
         indicates that such proposals will be permitted provided the site is reasonably
         accessible to schools, shops, health and other local services and community

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011079


         facilities. This broadly aligns with Policy HO12 of the Framework where it states
         that Traveller sites should be located to enable access to frequently used services,
         such as education, welfare and health services.
6.       Whilst recognising there might be circumstances where development needs to be
         located in the countryside, Policy DP21 of the DP requires proposals to be located
         to minimise the need for travel. It also requires them to explore and take up
         opportunities to increase use of alternative means of transport to the private car,
         such as the provision of, and access to, safe and convenient routes for walking,
         cycling and public transport. This is consistent with Policy TR4 of the Framework
         which requires proposals to give priority first to walking, wheeling and cycle
         movements with neighbouring areas and second, so far as possible, to facilitating
         easy access to high quality public transport.
7.       The proposed development would be located around 1.9km from Ansty, a small
         village with limited services including a petrol station with a convenience store, and
         around 4.7km from the town of Burgess Hill. The latter offers a range of services
         and facilities including retail, education, health, employment, and public transport
         links to London and Brighton.
8.       A limited bus service (number 89) operates through Ansty between Horsham and
         Haywards Heath. Another bus service (number 100) runs between Horsham and
         Burgess Hill, with the nearest bus stop located around 1.2km south of the site.
         Both require walking along Cuckfield Road to access the bus stops.
9.       As described in the previous appeal for Gypsy accommodation on this site1,
         Cuckfield Road is an undulating road with a national speed limit. It has no
         pedestrian footways, cycle paths or street lighting. The local highway authority
         does not object to the current proposal and previously suggested that cycling is a
         potentially viable option for confident cyclists.
10. Nevertheless, I agree with the Inspector’s reasoning in the previous appeal that
    the route would be unappealing for most people and that the public highway does
    not therefore offer safe and suitable access for pedestrians and cyclists. Thus,
    future occupiers of the proposed scheme would be heavily reliant on private
    vehicles to access facilities.
11. Policy HO12 of the Framework sets out criteria for the location of traveller sites. It
    states that they should be located so that they provide a settled base while
    recognising the extent to which traditional lifestyles can contribute to sustainability
    and may also mean that locations not well-related to existing settlements may be
    appropriate. They should also be located to enable access to frequently used
    services, such as education, welfare and health services. However, in this case
    there is no evidence that the lifestyle of future occupants would contribute to
    sustainability. Further, the site would not be reasonably accessible to the range of
    services identified by Policy DP33 of the DP and Policy HO12 of the Framework.
12. The appellant refers to many proposals for Gypsy sites allowed on appeal where
    Inspectors considered access to services and facilities, amongst other things.
    Nonetheless, in this specific case, which is considered on its own merits, given the
    distance to facilities and the nature of the route, the site would not meet the local
    and national policy requirements.

1
    Appeal ref: APP/D3830/W/25/3362298 ‘the previous appeal/proposal’


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                2
Appeal Decision 6011079


13. Consequently, I conclude that the site would not be a suitable location for the
    proposed development, having regard to the accessibility of services and facilities.
    In this regard, it would conflict with Policies DP21 and DP33 of the DP. It would
    also be contrary to Policy HO12 of the Framework.
Flood risk
14. Policy DP41 of the DP requires proposals to ensure development is safe across its
    lifetime and not increase flood risk elsewhere, considering a range of sources of
    flood risk. It requires particular attention to be paid to those areas that have
    experienced flooding in the past, and proposals should seek to reduce the risk of
    flooding by achieving a reduction from existing run-off rates. It sets out a preferred
    hierarchy of managing surface water drainage from development. This generally
    complies with policies for managing flood risk in the Framework, as set out below.
15. Policy F4 of the Framework identifies the types of applications which should be
    supported by a site-specific flood-risk assessment (FRA). In Flood Zone 1, this
    includes land which has been identified by the Environment Agency as having
    critical drainage problems and land identified in a strategic flood risk assessment
    or the flood map for planning as being at risk of flooding from any source, whether
    now or in the future.
16. Policy F7 of the Framework states that proposals should not present a risk from
    flooding to potential occupiers, users, or visitors, and should not increase flood risk
    elsewhere. Where development is proposed in a location known to be at risk from
    any form of flooding, now or in the future, it should be refused unless certain
    criteria are met. These include: ensuring development will be safe throughout its
    lifetime taking account of the vulnerability of its users; safely managing any
    residual risk, and including safe access and escape routes where appropriate; and
    demonstrating that flood risk will not be increased elsewhere. Mobile homes
    intended for permanent residential use are classed as a highly vulnerable use.
17. The Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)2 outlines that an FRA is carried out to
    assess the flood risk to and from a development site, demonstrating how flood risk
    will be managed now and over the development’s lifetime, taking climate change
    into account, and with regard to the vulnerability of its users. It sets out various
    objectives for FRAs, including establishing whether a development is likely to be
    affected by current and future flooding from any source, whether it will increase
    flood risk elsewhere and whether the measures proposed to deal with these
    effects and risks are appropriate. Amongst other things, the PPG states that the
    FRA should consider historic flooding records3.
18. The site is identified in Flood Zone 1 for fluvial flood risk, but the Environment
    Agency’s (EA) records show that parts of Cuckfield Road are influenced by fluvial
    flooding associated with the River Arun. The Council also has records of historical
    fluvial flooding affecting the appeal site, Cuckfield Road and the surrounding area.
    Further, EA data indicates that parts of Cuckfield Road are affected by surface
    water flooding during a range of rainfall events. Indeed, the appellant’s FRA
    indicates that land between the site and carriageway is within the surface water
    flood extent area. There are also historic records of surface water flooding along
    this road, and evidence of flooding having occurred at a neighbouring property.

2
    Paragraph: 020 Reference ID: 7-020-20220825
3
    Paragraph: 080 Reference ID: 7-080-20220825


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          3
Appeal Decision 6011079


19. The proposal includes five mobile homes providing permanent accommodation, a
    use which is highly vulnerable to flooding. The proposed pitches would be located
    within an area of very low surface water flood risk (comparable to Flood Zone 1)
    under the present day and 2061-2125 climate change scenarios. However, the
    appellant’s FRA fails to consider historic fluvial and surface water flooding and the
    potential for further such events on the safety of future occupants of the pitches.
20. In addition, the appellant’s FRA does not assess the safety implications of flood
    risk for the proposal as set out in the PPG4. For example, there has been no
    consideration of the characteristics of a possible flood event such as the flood
    depth and velocity along Cuckfield Road. There has also been no assessment of
    the ability for residents to safely access and exit the site during an extreme flood
    event, and the impact of flooding on essential services such as emergency service
    access to the development. The proposed scheme would be reliant on Cuckfield
    Road for access, and in the absence of this information I cannot be satisfied that
    safe access and escape routes would be available for occupants in a flood event
    or that the development would be safe for its lifetime. This would conflict with
    Policy DP41 of the DP and Policy F7 of the Framework.
21. The proposal would introduce a driveway, parking spaces, mobile units and utility
    buildings onto existing undeveloped land. The appellant states that the
    development would utilise rainwater harvesting and a discharge off site to manage
    surface water drainage on the site. Nonetheless, no surface water drainage
    strategy, drainage calculations, confirmation of the proposed discharge hierarchy
    or other technical details have been provided to show how surface water from the
    proposed development could be effectively managed to meet the requirements in
    Policy DP41 of the DP.
22. Further, it is indicated that a package treatment plant would manage foul water
    drainage with water discharging to either a soakaway or into the adjacent
    watercourse. However, there is no technical information demonstrating the
    suitability of either discharge option, and other matters such as percolation testing,
    drainage field design and discharge calculations.
23. The appellant considers that surface water and foul drainage arrangements could
    be secured via pre-commencement conditions. Nevertheless, without further
    evidence on the detailed arrangements for these, I cannot be certain that surface
    water generated by the proposal could be managed sustainably throughout the
    lifetime of the development or that foul drainage could be managed without
    unacceptable flood risk consequences. This is in accordance with the findings of
    the Council’s Flood Risk and Drainage Team. As such, pre-commencement
    conditions would not be appropriate in this case.
24. I acknowledge that the previous proposal was not refused by the Council nor
    dismissed by the Inspector on flood risk grounds. However, the Council has since
    adopted and updated its information checklist and guidance for flood risk and
    drainage. This requires the provision of sufficient information at application stage
    to demonstrate that flood risk and drainage can be appropriately managed in
    principle. This includes information relating to surface water and foul water
    drainage, site constraints, drainage hierarchy considerations and flood risk where


4
    Paragraph: 005 Reference ID: 7-005-20220825


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          4
Appeal Decision 6011079


       relevant. As such, there is a need for more information to be submitted with
       planning applications to address these issues than was previously the case.
25. Consequently, I conclude that there has been a failure to demonstrate that the site
    would be a suitable location having regard to policies concerned with development
    in areas at risk of flooding. This would be contrary to Policy DP41 of the DP and
    Policies F4 and F7 of the Framework.
Other Considerations
26. The Council accepts that as at 1 April 2025, it is unable to demonstrate a five year
    supply of Gypsy sites. In these circumstances, Policy S5 of the Framework states
    that development which would address an evidenced unmet need should be
    approved provided it meets the criteria in Policy HO12. If it does not fall within the
    categories set out in Policy S5, the development should only be approved in
    exceptional circumstances, where the benefits of the proposal would substantially
    outweigh the adverse effects, including in relation to promoting sustainable
    patterns of movement. Amongst other things, Policy HO12 requires the existing
    level of local provision and need for additional sites to be taken into account.
27. The Mid Sussex Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Accommodation
    Needs Assessment Update 2024 (GTAA) indicates a need for 21 permanent
    pitches (five for households that meet the national policy definition, 12 for
    households that do not meet the definition and four for undetermined households).
    The GTAA suggests a minimum of three pitches be delivered within the first five
    year period of 2024-2028.
28. The Council states that its existing commitments are currently expected to be
    delivered post year five. It does not give further detail on how the needs identified
    in the GTAA will be met, though I note that the draft District Local Plan 2021-2039
    is still subject to examination and as such carries limited weight.
29. Consequently, from the evidence before me, there appears to be a shortfall in the
    current supply of Gypsy and Traveller pitches. The proposal would contribute
    towards the supply if it were to be occupied by Gypsies and Travellers. This is a
    benefit of the proposal which could be secured via an occupancy condition. Policy
    HO7 of the Framework states that substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community.
30. Gypsies and Travellers have the protected characteristic of race under section
    149(7) of the Equality Act 2010. The public sector equality duty (PSED) at section
    149(1) of the Equality Act requires me to have due regard to eliminating
    discrimination, advancing equality of opportunity and fostering good relations. The
    lack of pitches indicates an inequality in housing opportunity for Travellers. Thus,
    the equality implications of the proposal weigh notably in favour of allowing the
    appeal.
31. The proposal would also make efficient use of the land and deliver biodiversity net
    gain. Given the modest size of the scheme, these points carry limited weight in
    favour of the proposed development.
32. Overall, the benefits of the scheme carry weight of a high order.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6011079


Other Matters
33. The Council did not find harm or development plan conflict in relation to several
    other matters, including character and appearance, living conditions, highway
    safety, and impacts on trees, landscape, protected species and heritage assets.
    Nonetheless, even if I were to agree with the Council on these points, the absence
    of harm would be a neutral matter which would not carry weight in favour of the
    proposed scheme.
Planning Balance
34. As adverse impacts, I have found that the site would be unsuitable for the
    proposed Gypsy accommodation having regard to the accessibility of services and
    facilities and the potential risk of flooding. The resulting conflict with Policies DP21,
    DP33 and DP41 of the DP would lead to a conflict with the development plan as a
    whole and with the Framework as set out above. Indeed, Policy F7 of the
    Framework indicates permission should be refused if its requirements are not met.
    The adverse impacts are very important matters weighing against the proposal.
35. I have identified several other considerations above, which together amount to
    weight of a high order in favour of the proposed scheme. However, the benefits of
    the proposal would not substantially outweigh the adverse effects. Accordingly, the
    exceptional circumstances required by Policy S5(4) of the Framework do not exist.
36. I accept that the prospect of alternative authorised sites becoming available
    remains uncertain given that the LP remains at examination. I have considered the
    option of granting permission for a temporary period, though I have no clear
    indication of what temporary period would be sufficient for the Council to adopt the
    LP, or for any future allocations to come forward other than its statement that
    existing commitments are expected to be delivered post year five. This requires a
    balancing exercise taking account the limited duration of any permission and any
    reasonable expectation of a change in planning circumstances by the end of the
    period. Nevertheless, the danger of flood risk is currently present and will not
    abate in the future, including during any temporary period.
37. Taking all this together, the material considerations do not clearly outweigh the
    harm arising from a limited period of occupation such as to justify a temporary
    permission.
Conclusion
38. The proposal conflicts with the development plan as a whole and the material
    considerations, including the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal should be
    decided other than in accordance with it. The appeal should therefore be
    dismissed.

A Wright
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
