Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 27 August 2026
by D Harris-Watkins BA(Hons) PgD MRICS
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011585
Wayside Farm, Lower Road, Hough-on-the-Hill, Lincolnshire NG32 2BB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) (the
     Act) against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr & Ms Harris and Brummitt against the decision of South Kesteven District
     Council.
•    The application Ref is S25/1903.
•    The development is described as “construction of three residential dwellings (2 no. two-storey and 1
     no. single-storey) on previously developed agricultural land”.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The appeal scheme relates to an outline proposal, with access to be considered at
       this stage, and with all other matters reserved for future consideration. I have
       considered the appeal accordingly. Insofar as submitted plans provide indications
       of potential appearance, layout, scale and landscaping, I have considered them as
       indicative only of how the appeal site could be developed. The plans show the
       point of access and internal circulation routes, as access is included at this stage
       these form part of the proposal.
3.     Within the context of an appeal under section 78 of the Act, it is not within my remit
       to formally determine the existing lawful use of the land as claimed by the
       appellant. However, I shall consider the evidence so far as it is material to this
       appeal. If the appellant wishes to ascertain the existing lawful use of the land, they
       may make an application under section 191 of the Act
4.     In determining this appeal, as the site is located within Hough-on-the-Hill
       Conservation Area (the CA) I have had special regard to section 72(1) of the
       Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990.
5.     On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published. The main parties have been invited to comment on the
       relevance of the Framework to the appeal, I am therefore satisfied they have not
       been prejudiced. Consideration has been given to those comments received in
       reaching the appeal decision.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011585


Main Issues
6.     The main issues are:
         •     the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area, and
               the extent to which it would preserve or enhance the character or
               appearance of the CA; and,
         •     whether the appeal site is a suitable location for the proposed development,
               with regard to the relevant development plan policies.
Reasons
Character and Appearance
7.     The CA comprises the village and the immediate surrounding field network.
       Hough-on-the-Hill has an extensive history, being recorded in the Domesday
       Book, is the site of a Norman motte and bailey castle, and the site of the former
       Hough Priory, which are of high archaeological significance. There is also a range
       of listed and unlisted buildings of historic and architectural interest within the CA.
8.     Hough-on-the-Hill is located on the banks of an escarpment, providing long
       distance views over the Trent and Belvoir Vale. The historic core of the village is
       focused around All Saints Church and the remains of the Motte and Bailey at
       Castle Hill. Surrounding this are dispersed groups of former farmsteads and farm
       buildings, with open spaces in-between.
9.     Given the above, I find that the significance of the CA, insofar as it relates to this
       appeal, to be primarily associated with its historic settlement pattern, dispersed
       farmsteads, topography and its relationship with the wider landscape. The pattern
       of open spaces within the village, play a vital role in both contributing towards its
       significance and maintaining the sense of openness within the village. The Hough
       on the Hill Landscape Character Assessment 2013, emphasises the need to
       maintain these to retain the existing character and structure of the village.
10. The appeal site comprises an undeveloped parcel of land within the CA, and the
    main parties agree the appeal site is an Important Open Space as defined within
    the Hough-on-the-Hill Conservation Area Appraisal and Management Plan 2014
    (CAAMP). Due to the topography of the area, there are a range of views out of and
    into the CA, both from and through the site. The site is a pasture field bordered by
    hedgerows and trees, and is an open space providing separation between
    buildings on Lower Road and Thompson’s Lane. The rural and undeveloped
    nature of the site therefore contributes positively towards the character and
    appearance of the CA.
11. The proposal is to construct three dwellings on the site. The development would
    remove the visual separation and open space between sections of Lower Road
    and Thompson’s Lane. This would enclose the former farm buildings to the north
    into the village. Whilst gaps in built form would remain, and the open countryside
    would still be visible between the dwellings, the proposal would consolidate the
    dispersed pattern of development. This would harmfully reduce the legibility of the
    historic settlement pattern of the village, which forms part of the CA’s significance.
12. The principle of residential development would also result in a domestication of the
    appeal site adversely affecting the sites verdant qualities and the rural approach to

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011585


       the village from the north from the Public Right of Way. The site is not located
       within any of the important views highlighted within the CAAMP, however this does
       not in principle mean the visual effect of the development are acceptable.
       Furthermore, the topography of the site in relation to surrounding lanes results in
       the site being prominently located and this prominence would exacerbate the harm
       cause.
13. Though The Design Guidelines for Rutland and South Kesteven 2021, advises
    designs need not simply replicate the characteristics highlighted within Landscape
    Character Assessments, Conservation Area Appraisals and Neighbourhood Plans,
    it does advise development must respond to the context the features provide. The
    proposed development would remove open space that forms a key characteristic
    and feature of the CA, and this would result in harm to the character and
    appearance of the CA.
14. The appeal proposal would harmfully undermine and conflict with the positive
    characteristics of the CA and reduce the appeal sites contribution towards them.
    Even if the development does not affect all aspects the CA derives its significance
    from, such as topography, the effects are nonetheless harmful.
15. The appellant has indicated the dwellings would be of a high quality of design and
    would use materials and architectural characteristics found within the village, and
    the dwellings would be constructed to a high standard of energy efficiency.
    However, these are matters which would be determined at the reserved matters
    stage and are not for consideration now.
16. Based on the location of the appeal site and the proposed use, I am satisfied that
    the proposal would harm the designated heritage asset. The harm would be
    localised within the CA, and the site forms part of its significance collectively
    together with the rest of the CA rather than individually. As a result, the harm
    would be towards the lower end of the spectrum of harm, but nonetheless of
    considerable importance and weight. In accordance with the Framework, when
    harm is found to the significance of a designated heritage asset, it must be
    weighed against the public benefits of the scheme, with substantial weight given to
    the assets’ conservation.
17. The proposal would contribute towards housing choice and mix, where there is
    currently a shortfall in housing supply when the Framework highlights the
    Governments objective of significantly boosting the supply of homes. As a small
    site, it would also be typically delivered quicker than larger housing sites.
    Considering the scale of the scheme and the effect on housing supply these
    benefits attract moderate weight.
18. The proposed development would also result in long and short term economic and
    social benefits; through the construction process; associated additional funding
    such as council tax revenue, and through the future occupiers’ use of services and
    facilities within the area. The development would also result in a biodiversity net
    gain. However, due to the limited scale of the development these benefits only
    attract limited weight.
19. All new dwellings have to be built in accordance with the latest building regulations
    and must be provided with formalised drainage. I have also not been provided with
    any evidence to demonstrate there is an existing flooding issue with the site or in
    the area. Though the development is not located within a Green Belt or National

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011585


       Landscape, it is located within a conservation area with its own level of protection
       and I have identified harm. Consequently, these matters do not amount to public
       benefits.
20. Even taken together the above public benefits would not outweigh the substantial
    weight to be attached to the conservation of the designated heritage asset.
    Consequently, the proposal fails to accord with policy HE6 of the Framework.
21. For the reasons above, the proposal would have a harmful effect on the character
    and appearance of the area, and it follows it would not preserve or enhance the
    character or appearance of the CA. The proposal would therefore conflict with the
    aims of policies EN6, DE1, SP2, SP3, SP4 of the South Kesteven District Council
    Local Plan 2020 (the LP), as well as policies HoH3 and HoH10 of the Hough on
    the Hill Parish Neighbourhood Plan 2014-2026 (the NP). These policies seek,
    amongst other things, to protect the historic environment, and that development
    should make a positive contribution to the local distinctiveness and character of
    the area and not have an adverse impact on an areas settlement pattern.
Location of Development
22. The Council’s spatial strategy is based upon the settlement hierarchy in policy SP2
    of the LP, which focuses new development on those settlements with the most
    accessible services and facilities. Hough-on-the-Hill falls within Smaller Villages
    which is the fourth tier of the hierarchy. In such locations development will be
    supported in accordance with policies SP3 and SP4 of the LP and all other
    relevant policies, and where development will not compromise the village’s nature
    and character.
23. Policy SP3 of the LP provides an allowance for infill development provided certain
    location criteria are met. Though the site shares a boundary with Jubilee Cottage,
    Willow Barn is located to the north, and there are a small barn and stables
    opposite the proposed access, the majority of the site’s boundaries are surrounded
    by grass paddocks. Consequently, the appeal site is not within a substantially built-
    up frontage, and it would extend development outwards into the countryside.
    Furthermore, the nearby buildings comprise one of the former farmsteads
    detached from the historic core of the village, which are separated from the core of
    the village by both the topography of the land, with the appeal site sitting further
    down the hill, and also by intervening open space. As a result, the appeal site is
    not within the main built-up part of the settlement.
24. Though representations have stated historic mapping shows buildings on a section
    of the site, I have not been provided specific details as to where these were. I have
    also not been provided with any other evidence in relation to the existing lawful
    use of the land. On my site visit only a small, corrugated sheet clad building and a
    pile of rubble was evident, the vast majority of the site was a grass paddock.
    Therefore, for the purposes of this appeal and on the basis of the evidence before
    me, at least the majority of the appeal site does not comprise previously developed
    land. As a result, the proposal would not accord with policy SP3 of the LP.
25. Policy SP4 provides criteria where development on the edge of settlements can be
    considered acceptable. This includes where there is clear evidence of substantial
    support from the local community. The appellant attended a parish council meeting
    to present their proposals, and 9 people were in support of the proposed
    development. They have not provided how many figures were against the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6011585


       proposal. Policy SP4 of the LP does not require unanimous or majority local
       support of a proposal, however in consideration of the size of the village - 9 people
       does not quantify substantial support.
26. Where demonstratable evidence of local community support or objection cannot
    be determined, then there is a requirement for support from the Parish Council.
    The Parish Council’s representation states that it is neutral to the proposal. This is
    not support.
27. Policy SP4 of the LP also requires housing development to meet a proven local
    need and to address a specific targeted need for local market housing. As the
    Council are unable to demonstrate a 5-year supply of housing land, and dwellings
    could be secured to be of a size in demand, I do not find the proposal would
    conflict with Part e) of Policy SP4 in this respect.
28. Though the proposal would be located adjacent to the existing pattern of
    development for the area, the proposal would cause harm to the character and
    appearance of the area and the historic settlement pattern, and would therefore
    not be appropriate to the heritage characteristics of the area. The development is
    also therefore in conflict with criteria b) and d) of policy SP4 of the LP.
29. For the reasons above, the appeal site is not in a suitable location for the proposed
    development having regard to the relevant development plan policies. The
    proposed development would be harmful in that it would undermine the spatial
    strategy for housing. The proposal conflicts with the aims of policies SP2, SP3 and
    SP4 of the LP, which outline the Council’s spatial strategy and seek to protect the
    open countryside.
Other Matters
30. The Council accepts that the proposal would not have an adverse impact on the
    nearby positive unlisted building Wayside Farm. On the basis of the evidence
    before me I find no reason to consider otherwise. The development is therefore in
    accordance with the aim of policy HoH6 of the NP, which seeks to protect positive
    unlisted buildings. The Council has also not identified harm in relation to highway
    safety and living conditions and based on the evidence before me I see no reason
    to come to a different conclusion. However, the absence of harm in relation to
    these matters is a neutral factor in the determination of the appeal.
31. Though new housing development has been constructed elsewhere within the
    village, I have not been provided any details of these developments to assess
    whether they would be directly comparable to the appeal before me. I have
    determined the appeal on its own merits and site-specific context.
32. I appreciate the appellant may have strong ties to the village and representations
    have been received outlining the appellant’s reputation as a builder. Nevertheless,
    the design of the buildings has not been confirmed at this stage, and planning
    permission runs with the land, such that there is no guarantee who would construct
    the proposed dwellings if approved. Therefore, this carries little weight and does
    not outweigh the harm identified.
33. The Framework supports the reduction of the number of years required for
    reserved matters to be submitted from the grant of planning permission to two



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6011585


       years, as proposed by the appellant. However, this would not mitigate the harms
       set out above.
Planning Balance
34. The conflict I have identified with policies EN6, DE1, SP2, SP3 and SP4 of the LP
    as well as policies HoH3 and HoH10 of the NP, results in a conflict with the
    development plan read as a whole.
35. Policy S3 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. For development inside and outside settlements, this means that
    policy S4 and S5 of the Framework should be applied respectively. The appeal site
    is primarily surrounded by grass paddocks and open space, as a result I do not
    find it is located within the settlement.
36. Policy S5 of the Framework states certain forms of development should be
    approved outside of settlements unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects. This includes where the
    development would address an evidenced unmet need, such as where the local
    planning authority cannot demonstrate a five-year supply of deliverable housing
    sites. It is agreed that the Council does not have a five-year housing land supply.
37. Policy S5 of the Framework outlines circumstances in which the benefits of
    approving development proposals are likely to be substantially outweighed by
    adverse effects include, but are not restricted to, situations where the development
    proposal would fail to comply with one of the national decision-making policies
    which state that development proposals should be refused in specific
    circumstances.
38. Under Policy DP3 of the Framework, development must respond to their context,
    including the history, character and features of the site and their setting, so that
    they integrate with and enhance their surroundings. Proposals that fail to do this
    without clear justification must be refused. As established above, the proposal
    would harm the character and appearance of the area and the CA. It also conflicts
    with policy HE6 of the Framework, which requires substantial weight to be given to
    preserving designated heritage assets. Even when taken together, I find the
    benefits of approving the development proposal would be substantially outweighed
    by the adverse effects. As a result, the presumption in favour of sustainable
    development does not apply.
Conclusion
39. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    For these reasons the appeal should be dismissed.

D Harris-Watkins
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
