 Appeal Decisions
 Site visit made on 3 August 2026
 by Les Greenwood MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 25 August 2026


 Appeal A: Ref 6010864
 Section of footpath adjacent to 85 Upper Richmond Rd, London, SW15 2FU
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Safia Rana-Jaswal for BT Group PLC against the decision of the Council of
      the London Borough of Wandsworth.
 •    The application Ref is 2026/0061.
 •    The development proposed is the installation of 1No BT Street Hub Unit and associated
      advertisement panels on either side of the unit.

 Appeal B: Ref 6011686
 Section of footpath adjacent to 85 Upper Richmond Rd, London, SW15 2FU
 •    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
      Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
      consent.
 •    The appeal is made by Rana Jaswal for BT Group PLC against the decision of the Council of the
      London Borough of Wandsworth.
 •    The application Ref is 2026/0183.
 •    The advertisement proposed is the installation of 1No BT Street Hub Unit and associated
      advertisement panels on either side of the unit.


Decisions
Appeal A: Ref 6010864
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal B: Ref 6011686
2. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary matters
3. Both appeal proposals have the same description on the application form (as set
   out above). To be clear, the planning proposal (Appeal A) does not include the
   advertisements themselves. The advertisement proposal (Appeal B) relates to the
   advertisements and the basic structure but not the street hub function.
4. Both appeals were made by BT PLC. In the recitals above I record the different
   names stated for the person/people submitting the appeals, though given the
   similarities of the names it seems likely that this is the same person.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
    Appeal Decisions 6010864 and 6011686


5. The application and appeal documentation makes it clear that the proposals are put
   forward as a replacement for an existing phone kiosk. I saw at my site visit that the
   previously existing kiosk has been removed and the pavement made good.
6. A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
   published on 17 August 2026. Having regard to the changes in the Framework and
   the comparatively minor scale and nature of these appeal proposals, I consider that
   further consultation on this matter is not necessary.
Main Issues
7. For planning applications and appeals (Appeal A), decisions must be made in
   accordance with the plan unless material considerations indicate otherwise1.
   Advertisement proposals (Appeal B) are, in contrast, subject to control in the
   interests of amenity and public safety only, bearing in mind material provisions of
   the development plan and any other relevant factors2.
8. With these requirements in mind, the main issues for both appeals are the effects
   on: (i) the amenity of the local area in terms of both visual character and physical
   convenience; and (ii) the safety of public highway users.
Reasons
Amenity
9. This part of the A205 Upper Richmond Road is a busy local centre, lined mainly by
   shops, cafés and other commercial premises. The street hub unit would be an
   approximately 3m high by 1.2m wide by 0.35m deep structure, providing
   communication services and carrying 2 illuminated digital advertising screens.
10. The other street furniture in this particular stretch of pavement, including bike racks
    and other signs, occupies a strip next to the kerb, leaving most of the pavement
    free of obstructions. The previously existing phone kiosk sat out slightly from this
    line. The proposed unit would sit in a much more central position, completely out of
    alignment with the other nearby street furniture. It would also be set perpendicular
    to the street so would become a highly prominent feature. Although this is a
    commercial shopping area with street lighting and other illuminated signs, I saw no
    similar digital signs in the immediate vicinity. The proposals, due to their size,
    unsympathetic siting and illumination would be an intrusive addition to the street
    scene, adding clutter.
11. I note that properties on the opposite side of Upper Richmond Road are within the
    Oxford Road Conservation Area, The Council has not suggested, however, that the
    setting of that heritage asset would be harmed. I agree with that assessment, due
    to the separation distance and the commercial nature of the area.
12. The aggressive siting of the structure in such a central position would also make
    pedestrians deflect their paths to go around it, causing significant inconvenience
    and potentially making people jostle for their position on this busy stretch of footway
    - despite the overall width of pavement. This poorly sited obstruction would
    therefore also affect local pedestrians’ amenity in this way.


1
     Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004
2
     Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007, Regulation 3

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              2
 Appeal Decisions 6010864 and 6011686


13. I conclude that the proposals would unduly harm the amenity of the local area in
    terms of both visual character and physical convenience. They conflict in this
    respect with Wandsworth Local Plan 2023-2038 (WLP) policies LP1, LP9, LP22
    and LP49, London Plan 2021 policies D8 and T2 and the Framework, which taken
    together support the provision of communications infrastructure in appropriate
    locations - where they would be of high quality design, integrate well in their context
    and not impact the usability of the pedestrian environment.
Public safety
14. The Council’s concern here is that the hub would create an unnecessary
    obstruction of the public space, hindering the safe passage of pedestrians.
    Although I have identified an amenity issue about pedestrian inconvenience, I do
    not find that this would cause a significant safety issue. The unit would be
    positioned well away from the kerb with space to both sides so that pedestrians
    would not likely be forced into the roadway. Conflicts within the flow of pedestrians,
    though potentially awkward, should be resolvable without significant danger.
    Likewise, the sign would be positioned away from driver’s main views where it
    should not cause a significant distraction or hinder visibility.
15. I conclude that the proposals would not significantly affect the safety of public
    highway users. They accord in this respect with WLP policies LP9, LP22, LP49 and
    LP50 and the Framework, which taken together also support communications
    infrastructure in appropriate locations - in this case where public or highway safety
    would not be harmed – and aim to ensure that advertisements avoid causing
    material harm to public or highway safety.
Other matters and planning balance
16. I take account of the Framework’s support for the expansion and upgrading of
    telecommunications infrastructure - in ways which limit an unnecessary proliferation
    of equipment and respect important environmental safeguards. The proposed unit
    would provide telecommunications benefits including emergency calls and
    telephone and internet services, and could also potentially be used for
    environmental monitoring and community purposes. These benefits would,
    however, be substantially outweighed by the adverse effect on amenity of these
    poorly sited proposals, with reference to Framework policy S4.
Conclusion
17. Although I have found in favour of the appellant in regard to the second main issue,
    my concerns about the impacts on amenity are sufficiently compelling for me to
    conclude that the appeals should not succeed.
Les Greenwood
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
