Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by S Simms BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011365
Land off Long Lane, Fowlmere, Cambridgeshire
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•    The appeal is made by Tony and Christine Deans and against the decision of South Cambridgeshire
     District Council.
•    The application reference is 26/01207/PIP.
•    The development proposed is up to seven self/custom-build dwellings.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The proposal is for permission in principle. The Planning Practice Guidance
       advises that this is part of an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
       housing-led development, comprising two stages: the first ‘permission in principle’
       (PIP) stage establishes whether a site is suitable and the second ‘technical details
       consent’ (TDC) stage is when the detailed development proposals are assessed.
       This appeal relates to the first of these two stages.
3.     The scope of the considerations for PIP is limited to location, land use and the
       amount of development permitted. All other matters would be considered as part of
       a subsequent TDC application if PIP is granted. I have determined the appeal on
       that basis. The submitted Planning Statement includes an Illustrative Masterplan,
       which demonstrates how the site might be developed. I have accordingly treated
       this information as illustrative only.
4.     A new version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) and the
       latest Housing Delivery Test results were published on 17 August 2026. I invited
       the main parties to comment on any implications of these for their cases and took
       their responses into account in reaching my decision.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues are whether the location is suitable for the proposed amount of
       residential development, having particular regard to the:
           •    accessibility of services and facilities;
           •    effect on the character and appearance of the area; and
           •    effect on the best and most versatile agricultural land.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011365


Reasons
Accessibility of services and facilities
6.     The site is a field a short distance north of the development framework boundary
       of Fowlmere, adjacent to dispersed houses and farm buildings. The village centre,
       about 600m away, has bus stops, a public house, church, primary school and a
       small business park. However, the first 100m of the road to it lacks a footway. The
       speed limit outside the site is 30 mph and reduces to 20mph entering the village.
7.     The District Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) advises that
       local shops, a primary school and a doctor’s surgery should ideally be located
       within 800m to avoid car dependency. The nearest shop is about 2.5km away in
       Thriplow and the nearest doctor's surgery and pharmacies are about 5km away in
       Melbourn. There is a café about 300m north of the site, but no footway to it and
       part of the road is subject to the national speed limit.
8.     There is a limited daytime bus service to Cambridge and Royston. The nearest
       railway stations are about 3.3 km and 3.7 km away in Shepreth and Foxton, but
       there is no paved footpath or footway to either. The appellant suggests the footway
       might be extended and a bus stop provided outside the site, and these could
       reasonably be conditions of a TDC. However, the village has no shops and a poor
       bus service, limiting the advantage obtained.
9.     I am referred to an allowed PIP appeal1 where a railway station was within a ten-
       minute cycle ride. However, that village had more facilities, and the station was
       closer and more easily and safely accessible. In this case, the nearest railway
       station is within cycling distance, but the most direct route is mostly subject to the
       national speed limit and crosses a busy main road. Furthermore, I have no
       evidence as to service frequency, utility or journey times.
10. Overall, I am satisfied that future residents would be likely to depend on the car for
    access to most services and facilities. Therefore, the location would not be suitable
    for residential development, which would conflict with Policies S/2 and S/7 of the
    South Cambridgeshire Local Plan 2018 (SCLP). These seek to direct housing to
    sustainable locations, where there is the infrastructure capacity to support it.
Character and appearance
11. The site forms part of a gap between the village and outlying houses and farm
    buildings. The adjoining garden to the north and fields to the west provide tree
    cover, but the site is more open to the road on approach from the village. The
    Council’s landscape officer is reported to have advised verbally that the site is
    strongly characteristic of the local landscape.
12. The appellant considers that the site shares characteristics with one in another
    village in the district, in respect of which PIP was granted at appeal.2 However,
    that differs from this in that it infilled a frontage gap within the village and was
    otherwise less open. Its development would therefore have different effects. Whilst
    the appeal site does not project into the countryside like one dismissed at appeal3
    at the other side of the village, it is nonetheless detached from the village.

1
  APP/E2205/W/25/3375669
2
  Appeal reference 6002762
3
  APP/W0530/W/22/3311183


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011365


13. The proposal would reduce the gap with outlying houses and farm buildings. This
    would change the shape of the village and the experience of open countryside on
    leaving it. Whether landscape impacts could be mitigated at the TDC stage will
    vary from case to case. I am satisfied that the impact of developing this site would
    be inherently harmful, so that design and landscaping could only reduce harm to
    character and appearance, including to landscape character.
14. Consequently, the proposal would be contrary to SCLP Policies S/7, HQ/1 and
    NH/2, which protect the countryside from encroachment and require proposals to
    respond to their landscape context and character.
Agricultural land
15. The field is Grade 2 or 3a agricultural land, both of which grades are amongst the
    best and most versatile. However, the farmer states that it is too small to farm with
    modern machinery and has not, in fact, been farmed for at least 60 years. The
    proposal would result in its loss to agricultural use, but the appellant considers that
    its size means that development would not be significant.
16. The appellant describes the site as separate from the wider agricultural fields
    surrounding the site, but there is a field to its south and I have no evidence as to
    whether the site is contiguous with a larger holding. The appellant further points
    out that all the land around the village and most of the district comprises the best
    and most versatile agricultural land.
17. SCLP Policy NH/3 would not grant permission for development which would lead
    to the irreversible loss of Grades 1, 2 or 3a agricultural land unless sustainability
    considerations and the need for the development were sufficient to override the
    need to protect the agricultural value of the land. Whether the site is farmed or
    farmable is not a criterion of the policy.
18. Whilst I turn to need later, I have no evidence that the extent of best and most
    versatile agricultural land would prevent need being met across the district if policy
    were to be applied. In any event, I have found that the site is not in a sustainable
    location and so, as both criteria must be met, the loss is contrary to that policy.
Other Matters
19. The appellant states that there are 1,110 people on the self-build and custom
    housebuilding register in the district, but only 533 permissions exist. The Council
    does not dispute the need for additional self and custom build housing and is
    under a statutory duty to permit self-build and custom housebuilding on enough
    serviced plots of land to meet demand in its area in respect of each base period.
    This is an important material consideration.
20. The proposed dwellings are described as self- or custom build, but a planning
    obligation would be necessary at the TDC stage to require the owner to market it
    as a serviced plot to people on the self-build and custom housebuilding register.
    Whilst I cannot be sure TDC would ultimately be granted, I am satisfied that the
    description of development would allow the Council to require an obligation to
    restrict any TDC that was granted to custom and self-build housing.
21. The proposal would also result in additional construction activity, revenue and
    demand for local services and facilities from future occupiers.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011365


Planning Balance
22. Outside settlements, unless the benefits would be substantially outweighed by
    adverse effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in
    the Framework, then Policy S5 of the Framework requires development which
    would address an evidenced unmet need to be approved if it is physically well-
    related to a settlement and of a scale that can be accommodated.
23. Policy CC2 of the Framework requires development to be located where it can
    support sustainable patterns of movement, enable good accessibility for different
    users, make the most of transport infrastructure and support good access to
    facilities to limit the need to travel. I have found that it would not be so located and
    attach significant weight to this conflict.
24. Policy DP3 of the Framework requires proposals to be refused if they would not
    respond to their context, integrate with and enhance their surroundings. I have
    found that the proposal would harm character and appearance, contrary to
    relevant development plan policies. I attach substantial weight to this conflict.
25. Policy HO7 of the Framework requires substantial weight to be given to providing
    homes that meet needs, including for people wishing to commission or build their
    own homes. However, it is not certain that TDC would ultimately be granted and
    that the proposal would therefore contribute to meeting that need. Consequently, I
    attach only moderate weight to this consideration.
26. I attach modest weight to the economic benefits of additional construction activity,
    revenue and demand on local services and facilities from future occupiers.
27. Policy N2 of the Framework requires poorer-quality land to be used if significant
    development of agricultural land is necessary. The site’s size and history mean
    that the proposal would be less significant, although its contiguity and necessity of
    development are uncertain. I therefore attach moderate weight to this conflict.
28. The unsuitable location, likely harm to character and appearance and loss of
    agricultural land would substantially outweigh the benefits, despite the shortfall in
    self- and custom-build serviced plots. I have also found that the proposal would not
    be suitably related to a settlement and its need for access to services and facilities
    could not be accommodated by available infrastructure.
29. Furthermore, in the context of this appeal, SCLP Policies S/2, S/7, HQ/1 and NH/2
    are not materially inconsistent with the Framework and so should continue to be
    afforded significant weight, which I attach to the conflicts with them. SCLP Policy
    NH/3 is less consistent in not considering the significance of development.
Conclusion
30. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and material considerations,
    including the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other
    than in accordance with it. Consequently, the appeal should be dismissed.



S Simms
INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
