Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by Richard Snow BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011598
1A Ellis Street, Kirkby in Ashfield, Nottinghamshire NG17 7AL
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Zafer Gulduren on behalf of Ashfield Global Limited against the decision
     of Ashfield District Council.
•    The application Ref is V/2025/0437.
•    The development proposed is change of use from Class E (Restaurant, snack bar and café) to Sui
     Generis (Drinking establishment, public house, wine bar, drinking establishment with expanded food
     provision). No material change to the building. Existing first floor managers accommodation to
     remain.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the change of use
       from Class E (Restaurant, snack bar and café) to Sui Generis (Drinking
       establishment, public house, wine bar, drinking establishment with expanded food
       provision); no material change to the building; existing first floor managers
       accommodation to remain at 1A Ellis Street, Kirkby in Ashfield, Nottinghamshire
       NG17 7AL in accordance with the terms of the application, ref V/2025/0437,
       subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The description of development the banner heading above and my formal
       decision differs from that given on the planning application form, but the appellant
       has agreed to the revised description, which now more accurately describes that
       for which permission is sought.
3.     Windows and doors shown on the submitted ground floor plan do not match those
       existing on the premises. The description of development specifically excludes
       material changes to the building, and no proposed elevation plans have been
       provided. I have accordingly determined the appeal on the basis that no external
       changes to the building are proposed.
4.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (‘the new Framework’) was published
       on 17 August 2026 after the statements in relation to this appeal had been
       exchanged and final comments made. However, as the changes to the new
       Framework are not material to this decision, the cases of the parties have not been
       prejudiced by not being able to comment on the new Framework. I have therefore
       determined the appeal on the basis of the statements and comments that have
       been received.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011598


Background and Main Issue
5.     The appellant suggests that the change of use took place in 2020 and that the
       premises operate as a Mediterranean Bar & Grill until 10pm and then as a drinking
       establishment until midnight. The proposal seeks to effectively regularise the
       change of use of the premises to a drinking establishment with expanded food
       provision, and permit opening hours later into the night.
6.     Due to the foregoing, the main issue is the effect of the proposal on the living
       conditions of nearby occupiers with regard to noise and disturbance late at night
       and during the early hours of the morning.
Reasons
7.     The appeal site comprises an existing restaurant, with managers/staff flat above,
       located within Kirkby in Ashfield town centre. As you would expect for a town
       centre location, there are a range of commercial uses, including other restaurants
       and drinking establishments in the immediate and surrounding area. There is also
       residential accommodation above existing commercial uses nearby. The site is
       along a busy road and high levels of activity during the day and at night time can
       be expected.
8.     The proposal would change the use of the ground floor to a drinking establishment
       with expanded food provision. The application form identifies proposed opening
       hours as 07:00 – 01:00 (Monday – Friday) and 07:00 – 02:00 (Saturday, Sundays
       and Bank Holidays). The first floor of the premises would continue to be used as a
       manager’s flat.
9.     In support of the proposal, the appellant’s evidence includes an Acoustic Report
       incorporating a Noise Impact Assessment (the Assessment). The results of a
       weekend noise monitoring undertaken outside and near to the premises are
       presented. The Assessment concludes that use of the premises with the main front
       bifold doors closed did not give rise to any significant noise and that patrons
       departing the premises at closing time had no discernible impact on background
       noise levels along Station Road. The report advances that single event noises (eg
       the voices of departing customers) at the proposed closing times would be less
       problematic to local residents than those at the current midnight closing time as
       they would occur when residents are likely to be in deeper sleep and therefore less
       likely to be disturbed. Whilst the noise survey did not appear to include times when
       the front bi-fold doors were open, as they may be in summer months, its
       conclusions suggest unacceptable noise and disturbance would be unlikely to
       occur.
10. The council contends that use of the proposed drinking establishment, particularly
    during hours late into the evening and into the early hours, would cause
    unacceptable living conditions for occupiers of the first floor flat above the
    premises. The appellant advances that this flat would be occupied solely by the
    manager, or other staff members of the proposed use, and that the restriction of its
    occupation in this manner could be controlled appropriately through the imposition
    of a planning condition. Such an arrangement would satisfy the council’s
    Environmental Health Officer (EHO), although the council’s statement raises
    concern that such a condition could not be lawfully imposed or enforced.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011598


11. The red line of the proposal incorporates the entire building. The application
    indicates that the first floor is within the control of the applicant and the description
    of development specifically refers to the continued use of the first floor flat as
    managers’ accommodation. The use of planning conditions to restrict occupancy
    of residential accommodation is commonplace and the imposition of such a
    condition would meet the tests in the new Framework, including its enforceability. I
    find therefore, that limiting the occupation of the first floor flat in this manner would
    appropriately address concerns over the effect of the proposal on the living
    conditions of the upper floor occupant(s).
12. The council advances that use of an external seating area to the front of the
    premises would give rise to noise and disturbance into the early hours of the
    morning, harming the living conditions of nearby residents. However, the red line
    plan identifying the appeal site excludes this external area and it does not
    therefore form part of the proposal. The council is further concerned that use of the
    premises with the front bi-fold doors open would give rise to disturbance during
    entertainment such as karaoke and live music. The appellant’s proposed condition
    requiring doors and windows to be closed during such periods is endorsed by the
    EHO and would restrict noise disturbance during these events.
13. My attention has been drawn to a number of Police recorded incidents related to
    the appeal site, which includes a 12-month period between March 2025 and March
    2026. It is suggested that increased opening hours would lead to more incidents
    later into the night thus increasing noise and disturbance to local residents.
    However, information in respect of those incidents is limited. Indeed, it is not clear
    how the incidents are linked to the appeal site. I am also mindful that there are
    other premises open late into the night and there is otherwise limited substantiated
    evidence to demonstrate that, within the context of this town centre environment,
    the proposed opening hours would exacerbate noise and disturbance levels to the
    extent that it would harm the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers. Likewise,
    and for similar reasons to the above, there is no substantiated evidence that the
    proposal would contribute to additional crime and disorder in the town centre.
14. The proposed opening hours would generally align with other drinking
    establishments nearby. It is likely that this would encourage the dispersal of
    patrons between the various venues in the town centre, avoiding concentrated
    periods of people departing the premises. Along with traffic noise associated with
    the busy road and its junctions in close proximity to the premises, this is likely to
    result in the further dilution of noise from pedestrians arriving and departing.
15. It is clear that the council has concerns over the way the premises has operated
    historically and may operate in the future. However, my consideration of this
    appeal is limited to matters of land use planning and the council has other
    regulatory means by which to address such concerns through licencing and noise
    abatement processes. Similarly, any historic breaches of planning control would
    have been within the gift of the council to resolve.
16. Having regard to all of the above and noting that the council’s EHO raises no
    objection to the proposal subject to conditions, I conclude, on the evidence before
    me, that the proposal would not have an unacceptable effect on the living
    conditions of nearby occupiers with regard to noise and disturbance late at night
    and during the early hours of the morning. Accordingly, the proposal meets the
    requirements of Policy ST1 of the Ashfield Local Plan Review (2002) by ensuring

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011598


       that, amongst other things, it will not adversely affect the character, quality,
       amenity or safety of the environment.
Conditions
17. I have considered the council’s suggested conditions against the tests in the new
    Framework and the advice in the Planning Practice Guidance. For certainty, I have
    included the standard 3-year implementation condition [1].
18. For clarity I have amended the suggested condition specifying the approved plans
    to the site plan and proposed block plan only, given that the proposed ground floor
    plan includes works not included as part of the proposed development [2]. I have
    also amended the opening hours condition to more accurately reflect those
    proposed and to protect the living conditions of nearby residents [3].
19. I have not included the council’s suggested conditions preventing the installation of
    amplifying equipment and requiring that windows and doors remain closed at all
    times. Such conditions are unreasonable and unnecessary in the context of the
    proposed development. Instead, I have amalgamated these conditions to require
    that the doors and windows are closed whilst amplified or live music is being
    played, except for ingress and egress, to protect the living conditions of residents
    [4].
20. Finally, with minor amendments to the wording, I have included a condition which
    restricts the occupation of the first floor flat to member(s) of staff, as independent
    occupation of the flat would be likely to give rise to unacceptable living conditions
    due to noise transference [5]. This would be reasonable and necessary in the
    circumstances.
Conclusion
21. With appropriate conditions to control the manner of the use and occupation of the
    premises, the proposal would not give rise to unacceptable harm to the living
    conditions of nearby residents. The proposal accords with the development plan
    as a whole and there are no material considerations which indicate a decision
    should be made other than in accordance with it. Accordingly, the appeal should
    be allowed.



Richard Snow
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6011598




                                           Schedule of Conditions

       1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
          the date of this decision.
       2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
          Site Plan and Proposed Block Plan included on drawing no: 2501-01 dated 15
          June 2025.
       3) The premises shall only be open for customers between the following hours:
             • 07:00 Mondays – 01:00 Tuesdays
             • 07:00 Tuesdays – 01:00 Wednesdays
             • 07:00 Wednesdays – 01:00 Thursdays
             • 07:00 Thursdays – 01:00 Fridays
             • 07:00 Fridays – 01:00 Saturdays
             • 07:00 Saturdays – 02:00 Sundays
             • 07:00 Sundays – 02:00 Mondays
             • 07:00 Bank or Public Holidays – 02:00 the following morning.
       4) All ground floor windows and doors shall remain closed when live or recorded
          music is being played, except for the purposes of ingress and egress to the
          premises.
       5) The occupation of the residential flat at first floor of the premises shall be
          limited to a person solely or mainly employed as a manager/employee of the
          business occupying the ground floor of the premises, together with their
          partner/spouse and any resident dependents.


                                              End of Schedule




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         5
