Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 24 August 2026
by H Nicholls MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 09 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011224
The Elms, Woodperry Road, Beckley OX3 9UZ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Tate Rogers against the decision of South Oxfordshire District Council.
•    The application Ref is P26/S0547/FUL.
•    The development proposed is construction of new self-build two bedroom, 1.5 storey detached
     house with two off-street parking spaces, bike and bin stores and private amenity space.

Decision
1.    The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for construction of new
      self-build two bedroom, 1.5 storey detached house with two off-street parking
      spaces, bike and bin stores and private amenity space at The Elms, Beckley,
      OX3 9UZ, in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref P26/S0547/FUL,
      subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.    An updated version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework)
      was published on 17 August 2026 and became a material consideration in the
      determination of planning proposals from the date of its publication. The main
      parties have been provided with an opportunity to comment on the relevance of
      the revised Framework so as to avoid any prejudice.
Main Issue
3.    The main issue in the appeal is the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of
      neighbouring occupiers at Honeybear, with particular regard to outlook and light.
Reasons
4.    Beckley is a small village within the Green Belt largely formed by residential
      development along High Street, Church Street and Woodperry Road. Closely
      spaced dwellings on the southern side of Woodperry Road front onto the road with
      modest front garden areas and typically larger private rear gardens. Dwellings also
      take a variety of forms, with some bungalows, dwellings with rooms in the roof and
      some two storey dwellings all contributing to a varied, yet pleasant streetscene.
5.    The proposal seeks to introduce a modestly-scaled two bedroom dwelling onto the
      site fronting onto Woodperry Road. The upper floor of accommodation would be
      set within the roof to minimise its overall scale. The dwelling would be provided
      with two parking spaces to the front and modest garden area to the rear. It would
      sit between two existing dwellings, Honeybear to the south-east and The Elms to
      the north-west.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011224


6.    The Elms is in the process of being extended to provide accommodation within its
      compact roof form. The Honeybear is also a two storey dwelling orientated to face
      the street, with rear windows overlooking its rear garden. It also has side windows
      in the flank wall at ground floor level which currently look out towards the close
      boarded fence boundary.
7.    The appeal dwelling would have front and rear walls broadly in line with the front
      and rear walls of Honeybear and would be angled modestly away from it. The
      absence of any material projection forward or rearward of Honeybear would
      ensure that the proposal avoided a materially overbearing impact. The side
      windows at ground floor level in Honeybear would not be materially affected in
      terms of outlook as they already look towards the shared boundary. As they are
      not the primary outlook or source of light within the rooms that they serve, the
      appeal proposal would not materially affect the light or outlook that they afford the
      occupiers of Honeybear from these living spaces.
8.    The first floor window in the flank wall of Honeybear overlooks the appeal site
      which is currently an area of side garden belonging to The Elms. The submitted
      evidence proves that the outlook from the window prior to site clearance was
      towards some evergreen trees close to the intervening boundary. Whilst these
      trees have since been removed, it is evident that the outlook afforded by the
      window was not particularly open or far-reaching.
9.    The appeal proposal would introduce a side wall within around 3m or more from
      the flank wall of Honeybear. The outlook from the window would be over the roof
      slope angled away from Honeybear, rather than towards a blank wall. This would
      maintain some sky glimpses. The roof form would not breach the line taken 25
      degrees from the centreline of the window, which would mean that there would be
      no harmful impact on the degree of light entering the bedroom through the window.
      Furthermore, as there is a rooflight serving the same bedroom as the flank wall
      window, there is a means for light to enter the room and for the occupants to
      experience another outlook.
10. In terms of privacy effects, the window in the side elevation at ground floor level
    would be screened by the intervening boundary fence. The rooflights in the rear
    elevation would be at least 1.5m above the floor level of the rooms that they serve.
    As such, there would be no material harm in terms of privacy.
11. Taking the above matters together, the proposal would not result in a harmful
    effect on the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers at Honeybear, with
    particular regard to outlook and light. The proposal therefore complies with, in
    particular, Policy DES6 of the South Oxfordshire Local Plan 2035 (adopted 2020)
    (Local Plan). This Policy specifically requires that development should not result in
    significant adverse impacts on the amenity of neighbouring uses in relation to loss
    of privacy, daylight or sunlight, dominance or visual instruction. Whilst not referred
    to in the Council’s decision notice, the proposal would also accord with Policy DG1
    of the Beckley and Stowood Neighbourhood Plan (BSNP) (adopted 2024) which
    shares similar objectives to policy DES6. For similar reasons, the proposal would
    also meet the expectations of Framework policy L2(1)(ii) which seeks for an
    efficient use of land through new development, provided it maintains acceptable
    living standards for residents and neighbours with regard to daylight, sunlight,
    privacy and external amenity space.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011224


Other Matters
12. The description of the development incorporates the term ‘self-build’ which is a
    form of housing for people wishing to commission or build their own homes. The
    Framework requires development plans to provide policies that take account of the
    needs for this type of accommodation. I have not been pointed towards any
    particular policy of the Local Plan that specifically supports self-build development,
    but the principle of development is not in dispute in any event. Neither main party
    has sought to offer a condition or planning obligation that secures the dwelling
    specifically as a self-build unit and given the acceptability of the principle of
    development under policies HO1 and HO8 of the Local Plan and policy VB1 of the
    BSNP, it is not strictly necessary for me to insist upon a planning obligation for
    such a purpose.
13. I have taken account of the representations made in respect of the proposal by
    interested parties. With particular regard to car parking, two spaces will be
    provided. Whilst it would be preferrable for vehicles to be able to turn on site and
    exit in forward gear, this is not achievable on all properties along Woodperry Road
    and the nature of the road and extent of visibility achievable would not result in a
    material hazard to road users. Visibility splays would also form a requirement of a
    planning condition.
14. I have also considered the criticism that the site is constrained and the
    development would appear cramped. I find that the dwellings along Woodperry
    Road share similar spacing in some instances such that the appeal proposal,
    whilst close to its near neighbours, would not result in the streetscene being
    unduly harmed or appearing cramped.
15. Whilst reference has been made to the emerging Joint Local Plan and its ability to
    attract at least limited weight relative to its progress towards adoption, no conflict
    with any specific policies has been brought to my attention.
Conditions
16. In addition to conditions stipulating the statutory period for commencement of
    development and the approved plans, conditions are needed to require a
    construction method statement to avoid any effects on species throughout the
    construction phase. For similar reasons, conditions are needed for details of
    necessary biodiversity enhancements and for any lighting scheme to be approved
    prior to its installation.
17. Details of both surface water and foul drainage schemes are also required by
    condition to avoid any environmental harms and increased risks of flooding. These
    conditions and those required for the construction method statement are pre-
    commencement conditions for unavoidable reasons but the appellant has agreed
    to the imposition of these conditions.
18. In the interests of the character and appearance of the area, details of the external
    materials of construction are required by condition.
19. To maintain highway safety, conditions are needed to secure the parking spaces
    prior to occupation and to ensure that the visibility splays are provided and
    thereafter maintained. A condition is also needed to prevent surface water spilling
    out onto the highway.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011224


20. In order to promote sustainable modes of travel, a condition is needed to ensure
    that cycle storage is provided on site.
21. Whilst not a condition suggested by the Council, it is necessary to remove
    permitted development rights for householder extensions (including alterations to
    insert additional windows), roof alterations and the construction of outbuildings
    given the modest size of the plot and close relationship of the proposal to
    neighbouring dwellings.
22. The Council has also recommended that informatives are added to remind the
    appellants of the need to pay the Community Infrastructure Levy and to secure
    approval for any works required to be carried out within the public highway. The
    appellant is advised to seek advice on these aspects which are covered under
    separate legislation.
Conclusion
23. The proposals comply with the development plan when taken as a whole. There
    are no considerations which individually or cumulatively indicate that a decision
    should be made other than in accordance therewith.
24. Consequently, the appeal should succeed.



H Nicholls
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6011224


SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS

     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plan numbers: 16, 17, 18 and 19.
     3)       No development shall take place, including vegetation clearance, demolition
              or ground works, unless and until a Construction Method Statement for
              protected species is submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority. This shall be produced by a suitably qualified ecologist
              and shall describe Reasonable Avoidance Measures to be employed during
              construction to avoid impacts on:
               1. Badger, hedgehog and other small animals (including measures to be
                   employed to avoid these species becoming trapped in excavations)
               2. Nesting birds (including vegetation clearance timings and/or
                   arrangements for ecological supervision)
              The Construction Method Statement shall include the procedure to be
              followed in each case if a protected species is found on site. The approved
              Construction Method Statement shall be adhered to and implemented
              throughout the construction period strictly in accordance with the approved
              details.
     4)       Prior to the commencement of development, with the exception of any
              demolition, a full surface water drainage scheme shall be submitted to, and
              approved in writing by, the Local Planning Authority. The design of the
              surface water drainage system shall be in accordance with the national
              standards for sustainable drainage systems, including details of BRE 365
              soakage testing, levels, size, position and construction of all drainage works.
              The drainage scheme shall be sized to accommodate a minimum of the
              worst case 1 in 30 year storm, with evidence to demonstrate that the site can
              accommodate the worst case 1:100 year storm + 40% Climate Change
              storm, without any flows exiting up to this storm event and any storage on
              site not causing a nuisance or flooding to property. Any offsite discharge shall
              be restricted to QBAR. A surface water discharge to a Thames Water
              recorded foul sewer will not be permitted under any circumstance. The
              hydraulic model must be run in FSR/FEH. Cv values must be set at 0.95. A
              10% increase for urban creep must be provided. An exceedance plan must
              be provided. The building must contain a bio retention and source control
              feature. Full construction details of all surface water drainage components
              including hard standing areas, must be provided. Drainage layout from RWP
              must be provided.
              The approved scheme shall be implemented in accordance with the
              approved details prior to the occupation of the development hereby
              approved.
     5)       Prior to the commencement of development, except for any demolition, a full
              foul water drainage scheme shall be submitted to and approved in writing by
              the Local Planning Authority. The drainage scheme shall include details of
              any necessary soakage testing, method, levels, size, position, and
              construction of the drainage scheme. Full construction details of all foul water


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6011224


              drainage components must be provided and the drainage layout from SVP
              must be provided.
              The approved scheme shall be implemented in accordance with the
              approved details prior to the occupation of the development hereby
              approved.
     6)       The exterior of the development hereby permitted shall only be constructed in
              the materials specified on the plans/supporting documents hereby approved.
     7)       Prior to the commencement of the development above new slab level, details
              (including specification, position, height, orientation) of a scheme of features
              to be provided for protected and priority species, shall be submitted to and
              approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority. The scheme shall be,
              designed in conjunction with a suitably qualified ecologist and bird/bat boxes
              on buildings shall be integrated into the fabric of the development. Features
              provided will be additional and separate to those required as mitigation
              measures under any protected species licence. A minimum number of
              biodiversity enhancement features shall be provided onsite as follows:
              One integrated bird nest box for house sparrow Passer domesticus or swift
              Apus apus, and one integrated bat box.
              Thereafter, the development shall be implemented in accordance with the
              approved details. All features shall be provided prior to first use and shall be
              retained and maintained thereafter.
     8)       No external lighting shall be installed on site unless and until a sensitive
              lighting strategy for bats is submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority. The strategy shall protect the conservation status of local
              bat populations, by:
              a) identifying those areas/features on site that are likely to be both sensitive
              for bats and vulnerable to disturbance from artificial lighting, including: known
              or potential breeding sites, resting places, foraging areas or important routes
              used to access key areas of their territory.
              b) demonstrating that the design and siting of the proposed lighting
              installation will not disturb or prevent bats using the areas identified in a)
              (through provision of appropriate lighting plans, isolux contour maps and
              technical specifications for the specific lighting units to be installed).
              All external lighting shall be installed in accordance with the specifications
              and locations set out in the approved strategy. Under no circumstances
              should any other external lighting be installed without the written approval of
              the Local Planning Authority.
     9)       Prior to the use of the new vehicular access, visibility splays shall be
              provided in both directions measuring 2.4 metres by 25 metres, to the
              nearside kerb in either direction. Such splays shall be designed to ensure
              there is no obstruction to vision above 0.9 metre in height relative to the
              centre line of the adjacent carriageway over the whole of each visibility splay
              area. Thereafter, the visibility splays shall be permanently maintained free
              from obstruction to vision.
     10)      Prior to occupation of the dwelling hereby permitted the proposed means of
              access onto Woodperry Road is to be formed and laid out and constructed
              strictly in accordance with the local highway authority's specifications and all
              ancillary works specified shall be undertaken.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6011224


     11)      Prior to the first occupation of the development, hereby approved, the parking
              area shall be provided in accordance with drawing no. 17, and shall be
              constructed, laid out, surfaced, drained and completed to be compliant with
              sustainable drainage (SuDS) principles, and shall be retained unobstructed
              except for the parking of vehicles associated with the development at all
              times.
     12)      No surface water from the development shall be discharged onto the
              adjoining highway.
     13)      Cycle parking facilities shall be provided prior to the occupation of the
              development hereby approved, in accordance with details to be submitted to
              and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority, prior to the
              commencement of development. Cycle parking provision to accord with
              Oxfordshire County Council standards requires two cycle parking spaces per
              bedroom, using ‘Sheffield’ type cycle stands at minimum 0.9m centres to be
              covered and secure.
     14)      Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 3 of the Town and Country Planning
              (General Permitted Development) Order 2015 (or any Order revoking and re-
              enacting that Order with or without modification) no building, structure or
              other alteration permitted by Classes A, B, and E of Part 1 and Class A of
              Part 2 of Schedule 2 of the Order shall be undertaken or erected on the
              application site without an application made for that purpose.

ENDS-----




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
