 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 14 August 2026
 by Jonathan Price BA(Hons) DipTP DMS MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 2 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011154
 21 Harwich Road, Little Clacton, Clacton-on-Sea, Essex CO16 9ND
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Ben Ferguson against the decision of Tendring District Council.
 •    The application Ref is 25/01061/FULHH.
 •    The development proposed is various works including extension to outbuilding, extension to home,
      hardstanding, drainage and swimming pool.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Application for costs
2. An application for costs was made by Mr Ben Ferguson against Tendring District
   Council. This is the subject of a separate Decision.
Preliminary Matters
3. The proposals that are the subject of this appeal are already in place. Section 73A
   of the 1990 Act allows for the submission of ‘retrospective’ applications.
4. On 17 August 2026 the Government published the revised National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework). I sought and considered the views of the main parties
   over this, prior to determining this appeal.
Main Issues
5. The effects of the proposals on neighbouring living conditions, with particular
   regard to rear outlook from the next-door dwelling at 19 Harwich Road and noise
   levels emanating from heat pump apparatus.
Reasons
6. The appeal relates to a dwelling within a stretch of ribbon housing development.
   The homes here observe an even building line and are generally quite closely
   spaced. Like its immediate neighbours, No 21 has a relatively long back garden.
   Much of this is occupied by the single storey additions to which this appeal relates.
   The proposal was viewed from 19 Harwich Road, as arranged, and also from the
   rear, via a track adjacent to playing fields. However, the appellant was not present
   at the advised site visit time to permit access to view the development from the rear
   of No 21. The planning statement does contain photographs taken within the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6011154


     appeal property of various stages of the development, the plans of which have
     been closely examined.
7. It is evident that the host dwelling was originally built as a bungalow, with roof
   space accommodation and partly flat and partly pitched roofed rear extensions
   added more recently. The pitched roof extension is to the side adjacent to No 19,
   which itself has a conservatory of a slightly lesser rearward extent. This next-door
   dwelling has a quite small outbuilding located some one third of the way down its
   back garden, positioned against the boundary with No 21. Beyond this outbuilding
   lies an attached log shed, a greenhouse and other domestic paraphernalia.
8. There were two pre-existing outbuildings at No 21 adjacent to this boundary, sited
   just beyond those at No 19, next to the log shed and greenhouse. These have
   been adapted to contain a games room and home cinema. These pre-existing
   outbuildings now form part of single storey additions that extend back to the rear of
   No 21, against the boundary with No 19.
9. The pitched roof rear extension to the dwelling is shown to include a kitchen. From
   this a door enters a narrow flat roofed side addition forming part of this
   retrospective proposal. This has three small rooflights and runs close up to the
   boundary fence with No 19, alongside and slightly beyond the extent of its
   conservatory. This provides a corridor leading on to a slightly higher flat roofed
   space shown to provide a dining room and two smaller partitioned rooms. These
   two partitioned rooms each have larger rooflights of raised pyramidal form and it is
   this section that lies adjacent to next door’s outbuilding.
10. On the other side of the rear garden there is a flat-roofed swimming pool building
    roughly corresponding in size and position to the linking section alongside No 19.
    Towards the end of the garden is a further detached outbuilding. This lies alongside
    the boundary with No 19 and at right angles to a similarly sized flat-roofed home
    gym. The latter is positioned against the plot’s rear boundary and has already
    gained retrospective approval from the Council. Collectively, these buildings occupy
    a substantial part of the back garden at No 21, with the remainder comprising
    mostly hardstanding or artificial lawn.
11. The retrospective nature of the proposal means the appellant had not been able to
    provide drawings of former buildings, as these had not been surveyed. There is a
    photograph in the planning statement of the two-outbuildings before being adapted
    to form part of the current proposal. This photograph also shows part of a former
    lean-to addition at the rear of the dwelling, which appears to me to have been an
    open-sided structure with slim posts supporting sheet roofing. This single
    photograph, and a pre-existing location plan in the appeal statement, provide rather
    incomplete evidence of the situation prior to the current developments. The satellite
    images supplied appear to reveal the flat-roofed additions for which approval is
    sought.
12. The Council’s refusal reason is restricted to the visual effects of the proposal upon
    the outlook from No 19 and potential noise from the five heat pumps installed.
    Dealing with the first of these matters, this does not relate to either the swimming
    pool building or the detached outbuilding. Although it refers to the entire length of
    the internally connected structure alongside No 19, the harm derives principally
    from the linking section between the pitched roof rear extension and the
    subsequently adapted outbuildings that were previously freestanding.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
 Appeal Decision 6011154


13. This linking section includes the corridor element, the dining room and the
    partitioned rooms with raised roof lights. As an entirety, this element of the
    proposals rises significantly above the boundary fence and has an oppressively
    dominating influence on the rear outlook at No 19, from both the conservatory and
    the adjacent and most regularly used part of the back garden. Although this outlook
    is also framed by the neighbour’s own outbuilding, this is comparatively small and
    insufficient to fully screen or diminish the overbearing visual impact of the linking
    extension, including its prominent raised roof lights.
14. Due to its overall height and extent along, and proximity to, the shared boundary,
    the linking part of the side extension comprises an oppressive and overbearing
    feature in the immediate outlook from the rear conservatory and adjacent back
    garden at No 19, materially diminishing the quality of overall living conditions as
    experienced by its occupiers. This brings the proposal into conflict with Policy SP7
    of the Section 1 Tendring Local Plan, which applies place shaping principles
    including to protect the amenity of existing and future residents from overbearing
    new developments. There would also be conflict with Policy SPL3 of the Section 2
    Tendring Local Plan, which applies criteria including that buildings be designed and
    orientated to ensure adequate outlook for future and existing residents.
15. The impact of the side extension is more harmful than any development that might
    have been allowed under the General Permitted Development Order, due to its
    height and proximity to the neighbour’s boundary. There is insufficient evidence to
    show that any previously existing development in this part of the site had as
    harmful an impact. The Council had found no material harm to neighbouring living
    conditions, other than in regard to No 19, nor in respect of any other matter
    including character and appearance, drainage arrangements or of uses other than
    incidental to residential enjoyment. However, these considerations do not weigh
    against the harm found and my finding that, for the reasons explained, the proposal
    conflicts with the development plan when read as a whole.
16. With regard to the heat pumps, no actual sound nuisance has been demonstrated
    and this is a matter that a condition governing noise control might adequately
    address. Consequently, the effects of the proposals on living conditions from noise
    levels emanating from any heat pump apparatus adds no material degree of further
    harm beyond that already identified.
Conclusion
17. The harmful effects of the proposal on living conditions at 19 Harwich Road, in
    respect of the outlook experienced by occupiers, conflict with policies SP7 and
    SPL3 of the Tendring Local Plan. The revised Framework does not supplant the
    statutory plan-led system but states itself to be a material consideration of critical
    importance. National decision-making policy L2 concerns making effective use of
    land. It requires substantial weight be given to, amongst other things, creating
    additional floorspace within settlements, including through additional development
    within existing plots. However, this is dependent on maintaining acceptable living
    standards for residents and neighbours in terms of access to daylight, sunlight,
    privacy and external amenity space. This proposal has been found not to maintain
    acceptable living standards at No 19 due to the overbearing impact of the adjacent
    flat-roofed extensions on the outlook from that neighbour’s external amenity space,
    in the form of the near part of the back garden.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
 Appeal Decision 6011154


18. The Framework has to be read as a whole. In Policy DP3 it provides key principles
    for well-designed places and, in Policy P3, seeks that development proposals
    provide healthy living conditions. I consider that the development plan policies
    relevant to this case are not materially inconsistent with the national decision-
    making ones recently published in the revised Framework. Therefore, material
    considerations would not indicate a decision otherwise than in accordance with the
    development plan, with which conflict has been found. As a consequence,
    I conclude that the appeal fails.

Jonathan Price
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
