Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 September 2026
by Andrew Fulford BSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011302
14-16 Hendon Rise, Nottingham NG3 3AN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Stephen Simpson (The Conclave Group) against the decision of Nottingham
     City Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00218/PFUL3 (PP-14615704).
•    The development is described as the creation of two independent garages for vehicle sales, repairs
     and servicing.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The appellant submitted a structural survey and noise assessment with their
       appeal. Neither of these documents had previously formed part of the planning
       application to the Council. However, given that the Council have had the
       opportunity to comment on these documents through the appeal process I am
       satisfied that there is no procedural unfairness in the consideration of these
       documents within my assessment.
3.     The application form confirms that the development has been completed, and I
       observed this during my site visit. I have determined the appeal on that basis.
4.     On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published. Those parts of the Framework most relevant to this
       appeal have been amended. As a result, parties have been provided with an
       opportunity to make further submissions. I have referred to the latest version of the
       Framework where relevant in this appeal.
5.     I have taken the site address in the banner heading above from the Decision
       Notice as it more succinctly sets out the property address than that on the
       application form. Given that the site is clearly defined on the location plan I am
       satisfied that neither party is prejudiced by this course of action.
Main Issue
6.     The main issue is the effect of the development on the living conditions of the
       occupants of adjacent properties with specific reference to the occupiers of No.12
       Hendon Rise in relation to noise, vibrations, odour and disturbance.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011302


Reasons
7.       The appeal site is in an area of mixed use including residential, industrial and
         retail. The appeal property is a longstanding brick-built building with two metal
         roller shutters located on the front elevation of each unit. An area of hardstanding
         is located in the front of the building.
8.       There is residential development in close proximity to the appeal site. No.12
         Hendon Rise is attached to the appeal property, and terraced dwellings are
         located on the opposite side of Hendon Rise (No’s 17-23).
9.       The evidence before me indicates that the site has historically been used as a car
         sales business with associated repair and maintenance. However, in recent years
         the property has been subdivided to create two separate units. In consideration of
         a lawful development certificate1 on the appeal site the Inspector concluded it is
         more likely than not that the use as a single car sales business with ancillary
         servicing and repairs had been operating continuously for more than 10 years prior
         to being sold 2021 and was consequently the lawful use at that point in time.
         However, in 2023 the Inspector considered that the site had been subdivided to
         create two planning units; one in use for car servicing and repairs and the other for
         car servicing and repairs with ancillary car sales. In view of this sub-division the
         appeal against the refusal of a lawful development certificate was dismissed by the
         Inspector.
10. On my visit No. 14 contained just two cars which appeared to be for sale given the
    price advertised on the widescreens of the vehicles. No. 16 contained a single
    vehicle which was being repaired by one individual. Due to the low intensity of the
    use, I did not experience any excessive noise, odour, disturbance or vibrations
    during my time on site. However, the noisier activities of vehicle servicing and
    repairs are core components of the use, which was not the case historically.
    Alongside this change in operation, the subdivision of the units has resulted in an
    increase in levels of noise and disturbance emanating from the site given the
    complaints received by Council’s Environmental Health and Planning Enforcement
    Teams. Interested parties have also submitted objections to both the planning
    application and the current appeal, specifically referencing the use of noisy
    machinery throughout the day and evening, 7 days a week.
11. The noise assessment highlights that the noise levels generated by the units have
    a significant impact on nearby residents. To mitigate this harm the assessment
    recommends the installation of PVC strip curtains on the entrance and exit to the
    workshops. Whilst this would reduce the impact on the occupiers of the properties
    on the opposite side of Hendon Rise, the noise assessment does not address the
    fact that one of the units shares a party wall with a residential property, No.12.
12. The noise assessment states that sound monitoring equipment was placed in the
    front of the units, which is not the most sensitive location. Noise and vibration
    levels would be greatest within No.12 given the shared party wall. The mitigation of
    installing PVC strip curtains over the entrances and exits on the front and rear
    would not address noise and vibrations experienced through the party wall.
    Consequently, the noise assessment has failed to demonstrate that mitigation
    would satisfactorily address the impact on the occupiers of the adjoining property.


1
    Appeal Ref: APP/Q3060/X/24/3342438


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011302


13. This subdivision of the units has led to an intensification of the uses on site with
    different customers and staff operating from each unit with a greater number of
    comings and goings thereby causing a greater level of disturbance. Furthermore,
    there is a greater focus on vehicle repairs and servicing which is noisier than car
    sales. Noise emanating uses include the use of an impact wrench, angle grinding
    and a ramp moving up and down, all of which were found to generate noise within
    the noise assessment.
14. Concerns have also been raised over odour. However, no evidence has been
    submitted regarding the strength of any odours emanating from the site. Whilst
    there may be odour at times when car engines are running it appears unlikely that
    any odours are so strong and the activity so prolonged to materially impact on the
    quality of life experienced by adjacent occupiers.
15. It has been suggested that the use of multiple conditions would be sufficient to
    minimise the impact on the living conditions of nearby residents. The suggested
    conditions include restrictions on opening hours, restrictions on external
    operations, restrictions on external engine testing, requirements to keep roller
    shutters closed, controls on vehicle storage areas, limits on the use of noisy
    machinery and the installation of PVC strip curtains. Whilst the use of these
    conditions would provide a greater level of control over the operation of the site it
    would not prevent the use of noisy machinery which directly impacts on the
    adjoining occupiers of No. 12 through the party wall. Consequently, planning
    conditions would not overcome the harm identified.
16. The appellant indicates that the Council has not been able to evidence the alleged
    harm. However, the appellant’s own evidence highlights that the development has
    a significant impact when equipment is in use and the submitted noise assessment
    fails to demonstrate how the impact on the occupiers of the attached residential
    property would be mitigated.
17. In conclusion, the development harms the living conditions of the occupiers of No.
    12 by virtue of noise, disturbance and vibrations. The development is therefore
    contrary to Policy 10 of the Aligned Core Strategies Part 1 (2014) and Policies
    DE1 and IN2 of the Nottingham City Land and Planning Policies Local Plan Part 2
    DPD (2020). Amongst other matters, these policies highlight the need to have
    regard to the amenities of occupiers of nearby residents taking account of noise
    and vibration and emphasises that development proposals should not result in
    noise or vibrations at levels that are likely to adversely impact on health or quality
    of life.
Other Matters
18. The structural survey confirms that the building is structurally sound and no repairs
    are required. However, this does not address the main issue in this case and
    consequently this is a neutral factor in my decision.
Planning Balance
19. Policy S3 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. For development inside settlements, this means that policy S4 of the
    Framework should be applied.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011302


20. Policy S4 of the Framework, states that development proposals within settlements
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in the Framework.
21. The sub-division of the site has created jobs and allowed businesses to invest in
    accordance with Policy E2 of the Framework. However, given the modest size of
    the units, a small amount of weight is attached to this benefit.
22. The appellant has placed weight on Policy P4 of the Framework. This policy seeks
    to prevent unreasonable restrictions being placed on the permitted operations of
    existing businesses. However, following the outcome of the recent appeal
    decision, the business operations operating from each of the units do not have
    planning permission or a relevant lawful development certificate. Consequently,
    Policy P4 does not weigh in favour of this retrospective scheme.
23. The scheme has an unacceptable adverse impact on the living conditions of the
    occupiers of No.12 and consequently the development is not appropriate for its
    location, contrary to Policy P3 of the Framework. I therefore attach significant
    weight to this harm.
24. Overall, the benefits of the scheme would be substantially outweighed by the
    adverse effects and the presumption in favour of sustainable development does
    not apply.
Conclusion
25. For the reasons given above, I therefore conclude that the development conflicts
    with the development plan as a whole and there are no material considerations
    that indicate that the development should be determined otherwise than in
    accordance with it. Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.



Andrew Fulford
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
