Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 September 2026
by R Gee BA (Hons) Dip TP PGCert UD MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011882
Merienda, Greenhill Road, Elton Cambridgeshire PE8 6SA
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Walker against the decision of Huntingdonshire District Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00660/FUL.
•    The development proposed is described as demolition of existing dwelling and construction of new
     detached self build dwelling with garaging including landscaping improvements

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
       August 2026. This has introduced significant changes to its structure and
       presentation, including the incorporation of development management policies.
       The Council and the appellant were invited to make further comments. My decision
       reflects the latest version of the Framework, and the responses received on it.
Main Issues
3.     The main issues are:
       i)       the effect of the development with regard to flood risk; and
       ii)      the effect of the proposal on character and appearance.
Reasons
Flood risk
4.     The latest Environment Agency (EA) mapping and the 2024 Strategic Flood Risk
       Assessment (SFRA) sets out that the site is located within Flood Zone 1 and
       therefore at lowest risk from fluvial flooding. EA mapping indicates the site is at risk
       from 1 in 30 annual likelihoods of surface water flooding. The SFRA also indicates
       the site is susceptible to groundwater flooding whereby the risk of groundwater
       flooding is to both surface and subsurface assets.
5.     Whilst the proposal relates to the replacement of an existing dwelling the proposal
       would substantially increase the extent of built form on the site in both footprint and
       scale. In the absence of a site-specific Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) there is
       limited evidence before me regarding the safety of future occupants, or whether
       the proposal would increase flood risk elsewhere.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011882


6.     The Appellant contends that the submission of a FRA was not a validation
       requirement and that any necessary surface water drainage details could
       reasonably be secured by condition. However, Policy LP5 of the Huntingdon Local
       Plan (LP) and the Policy F4: 2 of the Framework both require flood risk to be
       appropriately assessed before development is permitted. Consequently,
       regardless of whether a FRA was required for validation purposes, it remains
       necessary to provide adequate evidence addressing these matters.
7.     I am therefore unable to conclude that the proposal complies with the relevant
       flood risk policies of the LP or the Framework. This draws the proposal into conflict
       with Policies LP5 and LP15 of the insofar as they seek all forms of flood risk to
       have been addressed in accordance with, amongst other things, the Framework.
       proportionate Conflict also arises with the Framework F4 2c) which requires the
       submission of a site Specific flood risk assessment for sites in Flood Zone 1
       where land has been identified in a SFRA or the Flood Map for Planning as being
       at risk of flooding from any source, whether now or in the future.
Character and appearance
8.     The appeal site is located in an edge of settlement location. It comprises a modest
       single storey dwelling with a Dutch-barn style roof set back from the highway
       behind a deep grass verge and high boundary landscaping along its frontage.
       Along Greenhill Road there is an eclectic mix of property types including variations
       in their overall scale, age and design. Greenhill Road is a narrow road with
       countryside to the south and vegetation is present to the frontage of many
       dwellings, giving it a verdant appearance.
9.     The proposed dwelling adopts a distinctly Georgian-inspired design approach,
       characterised by its formal composition and architectural detailing. However, such
       a highly ordered and traditional form is not reflected in surrounding dwellings,
       which display a more varied and informal character. Notwithstanding the
       landscaping and position back into the site, the increased scale and height of the
       proposal would be notable on the front elevation.
10. The characteristics of a Georgian property in terms of its form and fenestration
    detailing would emphasise its vertical and horizontal aspect of the elevation. As
    such the proposal would appear discordant within its immediate context and would
    fail to respond positively to the prevailing character and appearance of this part of
    the settlement. The Appellant disputes the quoted height of neighbouring
    properties. However, even if the proposal were to have a similar overall height to
    neighbouring dwellings and the dwelling were constructed of high-quality
    materials, as indicated, these matters would not overcome the concerns in respect
    to the design response.
11. The replacement dwelling would extend across much of the width of the plot.
    Nevertheless, I do not concur with the view that the proposal would be
    disproportionate having regard to the plots overall size.
12. The proposed dwelling would be positioned forward of its existing location.
    However, it would not project further than built form at the neighbouring dwelling,
    Ashbourne House. It would be set back from the highway retaining a driveway and
    a landscaped garden in the intervening space. Although the garage would extend
    forward of the dwelling, contrary to the guidance set out in the Huntingdon Design
    Guide 2017, being single storey, it would not be overly prominent. Furthermore,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011882


       the retained tree and the landscaped frontage would help obscure views and
       accordingly the forward projecting garages would not appear unduly conspicuous
       within the streetscene.
13. The Council have concerns regarding the inclusion of dormer windows, however, I
    observed dormer windows on the neighbouring property, in a position closer to the
    road than the appeal proposal. I therefore do not concur that dormer windows
    would be an incongruous feature within the streetscene.
14. Nevertheless, these matters do not overcome the harm I have identified in terms of
    the discordant design that would fail to respect the character of Greenhill Road.
15. Overall, I conclude that the proposed dwelling would be materially harmful to the
    character and appearance of the area which draws it into conflict with Policies
    LP11 and LP12 of the LP. Collectively these policies seek to promote good design.
    It would also conflict with the National Design Guide and the Framework which
    require developments to respond positively to their context.
Other Matters
16. It is advanced that the scale of the proposed dwelling is intended to meet the
    needs of a future occupant to provide a safe, adaptable living environment capable
    of supporting the assisted living needs of the Appellants' disabled daughter. This
    would include level access, step-free ground-floor living and circulation space for
    mobility aids. I have, therefore, had regard to the Public Sector Equality Duty
    (PSED) contained in section 149 of the Equality Act 2010. The duty includes
    having regard to the need to eliminate discrimination, harassment, and advance
    equality of opportunity between those sharing relevant protected characteristics
    and those who do not.
17. I am mindful of the needs of the family member. I also acknowledge that the
    Framework encourages self-build/custom build homes. However, from the
    evidence before me it has not been demonstrated that their needs cannot be met
    by a less harmful scheme. Accordingly, this would not outweigh the harms in
    respect of flood risk and character and appearance. Therefore, the PSED
    considerations do not lead me to an alternative view in this case, and following
    careful consideration of these matters, I am satisfied that the impact of dismissing
    this appeal would be proportionate and justified.
18. I also recognise that the dismissal of the appeal may interfere the appellant’s
    human rights under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.
    Nevertheless, any such interference would be lawful, necessary and proportionate
    in the public interest of maintaining proper planning control. Accordingly, I find the
    decision justified.
19. No harm in respect of residential amenity, biodiversity or trees are neutral matters
    that weigh neither for, nor against the proposal.
20. Local residents and the Parish Council have expressed a wide range of concerns.
    However, as I am dismissing the appeal there is no need for me to consider these
    matters further.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011882


Planning Balance and Conclusion
21. The revised Framework introduced a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development for certain proposals within settlement boundaries through NDMPs
    S3 and S4, replacing the presumption contained within the previous Framework.
22. NDMP S4, paragraph 1, states that development proposals within settlements
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects.
23. It is not disputed between the parties that the site is located within the built-up area
    of Elton, nor that the principle of residential development on the site is acceptable.
    It is acknowledged that small sites such as this, can be built out relatively quickly.
    Whilst the Appellant advances that the proposal would provide an energy-efficient
    dwelling incorporating biodiversity enhancements and EV charging provision.
    However, the evidence submitted in these regards is limited and, in any case,
    good design is a key aspect of sustainable development, and it is fundamental to
    the planning process. In the circumstances, the benefit that would be derived from
    these facets of the proposal would be limited.
24. Whilst the Council cannot demonstrate a five-year housing land supply, the
    proposal relates to the replacement of an existing dwelling and therefore would not
    result in a net gain to the overall housing supply. Nevertheless, it would provide a
    contemporary home better suited to the needs of the occupiers, thereby offering a
    modest benefit through the provision of improved housing choice and quality.
25. There would be moderate, social and economic benefits associated with the
    proposal relating to construction employment and provide limited support to local
    services.
26. Whilst there would be limited benefits arising from the proposal, Paragraph 2(c) of
    NDMP S4 provides that development proposals should be refused where they fail
    to comply with one of the NDMP that requires refusal in specific circumstances.
27. The proposal has failed to demonstrate that it would be safe from flood risk due to
    the absence of a FRA which draws the proposal into conflict with NDMP F7.
28. I have also concluded that the proposal would be materially harmful to the
    character and appearance of the area which conflicts with NDMP DP3 of the
    Framework which states that development should be refused where, without clear
    justification, they conflict with paragraph 1 of the policy, the relevant design
    principles contained within paragraph 2, or any explicit design standards set out in
    the development plan. Paragraph 1 requires development proposals to respond
    positively to their context, including the history, character and defining features of
    the site and its surroundings, so that they integrate with and enhance the local
    area. This includes consideration of the arrangement of plots and buildings,
    architectural design, materials, and the integration of heritage assets where
    relevant.
29. Whilst NDMP DM3 requires a proportionate approach to decision-making and
    positive and proactive engagement to resolve outstanding issues in this
    circumstance matters particularly in respect of flood risk cannot be left to condition.
30. Drawing all the matters together, and having regard to the material considerations
    before me, I conclude that the benefits of granting permission would be

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6011882


       substantially outweighed by the adverse effects when assessed against the
       national decision-making policies of the Framework as a whole. Accordingly, the
       appeal should be dismissed.

R Gee
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6011882




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
