 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 11 September 2026
 by Jonathan Price BA(Hons) DipTP DMS MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 17 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011040
 26 Stirling Avenue, Leigh on Sea, Essex SS9 3PP
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Terry Beavis against the decision of Southend-on-Sea City Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00052/FUL.
 •    The development proposed is to construct new build 3 bedroom 5 person dwelling house.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted to construct a new build
   3 bedroom 5 person dwelling house at 26 Stirling Avenue, Leigh on Sea, Essex
   SS9 3PP in accordance with the terms of the application 26/00052/FUL and subject
   to the conditions set out in the Schedule at the end of this decision.
Preliminary Matter
2. My decision reflects the revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) published on 17 August 2026, after this appeal was made. I sought the
   views of the main parties over how this might pertain to this case, prior to reaching
   a decision.
Main Issue
3. The effects of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area.
Reasons
4. The detached dwelling at No 26 forms part of a residential suburb of inter-war
   twentieth century housing. The architecture varies somewhat but mainly comprises
   medium-sized detached or semi-detached two storey homes, quite closely spaced
   to an even building line behind small front gardens, with longer back gardens at the
   rear. The interlacing streets create blocks of housing enclosing spacious areas of
   greenery where the quite long back gardens converge.
5. Occupying a corner plot, the back garden to No 26 provides it a return frontage
   along Bailey Road. As noted in the Council’s report, the return frontages at corner
   plots in this area tend to accommodate ancillary buildings, such as garages,
   providing a degree of spaciousness. Like such similar situations, the rear part of the
   back garden at No 26 contains a garage, with its entrance onto Bailey Road. This
   rear section of garden has at some point been fenced off and now contains a
   second outbuilding. It is this unused garden area, currently occupied by a single
   garage and an outbuilding, where the new dwelling is proposed.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6011040


6. An earlier proposal for a three bedroom detached house on this site was the
   subject of an appeal dismissed on 1 March 20191. The Inspector’s findings in this
   appeal, and the degree to which this current proposal addresses these, are
   material considerations of strong relevance to my decision. This earlier appeal
   proposal had included the replacement of the existing house at No 26, and so it is
   only the Inspector’s conclusions over the proposed new house fronting Bailey Road
   that are relevant here.
7. The Inspector noted that the garden of No 26, as well as the unobtrusive form of its
   single garage, allowed for views of trees and other vegetation within the rear
   gardens of neighbouring properties. Its openness and low level of development was
   found to contribute positively to the character of this part of Bailey Road. The
   second outbuilding noted at my visit has clearly since been put in place, as this is
   not referred to by the previous Inspector.
8. The Inspector found that the proposed house would add considerable bulk and
   mass to the rear garden of No 26, partially obscuring the views of trees and other
   vegetation within surrounding gardens and harming the spacious, verdant feel of
   this part of Bailey Road.
9. Additionally, the Inspector noted the proposed dwelling would be sited on its
   eastern flank boundary, with only a small garden to the other side, and would be
   close to its rear boundary. As a result, it was found to appear unduly cramped on its
   plot in relation to its size. Furthermore, the layout was found to be noticeably
   different to that of any nearby dwelling, thus failing to integrate with the surrounding
   spatial pattern of built form. It was concluded that the design, materials palette and
   layout of the proposed dwelling would fail to integrate with the character of the
   Bailey Road street scene, creating a harmful visual impact clearly apparent from
   the public realm.
10. The Inspector concluded that the new and replacement dwellings would result in
    significant harm to the character and appearance of the area, in conflict with
    policies KP2 and CP4 of the Southend on Sea Core Strategy 2007 (CS), policies
    DM1 and DM3 of the Southend-on-Sea Development Management Document 2015
    (DMD) and the associated Design and Townscape Guide 2009 (DTG). In this
    appeal, the Council’s refusal reason relates to the same development plan policies
    and DTG.
11. The dwelling proposed would be of a chalet bungalow design, with two roof dormer
    windows facing the road and a single, flat-roofed dormer at the rear. The ground
    floor accommodation includes a single-storey, crown-roofed element at one side.
    This design provides for significantly less bulk and mass than the previous appeal
    scheme for a full two storey house. This reduced scale of dwelling would better
    preserve the openness of the street scene, including views of the greenery that
    forms a backdrop to this. However, the extent of such views is already constrained
    by the existing garage and outbuilding on the site, as well as by the high, ivy clad
    fencing along the front boundary.
12. The dwelling would occupy a relatively small plot, with a reasonably-sized front
    garden but limited space at both sides and to the rear. However, being cramped in
    a physical sense, in relation to occupying a large proportion of the plot, would not

1 APP/D1590/W/18/3208223




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
 Appeal Decision 6011040


     manifest itself in a visual sense in terms of street scene appearance. In respect of
     its separation between the host dwelling at No 26 and the next door house at 61
     Bailey Road, the proposed dwelling would broadly reflect the spacing of housing
     along this street and cannot reasonably be considered to have a cramped
     appearance in this regard. Even accounting for where such corner plots
     occasionally provide more open return frontages, this proposal would still generally
     reflect the overall grain of housing in this area, which is typified by the quite closely
     spaced frontage development enclosing areas of private greenspace where back
     gardens adjoin.
13. In terms of the house design, the proposal provides a stepdown in height and scale
    from the full two-storey height of those along Bailey Road and this would better
    address the concerns over preserving street scene openness. Although the design
    does not replicate the prevailing inter-war architecture, which is varied in any case,
    its scale and form would not be harmfully out of place within the prevailing built
    surroundings. A more suitable palette of external materials to those indicated on
    the plans might be covered in a planning condition.
14. The dwelling proposed would fit in with the prevailing character and appearance of
    the area and satisfy CS policies KP2 and CP4, DMD policies DM1 and DM3 and
    the DTG. These policies remain consistent with those of the Framework over
    achieving well-designed places.
Other Matters
15. I have had regard to the further matters of concern raised by interested parties.
    Subject to first floor rear windows being obscure glazed and non-opening, the
    proposal would not have materially adverse impacts on neighbouring occupiers
    living considerations, including in respect of outlook and privacy. The new dwelling
    would offer acceptable living conditions for future occupants.
16. The local highways authority does not consider that the level of parking shortfall
    arising from the proposal would result in a severe impact on the operation of the
    highway network. Both the host property and proposed dwelling have an off-road
    parking space and I am satisfied that there are no overriding highway objections to
    this proposal.
17. The scheme would not cause material harm through loss of greenspace and wildlife
    habitats and can meet requirements for Biodiversity Net Gain and recreational
    disturbance avoidance mitigation. There is no compelling evidence the proposal
    would be incapable of addressing surface water drainage in an acceptable manner.
18. Regarding the issue of precedent, all proposals should be considered on individual
    merit, and concerns in this respect do not weigh materially against this proposal.
    Regarding the allegation of a manufactured disuse of the site, there is no evidence
    of any prior breach of planning control either in this regard or through the
    outbuilding introduced since the last appeal.
Conclusion and conditions
19. The Framework advises that development proposals within settlements should be
    approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any
    adverse effects, when assessed against its national decision-making policies. Any
    adverse effects have not been found to weigh against this proposal to such a


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
 Appeal Decision 6011040


     degree. The Framework requires substantial weight be given to the benefits of
     providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced
     accommodation needs of the community, which applies in Southend. In making
     effective use of land, the Framework also requires substantial weight be given to
     the benefits of creating additional homes within existing plots within settlements
     through additional units within residential curtilages, provided this is consistent with
     the overall street scene. Quite clearly, this proposal gains substantial support from
     the Framework, in addition to complying with the Council’s development plan as a
     whole.
20. I have considered the conditions suggested by the Council against policy DM6 of
    the Framework. This states that planning conditions should only be attached where
    they are necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms,
    relevant to the development and to planning considerations generally, sufficiently
    precise to make them capable of being complied with and enforced, and
    reasonable in all other respects. It also states that conditions should not be used to
    restrict national permitted development rights and avoided where required to be
    discharged before development commences, unless in both cases there is a clear
    justification. Where applied, my conditions are worded to meet these tests and do
    not necessarily replicate the Council’s suggestions.
21. A condition requiring the permitted development to commence no later than three
    years from the decision date is imposed under the Planning Act (1). To create
    certainty for all parties, a condition is necessary setting out the approved plans (2).
22. Although facing materials are indicated on the plans, in the interests of the suitable
    appearance of the final development a condition is justified requiring final approval
    of these in advance of development proceeding above slab level (3). For the same
    reason, a condition governing approval and provision of hard and soft landscaping
    measures is needed (4).
23. The plans shows suitable bin and cycle storage and so this matter does not need to
    be addressed by condition. There is development plan policy justification for a
    condition requiring at least 10% of the development’s total energy needs to be met
    from renewable sources (5). The same applies to one addressing water efficiency
    (6).
24. Conditions requiring compliance with other regulatory requirements should be
    avoided. In this case, there is no evidence to suggest suitable drainage
    infrastructure would not be adequately addressed through the Building Regulations.
    Similarly, it is sufficient that the approved plans show one off-street parking space,
    to which an electric vehicle charging point is a Building Regulations requirement.
    However, there is development plan policy justification for a condition over the
    otherwise optional Building Regulation part M4(2) on accessible and adaptable
    dwelling requirements (7).
25. There is no clear justification for a pre-commencement condition requiring
    adherence to a Demolition and Construction Management Plan and Strategy (to
    include Noise and Dust Mitigation Strategies). This is given the small scale of the
    development and the lack of significant dust issues from any masonry demolition.
    Temporary impacts are inevitable with any construction project, but in this case the
    amenities of neighbours are adequately addressed by a condition restricting the
    days and hours of building works (8). A condition is necessary to ensure that the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      4
 Appeal Decision 6011040


     rear facing first floor windows are non-opening below 1.7 metres and obscure
     glazed, in the interests of protecting neighbours’ privacy (9). Finally, because the
     dwelling occupies a relatively small plot, there is clear justification for a condition
     removing permitted development rights (10).
26. Subject to these conditions, and for the reasons explained, I conclude that the
    appeal succeeds.

Jonathan Price
INSPECTOR


Schedule of Conditions
     1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
        the date of this decision
     2) The development hereby permitted shall accord with the following drawings:
        1258-01 Revision B, 1259-01 Revision C, 1259-02 Revision C, 1259-03
        Revision C.
     3) Notwithstanding the information submitted, no development above slab level
        shall take place until details of the materials to be used in the construction of
        the external elevations of the dwelling hereby approved have been submitted to
        and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The development shall
        be carried out in accordance with the approved details.
     4) No development above slab level shall take place until details of both hard and
        soft landscaping works have been submitted to and approved in writing by the
        local planning authority. These details shall include:
          i. means of enclosure, including gates and boundary fencing;
          ii. hard surfacing materials;
          iii. the number, size and location of the trees, shrubs and plants to be retained
          and planted together with a planting specification,
          iv. details of measures to enhance biodiversity
          v. an implementation programme.
          The landscaping shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details.
          All planting, seeding or turfing comprised in the approved details of landscaping
          shall be carried out in the first planting and seeding seasons following the
          occupation of the buildings or the completion of the development, whichever is
          the sooner; and any trees or plants which within a period of 5 years from the
          completion of the development die, are removed or become seriously damaged
          or diseased shall be replaced in the next planting season with others of similar
          size and species.
     5) Prior to the occupation of the development hereby permitted, a scheme
        detailing how at least 10% of the total energy needs of the development will be
        supplied using on site renewable sources shall be submitted to and agreed in
        writing by the local planning authority. This scheme shall thereafter be put in
        place as agreed and maintained for the lifetime of the development.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       5
 Appeal Decision 6011040


     6) Prior to occupation of the development hereby approved, water efficient design
        measures as set out in DMD Policy DM2 (iv) shall be provided and thereafter
        retained in accordance with details that shall have had the prior written
        approval of the local planning authority.
     7) The dwelling hereby permitted shall be completed to comply with Building
        Regulation part M4(2) ‘accessible and adaptable dwellings’ and thereafter
        retained in this manner.
     8) Construction works associated with the development hereby approved shall
        only take place between 8am and 6pm on weekdays and between 8am and
        1pm on Saturdays. No works shall take place at any time on Sundays and
        Bank or Public Holidays.
     9) The first floor windows in the rear elevation of the dwelling hereby approved,
        shall be fitted with obscured glazing (to at least Level 4 on the Pilkington Levels
        of Privacy), and no part of that window that is less than 1.7 metres above the
        floor of the room in which it is installed shall be capable of being opened. Once
        installed the obscure glazing shall be maintained for the lifetime of the
        development.
     10) Notwithstanding the provisions of the Town and Country Planning (General
         Permitted Development) (Amendment) Order 2015, or any order revising or re-
         enacting that Order with or without modification, no development shall be
         carried out at the dwellinghouse hereby approved within Schedule 2, Part 1,
         Classes A, AA, B, C, D and E.
                                            ----




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     6
