Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by Mark Harrison BA(Hons) DipTP LLM MIoL MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 7 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011398
26 Pinfold Lane, Halton, Leeds LS15 7SY
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Laura Prideaux against the decision of Leeds City Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/01601/FU.
•    The development proposed is first floor side and rear extension.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for first floor side and
       rear extension at 26 Pinfold Lane, Halton, Leeds LS15 7SY in accordance with the
       terms of the application, Ref 26/01601/FU, and the plans submitted with it, subject
       to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development shall be carried out in accordance with the following
              approved plans: Site Block Plan DP-PL-PD01 and Proposed Floor Plan &
              Elevations DP-PL-PD03 Rev.A.
     3)       The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
              extension shall match those used in the existing building.
     4)       The extension hereby permitted shall not be occupied until the bathroom and
              en-suite windows have been fitted with obscured glazing, and no part of
              those windows that is less than 1.7 metres above the floor of the room in
              which it is installed shall be capable of being opened. Details of the type of
              obscured glazing shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local
              planning authority before the windows are installed and once installed the
              obscured glazing shall be retained thereafter.
Main Issue
2.     The main issue in this appeal is the effect of the proposed extension on the
       character and appearance of the existing building and the surrounding area.
Reasons
3.     The appeal property is a two-storey semi-detached dwelling, with a single storey
       extension to the side and rear. The single storey side extension is flush with the
       front wall of the property. The property is set within a predominantly residential
       area, largely comprising semi-detached and detached houses in a variety of styles,
       many of which have been extended. The property is set within a group of three


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011398


       pairs of semi-detached dwellings. Pinfold Lane is on a slope, such that the appeal
       property is set slightly higher than the neighbouring dwelling, no.24.
4.     The proposed development comprises a first-floor extension to the side and rear of
       the property, creating a new master bedroom, dressing room, en-suite and
       enlarging the existing bathroom. The first-floor side extension would be flush with
       the front wall of the dwelling.
5.     This aspect of the scheme’s design puts it at odds with guidance set out in the
       Householder Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document (April 2012) (SPD)
       that requires side extensions to be subservient to the host property, with a 2-metre
       set back from the front wall of the property.
6.     However, the SPD also acknowledges the need for symmetry in a pair of semi-
       detached dwellings. In this case, there is currently a lack of symmetry between the
       appeal property and its attached neighbour, No.28, which has been extended to
       the side with a two-storey extension that is flush to the front wall of the property.
       Consequently, the proposed development would bring symmetry and harmony to
       the pair of semi-detached dwellings.
7.     Additionally, I am mindful that the existing single storey side extension to the
       appeal property is flush with the front wall of the property. It is logical that any first-
       floor extension would also be flush, as any set back would appear contrived. The
       proposed front elevation brings symmetry to the property itself due to the design of
       the first-floor fenestration. Were the first floor to be set back 2 metres then the
       balance achieved by this design would be lost.
8.     Whilst the first-floor side extension would reduce the gap to the neighbouring
       unattached property, No.24 Pinfold Lane, this is not out of keeping with the built
       form of the surrounding area, where many properties have been extended. It
       would not introduce a harmful terracing effect, as a gap would still be maintained
       to No.24 and due to the sloping nature of Pinfold Road, the ridge line of the roof of
       the appeal property would be slightly higher than that of No.24, maintaining a clear
       visual distinction between the two pairs of semi-detached dwellings.
9.     For the above reasons, I conclude that the proposed extension would not have a
       harmful effect on the character and appearance of the existing building or the
       surrounding area. Accordingly, I do not find conflict overall with Policy P10 of the
       Core Strategy Review (2019), Policies GP5 and BD6 of the Leeds Unitary
       Development Plan (Review 2006) or the SPD which require, amongst other things,
       that new development should provide good design appropriate to its scale and
       function and that extensions should respect the scale, form, detailing and materials
       of the original building.
Other Matters
10. The Appeal Statement refers to the occupant having a medical condition and the
    need for the proposed development to provide flexibility to accommodate their
    future needs. As I am allowing this appeal for other reasons, I have not needed to
    explore this matter in further detail.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6011398


Conditions
11. The Council has provided a list of suggested planning conditions, which I have
    considered in the light of Policy DM6 of the National Planning Policy Framework
    (the Framework) and the advice contained in the Planning Practice Guidance.
12. In addition to the standard time limit condition (1), I have attached a condition
    specifying the approved plans to provide certainty (2). A condition is necessary
    requiring materials which match in order to integrate the appearance of the
    proposed extension with that of the original building (3).
13. I am imposing a condition requiring the bathroom and en-suite windows be fitted
    with obscured glazing and any opening part of those windows to be at least 1.7
    metres above floor level (4). The Council requested this for all new windows on the
    rear elevation, but I do not consider that this is necessary in the case of the
    dressing room window. The rear garden of the appeal property is of sufficient
    depth that I do not have concerns regarding overlooking or loss of privacy from this
    window to any neighbouring dwellings or their gardens.
14. The Council also suggested a condition requiring no window on the side
    elevations. Policy DM6 of the Framework states that planning conditions should
    not be used to restrict national permitted development rights unless there is clear
    justification to do so. In this case there is no clear justification for such a condition,
    and as such I have not imposed the suggested condition.
Conclusion
15. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.




Mark Harrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
