Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 September 2026
by Andrew Fulford BSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 8 September 2026.


Appeal Ref: 6011840
56 Woodstock Road, Worcester, Worcestershire WR2 5NE
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Dieu, Big Fish Property Ltd against the decision of Worcester City Council.
•    The application Ref is 24/00959/FUL.
•    The development proposed is using vacant rooms within an existing 6-bedroom HMO to form a 8-
     bedroom HMO and a new dropped kerb access.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2.     An application for costs was made by Dieu, Big Fish Property Ltd against
       Worcester City Council. This application is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     Since the Council determined the appeal proposals the South Worcestershire
       Development Plan Review (2026) (SWDPR) has been formally adopted by the
       Council. Consequently, Policies SWDP 4 and SWDP 22 of the South
       Worcestershire Development Plan (2016) that were referred to in the Decision
       Notice have been deleted. The only Development Plan Policies relied upon by the
       Council are Policies SWDPR 06 and SWDPR 29 of the SWDPR. Given that this
       policy change was clearly set out within the Council’s statement, the appellant had
       the opportunity to comment on this matter within their final comments.
       Consequently, it was not necessary to provide the appellant with a further
       opportunity to comment on the relevance of the adoption of the SWDPR to the
       appeal proposals.
4.     The appeal was submitted with new information, in the form of an amended layout
       plan (Ref: 0100 Rev P02). This new plan seeks to evolve the scheme and address
       the reason for refusal. The consideration of this plan would not have been fair to
       the local planning authority therefore the plan was returned to the appellant and
       will not be considered further in my assessment.
5.     On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published. Those parts of the Framework most relevant to this
       appeal have been amended. As a result, parties have been provided with an
       opportunity to make further submissions. I have referred to the latest version of the
       Framework where relevant in this appeal.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011840


Main Issues
6.     The main issues are:
          • the impact of the proposal on an existing street tree in relation to its future
            preservation; and

           •    the impact of the proposal on the highway network in relation to the
                provision of a safe access.
Reasons
Tree Impact
7.     Woodstock Road is a traditional residential street with grass verges located on
       either side of the highway between the individual vehicular accesses to dwellings.
       Street trees are located on many of these verges providing an attractive verdant
       setting for the dwellings within the street.
8.     A mature whitebeam tree that has no statutory protection, is located within the
       grass verge directly in front of the appeal site. The proposed dropped kerb would
       require the remove of a section of grass verge in close proximity to the tree.
9.     The Highway Authority have explained that a 4.5m wide access is required which
       incorporates the removal of three kerb stones entirely and installation of two
       tapered kerb stones. To minimise construction works near the street tree the plans
       indicate a grassed area would be retained behind the tapered kerb stone.
       However, construction works would be required in this location to address the
       change in levels associated with the tapered kerb. The appellant has therefore
       underestimated the extent of ground works required in close proximity to the tree
       and consequently this would result a significant incursion into the root protection
       area of the tree. Works would be required to a depth of approximately 385mm
       below the existing ground level. Given that typically most roots are located within
       the first 600mm below ground level there would be damage to the root structure of
       the tree. The extent of the harm could therefore cause irreparable damage to the
       tree and necessitate its removal.
10. The application was supported by a radar survey which indicated that the majority
    of tree roots are located to the south away from the proposed dropped kerb.
    However, no excavations have taken place and pertinently the equipment utilised
    to undertake the survey does not identify roots below 20mm in diameter.
    Furthermore, the increase in hardstanding above the remaining root structure
    would reduce the ability of the tree to access moisture. In such circumstances the
    proposal would impact on a greater proportion of the tree’s root system that the
    8% that has been suggested by the appellant.
11. Images have been provided of other local street trees that are surrounded by
    hardstanding. However, no evidence has been provided to suggest that these
    situations are the result of recent planning approvals. Furthermore, there is no
    suggestion that any of these trees had their roots damaged by excavation works
    which would be the case in this instance.
12. It has been suggested that use of a range of protective conditions would be
    sufficient to minimise the impact on the tree. However, given the extent of the
    incursion into the root protection area of the tree this would not be sufficient to
    overcome the harm identified.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011840


13. In conclusion, the proposal would have an adverse impact on the health of the
    existing street tree. This would be contrary to Policy SWDPR 29 of the SWDPR.
    Amongst other matters the policy sets out that developments should consider
    ecological and green infrastructure networks that link biodiversity areas and
    ensures that compensatory provision is made for any habitat losses.
Highway Impact
14. The appeal site is located within a residential area consisting of semi-detached
    properties which are quite uniform in appearance. Most properties have off street
    parking for at least two cars. There is a traffic regulation order in place on
    Woodstock Road which prevents on street parking between 11am and 3pm.
15. The appeal property is a semi-detached property with an area of hardstanding
    located in front of the dwelling which is accessed via a single access point from
    Woodstock Road.
16. The Streetscape Design Guide requires the provision of a minimum of 3 car
    parking spaces for a 6-bedroom HMO and the figure rises to 4 for an 8-bedroom
    HMO. Whilst the area of hardstanding in front of the property is physically large
    enough to accommodate 3 cars it cannot currently accommodate more than 2 cars
    without vehicle owners having to move cars due to the single car width access,
    which is impractical for the occupiers.
17. No evidence has been provided to suggest that any harm has arisen from the
    existing under-provision, therefore I am satisfied that a third space would be
    sufficient to meet the parking needs of the larger 8-bedroom HMO that is
    proposed.
18. A recent appeal decision 1 within the same administrative area has been
    referenced by the appellant. In this case, the Inspector determined a lower parking
    provision of 0.3 spaces per resident/bedroom was sufficient for a 7-bedroom HMO.
    However, the evidence upon which this decision was reached has not been
    provided so the circumstances that led to the decision are not clear. Consequently,
    I do not have evidence to demonstrate that parking provision below 3 spaces
    would be acceptable in this instance.
19. To accommodate a third parking space the installation of a second dropped kerb is
    proposed. The Highway Authority have explained that a 4.5m wide access is
    required which incorporates the removal of three kerb stones and installation of
    two tapered kerb stones. To minimise construction works near the street tree
    grassed areas would be retained behind the tapered kerb stones meaning the
    actual access width would be 3.2m. This would result in vehicles potentially driving
    over the grassed verge which would may damage the verge but given the low
    speed involved it would not cause a conflict with pedestrians or other vulnerable
    road users.
20. It has been suggested that the narrow access would also likely result in unsafe
    vehicle manoeuvres in the highway, including slower and exaggerated vehicle
    movements in the carriageway with an increased potential for conflict between
    vehicles. However, on my site visit I observed that Woodstock Road is a quiet
    residential street and whilst only a single moment in time, any vehicles were

1
    Appeal Ref: APP/D1835/W/24/3352502


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011840


       travelling at low speeds. With this in mind, I am satisfied that any drivers would
       have sufficient opportunity to react to a manoeuvring vehicle without there being a
       risk of collision.
21. In conclusion, I have found that the proposed access would not have an
    unacceptable impact on highway safety. This would accord with Policy SWDPR 06
    of the SWDPR. Amongst other matters the policy sets out that developments
    should take account of their nature and location and must demonstrate that the
    proposed layout and design will avoid unacceptable impact on highway safety.
Other Matters
22. The appellant has suggested that they are open to contributing towards the
    replanting of trees in Woodstock Road. However, no details have been provided
    of the number or location of trees and no means of securing these enhancements
    has been suggested. On this basis, I am unable to attach any meaningful weight
    to this suggestion.
23. Concerns have been raised over the handling of the planning application by the
    Council, in terms of the reference to earlier application 24/00216/FUL, the
    consistency of the advice and the timing that the advice from consultees was
    shared with the appellant. These matters fall outside of the scope of my
    assessment of the planning merits of the appeal but will be addressed in the
    separate costs decision.
24. It has been suggested that should the dropped kerb be found unacceptable, a split
    decision could be issued which approves only the change of use to a large HMO.
    However, as indicated above, there is already an under provision of parking at the
    appeal property which would be exacerbated by a larger HMO. The additional
    parking provision is integral to the acceptability of the development and
    consequently a split decision would be inappropriate in this context.
Planning Balance
25. Policy S3 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. For development inside settlements, this means that policy S4 of the
    Framework should be applied.
26. Policy S4 of the Framework, states that development proposals within settlements
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in the Framework.
27. The proposal would provide additional specialist residential accommodation in
    accordance with Policies HO7 and HO9 of the Framework. The site would also be
    well located to support sustainable patterns of movement and therefore accords
    with Policy TR3 of the Framework. The proposal would also make more effective
    use of the existing building in accordance with Policy L2 of the Framework.
    However, given that the scheme would provide just two additional bedrooms within
    an existing property only limited weight is attached to these benefits.
28. The proposal would fail to conserve or enhance an existing natural feature,
    causing irreversible harm to a hornbeam tree. This is contrary to Policy N2 of the
    Framework. Given the proposal would potentially lead to the loss of a tree which


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6011840


       contributes positively to the character of the locality I attach significant weight to
       this harm.
29. Overall, the benefits of the proposal would be substantially outweighed by the
    adverse effects. The presumption in favour of sustainable development does
    therefore not apply.
Conclusion
30. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the proposal would conflict with the
    development plan and there are no material considerations that indicate that the
    development should be determined otherwise than in accordance with it.
    Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.



Andrew Fulford
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
