 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 14 August 2026
 by Mrs Chris Pipe BA(Hons), DipTP, MTP, MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 28 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6011212
 58 Ryehill Gardens, Hartlepool TS26 0JJ
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
     to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Pat Wormald against the decision of the Hartlepool Borough Council.
     The application H/2025/0222.
 •   The development proposed is part retrospective application for the erection of a raised decked area
     together with an associated enclosure to the rear of the property.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed for the part retrospective application for the erection of a
   raised decked area together with an associated enclosure to the rear of the
   property at 58 Ryehill Gardens, Hartlepool TS26 0JJ in accordance with the terms
   of the application, Ref H/2025/0222 and the plans submitted with it, subject to the
   conditions set out below:
     1)      The development hereby permitted shall be completed not later than
             6months from the date of this decision.
     2)      The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
             the approved plans: Drawing No’s. PL – LP REV002, PL – PBP REV002,
             PL-PE REV002 and PL-PL REV002.
     3)      The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
             hereby approved development shall match that of the existing decking.
Procedural Matters
2. The Council changed the description of development from that referenced in the
   application form. The revised description is more accurate than that proposed. In
   the interests of clarity, I have adopted the revised description of development.
3. The application made clear that the scheme had been submitted retrospectively.
   The proposed development was in place at the time of my site visit; I have dealt
   with the proposal accordingly. Notwithstanding this, amended plans were
   considered by the Council prior to the determination of the planning application
   which included revisions to the proposed enclosure, changing the orientation and
   design of the steps and revising the design of the decking to include a lower level
   decking area. I have therefore considered this appeal on the basis of the amended
   plans submitted: Drawing No’s. PL – LP REV002, PL – PBP REV002, PL-PE
   REV002 and PL-PL REV002 as this is what the Council based its assessment on.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6011372


4. Since the determination of the application the National Planning Policy Framework
   (2024) has been superseded by the National Planning Policy Framework (2026)
   (the Framework). No party would be prejudiced or caused any injustice by me
   proceeding with the appeal in light of this change in policy.
Main Issue
5. The main issue in this appeal is the effect of the development on the living
   conditions of occupiers of No’s. 56 Ryehill Gardens.
Reasons
6. The appeal property is a two-storey semi-detached house in a predominantly
   residential area. No. 56 Ryehill Gardens adjoins the appeal property to the north
   and has a long, narrow rear garden, similar to the appeal site. The land falls away
   from the rear of the appeal property, with No. 56 situated at a slightly lower level.
   There are existing close-boarded fences between the properties, although their
   height varies as a consequence of the changing ground levels. The existing
   boundary is approximately 2.3m high from the highest ground level at the rear of
   the property and reduces in height towards the rear garden. The existing boundary
   treatment is higher when viewed from No. 56.
7. The amended proposal would retain part of the unauthorised raised decking area
   approximately 0.9m above natural ground level at its highest point, it would reduce
   the depth of the raised element along the boundary shared with No. 56 to
   approximately 4m. The decking closest to No. 60 Ryehill Gardens would be
   retained at the current 6.2 projection, forming an L-shaped raised decking area.
8. Steps would be provided in an off-centre position to access a lower section of
   decking, approximately 0.3m above ground level, which would then provide access
   towards the rear garden, effectively squaring off the decking area. The proposal
   would also include privacy screens at the eastern end of the higher decking area.
9. It is important to note the relationship between the two properties prior to the works
   being carried out, rather than considering the decking in isolation. The existing
   boundary treatment does not provide complete screening between the gardens.
   Mutual overlooking occurs as a result of the existing boundary arrangements and
   the former decking area.
10. The amended higher decking would provide an elevated position from which some
    views towards the neighbouring garden could be obtained, the difference in height
    between the amended proposal and the former decking is relatively limited. The
    evidence before me indicates that the former decking was itself raised, with a
    maximum height of approximately 0.7m above natural ground level. The amended
    proposal would therefore represent an increase of approximately 0.2m over that
    previous arrangement. The size of the deck projecting from the rear elevation
    along the boundary with No. 56 would be similar, with the overall length 0.1m
    longer.
11. I do not consider that an additional height or the slightly longer decking area, in the
    context of the existing boundary treatment and the established relationship
    between the gardens, would result in a materially different degree of overlooking.
    There would remain some perception of overlooking from the raised platform,
    particularly towards the rear garden of No. 56. However, that relationship already


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision 6011372


     exists to a degree as a consequence of the existing varying height of the boundary
     treatment. The proposal would not introduce an entirely new relationship of
     overlooking between the properties.
12. I have also taken into account the existing built form at No. 56. The neighbouring
    property has two rear extensions incorporating large areas of glazing to their rear
    elevations, with views available from them all year round. Whilst those windows
    are not directly comparable with views from an external raised platform, their
    presence demonstrates that the rear of No. 56 already has a relatively open
    relationship with the adjoining garden environment. Views between the two
    properties are not solely a consequence of the appeal proposal.
13. The amended arrangement reduces the extent of the higher decking along the
    shared boundary compared with the decking as built. The lower 0.3m section
    would be less elevated and would therefore have a more limited effect on outlook
    and privacy. Whilst the shared fencing along the boundary of the proposed lower
    decking area is lower in height compared to the higher decking, taking a pragmatic
    perspective, I am mindful that this area of decking at a height of 0.3m would if built
    in isolation be within the limits of permitted development.
14. In terms of overbearing effect and outlook the amended decking would have a
    limited projection beyond the rear elevation of the neighbouring rear extension;
    occupiers would continue to benefit from a good outlook from the rear facing
    windows. The proposed development would not give rise to significant
    overshadowing.
15. I have considered whether additional boundary screening would be necessary to
    prevent overlooking. However, I do not consider that further screening, beyond that
    proposed is required, based on the relationship between the properties.
16. I conclude that the proposed development would not cause harm to the living
    conditions of the occupiers of No. 56 Ryehill Gardens.
17. There is no conflict with Policy QP4 of the Hartlepool Local Plan (2018) which
    seeks amongst other things for developments to not negatively impact upon the
    relationship with existing and proposed land uses and the amenity of occupiers of
    adjoining or nearby properties.
18. Whilst not contained in the reason for refusal the Council’s Delegated Report
    concludes that the development would also be contrary to Policy HSG11 of the
    Local Plan which, similar to Policy QP4 seeks amongst other things for
    developments to ensure development do not significantly affect the amenities of the
    occupiers of adjacent or nearby properties. There is no conflict with Policy HSG11.
19. There is no conflict with the Framework which seeks amongst other things to
    protect living conditions by ensuring that development proposals are appropriate to
    their location.
Conclusion and Conditions
20. For the above reasons I conclude that this appeal should be allowed.
21. I have imposed a condition relating to the completion of development in accordance
    with the approved amended plans on the basis that the works to modify the existing
    unauthorised works should be carried out in a timely manner. I have also imposed

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
 Appeal Decision 6011372


     a condition specifying the relevant plans as this provides certainty. In order to
     safeguard the character and appearance of the area I have imposed a condition
     concerning materials to ensure a satisfactory appearance.

Chris Pipe
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       4
