Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by Richard Gilbert BA (Hons) MSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 11 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011648
13 Temperance Hill, Woolley Moor DE55 6FJ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Kenneth Riley against the decision of North East Derbyshire District
     Council.
•    The application reference is 26/00145/FLH.
•    The development proposed is a rear first floor extension.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The site address details of the application form omitted the post code for the
       appeal property. The post code in the banner heading above is taken from the
       decision notice.
3.     During the course of the appeal a new National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published on the 17 August 2026. The amendments to the
       Framework have incurred a change in national planning policy which are material
       considerations to this appeal proposal. I have provided both parties with an
       opportunity to comment on the Framework with relevance to their case.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
       appearance of the appeal property and surrounding area, having regard to its
       location in the countryside.
Reasons
5.     The appeal property is a two-storey semi-detached dwelling faced in stone and
       positioned at the end of a row of similar pitched roof houses. It possesses a single
       storey rear extension with a shallow mono-pitch roof. The gable of the appeal
       property faces toward an open, grassed area of land that exposes its side
       elevation to public vantage points along a stretch of Temperance Hill.
       Neighbouring dwellings in the row comprise the attached neighbour and a further
       terrace of four houses. The appeal property and its neighbours have a rural
       character and appearance resulting from their modest size, humble form and
       ample gardens set within the surrounding countryside.
6.     The proposed development includes the erection of a first-floor pitched roof
       extension forming a rear gable above the existing rear extension. Policy LC5 of the
       North East Derbyshire Local Plan (2021) (NEDLP) permits extensions to dwellings

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011648


       provided that the proposal respects the scale, proportions, materials and overall
       design and character of the existing property. The appeal site is also situated in
       the countryside, outside of the settlement development limits. Therefore, Policy
       LC5 also requires proposals for residential extensions outside of development
       limits to be assessed as a new dwelling where they, either individually or
       cumulatively, involve a significant change in the scale and character of the original
       dwelling.
7.     The depth of the existing extension is significant and, as the proposal would match
       its projection, a large new area of blank wall would be created at height behind the
       dwelling preventing the proposal from appearing subsidiary when approaching
       from Temperance Hill. When considered alongside existing extensions, the
       proposal would cumulatively increase the original volume of the host dwelling by
       approximately 70.6%. Not only would this additional mass be disproportionate to
       the size of the original dwelling, it would be unsympathetic to its simple form and
       modest scale, and therefore detrimental to its character and appearance.
8.     The Council have identified the proposed extension as amounting to a significant
       change in scale and character of the original dwelling and, in accordance with
       Policy LC5, the proposal was assessed as if it were a new dwelling. Policy SS9(1)
       of the NEDLP sets out the categories where proposals in countryside locations
       outside of settlement development limits will be approved. This includes, amongst
       other categories, a replacement building for the same use that is not significantly
       larger than the building it replaces. As the development plan requires the proposal
       to be assessed as a new dwelling, and it would be significantly larger in scale and
       character than the existing dwelling, it would not fall within that category.
       Furthermore, when considered in the alternative as a residential extension, there
       are no categories within SS9(1) that the proposal would otherwise fall into.
       Consequently, the proposal is not capable of satisfying SS9(1).
9.     As regards the extensions present at neighbouring dwellings, there is no rear
       extension at 11 Temperance Hill, and the rear extensions to 10 and 12
       Temperance Hill are restricted to a single storey. These examples are therefore
       not comparable to the appeal proposal.
10. There are two, two-storey rear extensions present at 8 and 9 Temperance Hill
    (Nos. 8 and 9) that form an end-terrace and mid-terrace, respectively. Being a mid-
    terrace, the extension to No.9 sits within the profile of the extension next door at
    No.8 and is not visible within the street scene. The extension to No.8, although
    two-storey, consists of a first floor dormer set within the side of a roof slope. With
    the eaves positioned at a low level, that extension possesses far less bulk and
    dominance than the proposal before me. In this context, and mindful of the lack of
    information relating to how neighbouring extensions came into being, I attribute
    limited weight to any comparison with them, and they do not persuade me that the
    appeal proposal is acceptable.
11. For the reasons set out above, the proposed development would have a
    substantially harmful effect on the character and appearance of the appeal
    property and surrounding area, having regard to its location in the countryside.
    Conflict therefore arises with Policies SS9, LC5, SDC3 and SDC12 of the NEDLP.
    These policies seek development in countryside locations that respects the scale,
    proportions, materials and overall design and character of the existing property,
    and make a positive contribution to the quality of the local environment whilst not

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011648


       causing significant harm to the character, quality distinctiveness or sensitivity of
       the landscape.
Other Matters
12. I further note the appellant’s contention in respect of fairness. There is no
    procedural or substantive evidence before me to indicate that the Council
    assessed the proposal in an unreasonable or unfair manner. Nonetheless, my
    assessment is based on the plans, evidence and merits of the case before me and
    I have determined the appeal accordingly.
Planning Balance
13. The proposal would have a harmful effect on the character and appearance of the
    appeal property and surrounding area and would therefore conflict with the
    development plan, taken as a whole.
14. The appeal site is situated outside of a settlement where only certain forms of
    development should be approved as specified by Policy S5 of the Framework.
    These specific forms of development should be approved unless the benefits of
    doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies of this Framework.
15. Whilst the proposal is required to be assessed as a new dwelling by the
    development plan, this does not apply to the Framework. As such, Policy S5(1)(c)
    specifies that the reuse, extension, alteration or replacement of an existing building
    can be approved provided that the existing building is of permanent and
    substantial construction, is lawful in planning terms and any extension or alteration
    would not result in a disproportionate increase in size to the existing building as of
    17 August 2026.
16. The proposal is constructed of masonry and is therefore of permanent and
    substantial construction and there is no evidence before me to suggest that the
    dwelling is not otherwise lawfully used as such. Although the proposed extension
    would increase the overall additions to the property to approximately 70.6% of its
    original volume, independently it represents an increase of approximately 22.4%
    as of 17 August 2026. This is not considered to be a disproportionate increase
    when existing extensions are excluded. Consequently, the proposal is a form of
    development that should be approved, unless the benefits of doing so are
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects assessed against the national
    decision-making policies of the Framework. This material consideration limits the
    weight to be attached to the proposal’s conflict with Policy SS9 of the NEDLP.
17. The proposal would provide economic and social benefits through employment
    related to its construction, and through the provision of additional living space for
    the appellant and their family, respectively. Nevertheless, the construction period
    would be temporary, thereby restricting long term employment. Similarly, the
    additional living space would be confined to a private use. As such, the identified
    benefits attract limited weight in the balancing exercise.
18. Policy DP3(3) of the Framework states that development should be refused if,
    without clear justification, it conflicts with Policy DP3(1), which states that
    development proposals should respond to their context (the history, character and
    features of their site and its setting), so that they integrate with and enhance their


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011648


       surroundings. Whilst Policy SS9 of the NEDLP has diminished weight due to
       Policy S5(1)(c) of the Framework, the design of the proposal has been assessed
       as contrary to Policy LC5 of the NEDLP by reason of character and appearance.
       This conflict amounts to a substantial adverse effect in the planning balance in
       accordance with Policies DP3(3) and S5(2) of the Framework.
19. When weighed against one another, the benefits of the proposal would be
    substantially outweighed by its adverse effects when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies of the Framework.
Conclusion
20. Overall, material considerations in favour of approval are not of sufficient weight to
    suggest the decision should be made other than in accordance with the
    development plan. For the reasons given, and having regard to all other matters
    raised, the appeal should be dismissed.

Richard Gilbert
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
