Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 1 September 2026
by L Fern BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 02 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011081
239 Barking Road, East Ham, London E6 1LB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Q Sadikaj against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
     Newham.
•    The application Ref is 26/00723/FUL.
•    The development proposed is demolition of the existing single-storey rear structure and erection of a
     two-storey building, comprising ancillary ground floor waiting area to the existing hand car wash (Sui
     Generis) and the creation of two self-contained studio flats at first floor level (Use Class C3).

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     Although the address only refers to No 239 Barking Road (No 239), the red line
       boundary of the appeal site also includes Nos 239A, 241 and 241A Barking Road
       (Nos 239A, 241 and 241A respectively).
3.     Furthermore, for the avoidance of doubt, where this decision refers to ‘Flat 1’ it is
       in reference to the proposed flat that would be furthest away from Aintree Avenue.
4.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework was published in
       August 2026 (the Framework), which replaces previous iterations, and the
       contents of which have been considered in the determination of this appeal.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues are:
           •    the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the
                surrounding area;
           •    the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of future occupants of Flat
                1 regarding outlook and daylight, and Flats 1 and 2 regarding privacy, noise
                and the amount of private outdoor space;
           •    the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of the occupants of Nos
                239A and 241A regarding privacy and of No 239A regarding outlook; and
           •    whether the proposal would make adequate provision for cycle and waste
                storage.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011081


Reasons
6.     The appeal site is modest in scale and comprises two two-storey properties
       located on the end of the terraced row, together with the largely open space to the
       rear, which is used as a hand car wash facility and includes a small single storey
       structure used for storage. The ground floor of the properties (Nos 239 and 241) is
       commercial, whereas residential accommodation is located at first floor level (Nos
       239A and 241A) and benefits from rear facing windows. Single storey rear
       projections are common features behind the commercial properties fronting onto
       this part of Barking Road.
7.     Aintree Avenue, which is closely related to the proposed location of the building, is
       largely characterised by Victorian residential terraced development that is
       regimented in design with large decorative front bays and simple pitched roofs.
       The terraces also have a strong and consistent front building line behind small
       front gardens. These attributes contribute positively to the character of Aintree
       Avenue.
Character and appearance
8.     Policy DP3 of the Framework, amongst other things, makes it clear that
       development proposals should respond to their context (the history, character and
       features of their site and its setting), so that they integrate with and enhance their
       surroundings. Policies D3 and D4 of the London Plan (2021) and Policies SP1,
       SP3 and H1 of the Newham Local Plan (2018) (NLP) are broadly consistent with
       the Framework in that they, amongst other things, require high-quality
       development, which respects, takes advantage of, and enhances the positive
       elements and distinctive features of the borough.
9.     The proposal would introduce a significant amount of built form, both in footprint
       and height, to what is a modest sized plot that provides a distinct break at first floor
       level between the properties fronting onto Barking Road and those on Aintree
       Avenue. It would therefore appear as an incongruous addition to the street scene.
10. It is acknowledged that the proposed building line would be consistent with the
    existing storage building and the rear projection on the opposite side of Aintree
    Avenue. However, these are single storey in height and are distinctly commercial
    in character, setting them apart from the residential area beyond. The proposed
    building would appear residential in appearance and would sit forward of the
    terraced dwellings, which would disrupt the consistent residential building line
    along Aintree Avenue.
11. Furthermore, the hipped roof design would be out-of-keeping with the pitched roofs
    that are prevalent along both Barking Road and Aintree Avenue, and the overly
    simplistic fenestration would fail to take reference from the positive attributes that
    are distinctive of the residential terraced properties along Aintree Avenue.
12. Accordingly, the proposal would harm the character and appearance of the
    surrounding area. Thus, it would be contrary to London Plan Policies D3 and D4
    and NLP Policies SP1, SP3 and H1.
Living conditions – future residents
13. Framework Policy P3 requires development proposals to, amongst other things,
    provide healthy living conditions for occupiers. London Plan Policies GG4 and D6

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011081


       and NLP Policies SP1, SP3 and H1 are broadly in-line with the Framework policy
       but provide more detailed requirements to achieve the comparable aim.
14. Flat 1 would only benefit from one modest sized window, which would be unlikely
    to allow sufficient daylight into the building given the limited separation distance
    (approximately 4.4m) between the proposed building and the rear elevation of Nos
    239 and 239A. For the same reason, the future residents of Flat 1 would be
    afforded a poor and oppressive outlook from their single window, which would
    consist of the rear elevation of Nos 239 and 239A at close proximity.
15. Furthermore, even though at slight acute angles, the residents of Nos 239A and
    241A would have largely unobstructed views into both proposed flats from the
    rooms used as kitchens and a lounge. The modest gap between the buildings
    would have little effect in reducing what would be a significant lack of privacy.
16. It is acknowledged that the existing car wash is currently uncovered, is close to
    existing residential dwellings and the proposal seeks to provide a roof over the
    facility. However, regardless of present conditions and the established relationship
    with existing residential properties, the effect on future residents of this proposal
    should be assessed. The hand car wash is a noisy operation and in the absence of
    a thorough assessment, it is unclear whether such an environment would be
    detrimental to the living conditions of future residents or whether the proposed roof
    would provide satisfactory mitigation.
17. The proposal would not provide any private outdoor space, which would be
    contrary to London Plan Policy D6 that requires a minimum of 5 sq.m. to be
    provided for each 1-to-2-person dwelling, regardless of whether the flats would be
    occupied by families or otherwise. The appellant asserts that this deficiency would
    be mitigated by access to nearby public parks and recreational spaces. However,
    no specific locations have been provided in evidence, and it is therefore unclear
    whether such provision would alleviate the health and wellbeing concerns raised.
18. For these reasons, the proposal would not provide adequate living conditions for
    future residents of Flat 1 regarding outlook and daylight, and Flats 1 and 2
    regarding privacy, noise and the amount of private outdoor space. Thus, it would
    be contrary to London Plan Policies GG4 and D6 and NLP Policies SP1, SP3
    and H1.
Living conditions – neighbours
19. In a similar vein to the previous main issue, Framework Policy DP3 requires
    development proposals to, amongst other things, ensure adequate healthy living
    conditions are maintained for existing residents. London Plan Policy D3 and NLP
    Policies SP1 and SP8 are broadly consistent with the Framework in this regard.
20. As previously discussed, the separation distance between the rear windows of Nos
    239A and 241A, which include a substantial one servicing a lounge, and the
    windows of the proposed flats would be insufficient to prevent or even reduce the
    unacceptable loss of privacy that would occur for existing residents.
21. Furthermore, the proximity of the proposal and its two-storey height would create
    an overwhelming sense of enclosure and oppressive environment for the residents
    of No 239A. This is particularly the case given that the rooms to the rear are two
    important rooms that form an integral part of the home, the kitchen and the lounge.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011081


22. Consequently, the proposal would harm the living conditions of the occupants of
    Nos 239A and 241A regarding privacy and of No 239A regarding outlook. Thus, it
    would be contrary to London Plan Policy D3 and NLP Policies SP1 and SP8.
Cycle and waste facilities
23. Given the constrained nature of the appeal site, that the proposed building would
    extend to its boundaries on three sides and the proximity of the hand car wash, it
    is difficult to identify a feasible location for residential cycle and waste storage,
    despite the appellant showing willingness to provide such facilities.
24. Thus, the proposal would not provide adequate cycle and waste storage facilities.
    Thus, it would be contrary to London Plan Policies T1, T5 and SI7, and NLP
    Policies INF2 and INF3, which, amongst other things, seek adequate, flexible and
    easily accessible on-site waste storage space and collection systems, and the
    provision of appropriate levels of cycle parking that is fit for purpose, secure and
    well-located. These policies are broadly consistent with the Framework.
Other Matters
25. The proposal would contribute to housing supply within a sustainable location that
    benefits from convenient access to the public transport network. It would also
    represent an effective use of land within a settlement by utilising airspace above
    an existing commercial premises. Therefore, these benefits attract substantial
    weight, despite its small scale.
26. Although the Council has not identified any fundamental deficiencies with the
    proposed amount and configuration of internal residential floorspace, this is a
    neutral matter in the planning balance.
27. The appeal site is located within the zone of influence of the Epping Forest Special
    Area of Conservation. However, as the appeal is to be dismissed there is no need
    to undertake an appropriate assessment or to have regard to the Conservation of
    Habitats and Species Regulations.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
28. Whilst the benefits of the proposal attract substantial weight in-line with Framework
    Policy L2 relating to the effective use of land, the proposal would be in
    fundamental conflict with Framework Policy D3 relating to character and
    appearance that stipulates permission should be refused in such circumstances.
29. The appeal site is located within a settlement and therefore Framework Policy S4
    is engaged. In this case, given the conflict with Policy D3, the benefits of the
    proposal would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects and therefore it
    does not benefit from the presumption in favour of sustainable development as
    articulated at Framework Policy S3.
30. The proposal conflicts with the development plan, and material considerations do
    not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    Thus, the appeal is dismissed.

L Fern
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
