Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by F Harrison BA(Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 16th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6011052
31a Roman Road, Linthorpe, Middlesbrough TS5 6DZ
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by SAAMI Properties Ltd against the decision of Middlesbrough Council.
•      The application Ref is 26/0033/COU.
•      The proposed development is the retrospective change of use from 2 bed flat to 5 bed HMO.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       The appellant indicates that permission is not required for the change of use since
         there is a certificate of lawful use1 (CLU) for the use of the upper floor of the
         appeal property for five occupants, falling under Use Class C4. The CLU was
         approved prior to the introduction of the Article 4 Direction, which removed
         permitted development rights for the change of use of a dwelling to a small House
         in Multiple Occupation (HMO). However, there is no substantive evidence that the
         change of use occurred before the Article 4 Direction came into force. In any
         event, it is beyond the scope of this appeal to determine whether the proposed
         development requires permission. The proposal is before me, which I have
         assessed against the information submitted by the parties and my site visit.
3.       The decision notice refers to the emerging Middlesbrough Publication Local Plan
         (March 2025) (the PLP). Despite being at an advanced stage of preparation, I
         have limited substantive information regarding the PLP, including whether there
         are any unresolved objections relating to policies HOU7, HOU8 and HOU9 or any
         required modifications. These emerging policies therefore attract limited weight.
         Since the appeal was submitted a new version of the National Planning Policy
         Framework (the Framework) came into effect, but there are no material changes in
         policy emphasis relevant to the substance of the appeal. The change of use has
         already taken place, however for clarity, I have determined the appeal on the
         development as shown on the plans.
Main Issues
4.        The main issues are whether the proposal would provide acceptable living
          conditions for the future occupiers, with regard to internal space; and the effect of
          the proposal on highway safety, with regard to car parking.


1
    Council ref:24/0380/CLU

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6011052


Reasons
Living conditions
5.     The proposed bedrooms would range in size, and all would have ensuite facilities.
       None of the bedrooms would be well proportioned, owing to the sloping roof of the
       second-floor bedrooms and the narrow width and awkward shape of the first-floor
       bedrooms. With the addition of basic furniture shown on the submitted plan there
       would be very limited circulation space or floorspace for any additional furniture in
       the bedrooms, such as a desk, indicative of the confined nature of the
       accommodation. The bedrooms would not therefore have a comfortable or
       functional layout, and I am mindful that bedrooms in HMOs would reasonably be
       used more intensively than those in a dwelling.
6.     The size and shape of the shared kitchen is unlikely to be able to comfortably
       accommodate a dining table and seating area for all occupiers at the same time
       with sufficient unobstructed circulation space. Furthermore, no private external
       amenity space is proposed. Accordingly, there would be limited opportunity for
       occupiers to interact with one another and instead, occupiers would spend most of
       their time in their private rooms. There may be no explicit development plan policy
       requirement for communal facilities to be provided, however, to create well
       designed places with liveability, Framework Policy DP3 requires proposals to
       employ features that promote social interaction. That would not be the case for the
       appeal scheme.
7.     Irrespective of the precise amount of floorspace, and even if occupation of the
       property was restricted to five occupants and for students, overall, the proposed
       accommodation would be generally limited in size. It would have a cramped and
       claustrophobic environment and spaces that were awkward to navigate, resulting
       in inadequate living conditions for the occupiers and would therefore not deliver
       high quality development, as required by the development plan.
8.     Notwithstanding that internal space standards are indicative of a high quality of
       accommodation that meets occupiers’ needs, a numerical breach, in itself, does
       not indicate that satisfactory living accommodation cannot be achieved at the
       appeal property. This is recognised in the Council’s interim policy on conversion of
       residential properties which advises that proposals that fall below nationally
       prescribed space standards will be expected to provide a high standard of space,
       usability, privacy and amenity that is suitable for long term accommodation.
9.     However, the examples cited in the appellant’s submissions where the Council
       granted permission for schemes that were below space standards also provided
       accommodation that had an acceptable layout, circulation space and supporting
       facilities. That would not be the case at the appeal site and so the other examples
       are not directly comparable. As such, a decision to refuse permission at the appeal
       site would not be inconsistent with other decisions that have been taken in the
       area. For the same reason, the allowed appeal in Nottinghamshire does not lead
       me away from my above findings.
10. The proposal may well meet the standards in the Council’s HMOs in
    Middlesbrough: Guidance on Accommodation Standards. However, the purpose of
    this document is for licensing. As licensing relates to powers under housing
    legislation, which operate separately to the planning system, the weight afforded to
    the guidance as a specific measure for planning purposes is limited.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6011052


11. The windows of the middle first floor bedroom would look onto the neighbour’s roof
    terrace. However, taking account that there would be two windows serving this
    bedroom with opportunities for direct views available primarily from one of the
    windows, and given the height difference of the terrace relative to the windows it
    would not unacceptably diminish the level of privacy or sense of overlooking that
    could be expected by the future occupiers. The position of the window of the
    adjacent first floor bedroom means that views of the terrace would be at an oblique
    angle and so privacy in this room would not be harmfully undermined.
12. Overall, I conclude that the proposal would not provide acceptable living conditions
    for the future occupiers, with regard to internal space and would be in conflict with
    Policy DC1 of the Core Strategy (2008) (CS) and PLP policies H07, H08 and H09
    insofar as these policies require high quality development that serves the amenity
    requirements of future occupiers through well proportioned, useable living space.
Highway safety
13. The terraced properties on Rockliffe Road have no off-street parking and there are
    parking restrictions on Rockliffe Road and Roman Road nearest to the appeal site
    which reduces the amount of on-street parking available. There is also demand for
    parking from patrons of the businesses on Roman Road, although these are likely
    to have a high turnover. I have no reason to doubt the objections from several
    residents and local Councillor who indicate a high demand for parking which has
    led to existing problems in the locality, resulting in the restrictions at the junction of
    Rockliffe Road with Roman Road.
14. However, given the scale of the proposal and that the number of occupants could
    be restricted through the imposition of a suitably worded condition there is no
    substantive evidence that the proposal would significantly increase the demand for
    parking, or that demand for on-street parking arising from the appeal would result
    in unsafe parking. It therefore follows that the living conditions of existing occupiers
    of Rockliffe Road would not be diminished in relation to the availability of car
    parking spaces.
15. In coming to this view, I have taken into account that the proposal would be for
    students who typically may be less likely to have a car, particularly in the
    circumstances of this case given that the parties agree that the site is in an
    accessible location. Additionally, while I have no clear information about the supply
    of nearby public parking provision and acknowledging that it was only a snapshot
    in time, at the time of my site visit, late morning on a weekday, I observed several
    available car parking spaces along Rockliffe Road. Furthermore, Rockliffe Road
    has a 20 miles per hour speed limit, is not a complicated section of the highway
    and I did not observe the existing highway situation to be inherently unsafe. There
    is no clear evidence that the appeal scheme would add to existing parking
    problems in the area to the extent that it would have an unacceptable impact on
    highway safety, which Framework Policy TR6 seeks to avoid.
16. To conclude, the proposal would not have an unacceptable effect on highway
    safety, with regard to car parking and would be in accordance with CS policies DC1
    and CS5 and PLP Policy HO9. Amongst other things, these policies require all
    development proposals to not impact highway safety and to avoid barriers to
    access and movement and the enjoyment of the built environment.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6011052


Other Matters
17. The appeal site falls within the Linthorpe Conservation Area (LCA). Insofar as it
    relates to this appeal, the significance of the LCA is primarily derived from the
    architectural detailing and layout of the buildings within it. As part of the varied
    character of the local centre the appeal site makes a neutral contribution to the
    LCA. No external alterations are proposed and the use at ground floor level would
    not be altered and so the contribution the appeal site makes to the character and
    appearance of the LCA as a whole would be preserved and its significance as a
    designated heritage asset would not be harmed.
18. Consequently, the development would meet the requirements of section 72(1) of
    the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 and the
    provisions of the Framework to conserve and enhance the historic environment. I
    note the Council raised no concerns in this respect either. However, this, and any
    other policy compliance, including daylight/sunlight, and cycle and bin storage,
    would be a neutral matter, weighing neither for nor against the proposal.
19. The appeal site lies within the impact risk zone of the Teesmouth and Cleveland
    Coast Special Protection Area and Ramsar Site (the protected site) afforded
    protection under the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (the
    Regulations). The Regulations require that permission may only be granted after
    having ascertained that the development would not affect the integrity of a
    designated habitat. However, as the scheme is unacceptable for other reasons, it is
    not necessary for me to consider the implications of the proposal upon the
    protected site.
Conclusion
20. My above findings bring the proposal into conflict with the development plan, read
    as a whole. There are no material considerations that indicate a decision should
    be made other than in accordance with it. Therefore, I conclude that the appeal
    should be dismissed.



F Harrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
