Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 September 2026
by Andrew Fulford BSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 11th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012021
13 Howard Avenue, Bedford MK40 4EA
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of
     the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as
     amended).
•    The appeal is made by Mr Kotecha against the decision of Bedford Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00578/CPNMA.
•    The development proposed is a change of use of a building from Class E (commercial, business and
     service) to a use falling within Class C3 (dwellinghouses)

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and prior approval is granted under the provisions of Article
       3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of the Town and Country Planning (General
       Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) for prior notification
       for development consisting of a change of use of a building from Class E
       (commercial, business and service) to a use falling within Class C3
       (dwellinghouses) at 13 Howard Avenue, Bedford MK40 4EA in accordance with
       the application 26/00578/CPNMA and the details submitted with it including plan
       Nos K1858-01a and K1858-02a.
Preliminary Matter
2.     The description of development in the banner heading is taken from the application
       form, but I have removed the reference to the proposal being for prior approval as
       that is not an act of development.
3.     On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published. Those parts of the Framework most relevant to this
       appeal have been amended. As a result, parties have been provided with an
       opportunity to make further submissions. I have referred to the latest version of the
       Framework where relevant in this appeal.
Background and Main Issue
4.     Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA, of the Town and Country Planning
       (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) (“the
       GPDO”) provides for a permitted development right for the change of use of a
       building falling within use class E (Commercial, Business and Service) to class C3
       (Dwellinghouses). This is subject to limitations and conditions, as set out in
       subsequent paragraphs of Class MA.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012021


5.     Paragraph MA.1 of Class MA sets out the requirements that a proposal must
       satisfy to qualify for prior approval. The Council considers that the development
       complies with these requirements. Based on the evidence before me, I have no
       reason to reach a different conclusion.
6.     However, Paragraph MA.2 details that development under Class MA is permitted
       subject to an application to the Local Planning Authority for a determination as to
       whether prior approval is required in relation to the conditions set out in Paragraph
       MA.2(2). One of these conditions MA.2(2)(a) relates to the transport impacts of the
       development, particularly to ensure safe site access. The prior approval was
       refused on the basis that the proposal would provide insufficient car parking.
7.     The Council considered that the development complied with the other conditions
       set out in Paragraph MA.2(2), and based on the evidence before me, I have no
       reason to reach a different conclusion. Accordingly, there is no need to give these
       matters further consideration in this decision.
8.     Accordingly, the main issue is whether the proposal would be permitted
       development under Class MA, with regard to whether the proposal would satisfy
       condition MA.2(2)(a), with reference to the transport impacts of the development,
       particularly to ensure safe site access.
Reasons
9.     The appeal site is in a residential area consisting of a mix of terraced and semi-
       detached properties. There are also a small number of non-residential uses in
       close proximity including a church and retail unit. All dwellings have small front
       gardens and consequently occupiers are reliant on on-street parking for their
       vehicles. There are no parking restrictions outside the appeal site or on any
       surrounding roads.
10. The front part of the appeal property is in retail use at ground floor level with the
    ground floor rear and first floor in lawful use as two residential flats. The proposal
    seeks to convert the ground floor retail use into a single one-bedroom dwelling.
11. There is agreement between the parties that the proposed residential use would
    generate a lower parking demand than the existing retail use. There is no evidence
    before me to reach a different conclusion on this matter.
12. The Council’s concern relates solely to the increase in parking demand arising
    through the night when the retail unit would be closed. Whilst parking demands
    would be at their highest overnight when occupiers are most likely to be at home, it
    is conceivable that a business vehicle could be parked near the premises
    overnight. Nevertheless, the likely parking demand arising from the proposed one-
    bedroom property would be for a maximum of one parking space. Whilst only a
    snapshot in time, I was able to park outside the premises on my site visit and other
    spaces were available in the vicinity. Given the extent of unrestricted parking on
    Howard Avenue and the surrounding streets I am satisfied that the parking
    demand could met without any undue impact.
13. The site is in a sustainable location within walking distance of Bedford train station
    and a bus service on Ford End Road. Cycle storage would also be provided within
    the scheme to encourage sustainable travel. Future occupiers would therefore



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012021


       have access to a range of transport options and would not be reliant on car use to
       access nearby services and facilities.
14. Whilst the appeal proposal would result in a third residential unit within the
    curtilage of No 13 Howard Avenue that has no off-street parking provision, this is a
    location where all surrounding dwellings are reliant on on-street parking. There is
    no evidence to suggest that the cumulative parking demands arising would unduly
    impact on parking availability in the surrounding streets. I note that a parking
    survey has been requested by the Council however, given the minor nature of the
    proposal I am satisfied that a survey is not required in this instance.
15. Condition MA.2(2)(a) places emphasise on ensuring a safe site access. The
    change of use would not introduce a new access, and the proposed use is less
    intensive in terms of vehicle movements. Consequently, a safe site access would
    be provided for the one-bedroom dwelling.
16. Based on the evidence before me, I find that the transport impacts of the proposed
    development, particularly to ensure safe site access, would not be materially
    harmful and appropriate parking provision would be provided reflecting the location
    and nature of development in accordance with Policy TR4 of the Framework. The
    proposal would therefore also accord with condition MA.2(2)(a) of Schedule 2, Part
    3, Class MA of the GPDO.
Conditions
17. The approval is granted on the basis that the development must be completed
    within three years from the date of prior approval, as stipulated by MA.2(5), and
    thereafter the building must remain in use as a dwellinghouse under Class C3, in
    accordance with MA.2(6). It is also subject to compliance with paragraph W, which
    governs the prior approval procedure.
18. Further to the above, paragraph W (13) of the GPDO permits prior approval to be
    granted subject to conditions that are reasonably related to the subject matter of
    the prior approval. In this case the local highway authority has suggested a
    condition regarding the door proposed for the cycle and bin store as there may be
    maintenance and security issues. However, the transport-related prior approval
    matter set out within paragraph MA.2 particularly concerns safe site access rather
    than security or maintenance concerns. Consequently, I find the imposition of the
    additional condition unnecessary, and I have not imposed it.
Conclusion
19. For the reasons given above the appeal is allowed and prior approval is granted.



Andrew Fulford
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
