Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 19 August 2026

by Andrew Dale BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date:03 September 2026


 Appeal ref. 6012527
 1 Charnwood Bank, White Lee, Batley WF17 8PY
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr Hashmi against the decision of Kirklees Metropolitan Council.
 •   The application ref. is 2026/62/91139/E .
 •   The development proposed is: “Erection of side and rear extensions, formation of driveway with
     dropped kerb to front elevation and associated works”.



Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed insofar as it relates to the formation of driveway with
   dropped kerb to front elevation and associated works.
2. The appeal is allowed insofar as it relates to the erection of side and rear
   extensions and planning permission is granted for the erection of side and rear
   extensions at 1 Charnwood Bank, White Lee, Batley WF17 8PY in accordance with
   the terms of the application, ref. 2026/62/91139/E, and the plans submitted with it
   numbered 10442/01, 10442/02D, 10442/03C, 10442/04 and 10442/05A, so far as
   relevant to those parts of the development hereby permitted and subject to the
   following conditions:
     1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
        date of this decision.
     2) The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
        extensions hereby permitted shall be as stated on the submitted drawings.
Preliminary matters
3.    A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
     17 August 2026. The new 2026 version does not however materially differ from the
     previous version insofar as it relates to the main issues in this householder appeal.
     The cases of the main parties will not therefore be prejudiced by my reference to
     the new version. I have proceeded on this basis.
4. The description of the proposal in the heading above is taken from the Council’s
   decision notice and the householder planning appeal form. It is more precise than
   the one provided on the application form since it makes clear that there would be
   more than one extension.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012527


5. A fence, about 1.8m in height, has been erected around the site. The Council says
   that it does not have the benefit of planning permission. It has not been included in
   the terms of the planning application so it is not for consideration under this appeal.
   The proposed site/block plan includes electricity substation 5563 within the red
   edge marking out the site. This could be a drawing error but in any event it does not
   affect my assessment of the development proposals the subject of the application.
6. Adopting a flexible reading of the guidance in the Council’s House Extensions and
   Alterations Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) 2021, the Council had no
   objections to the proposed single storey rear extension which would replace a
   conservatory. I see no reason to reach a different view on that part of the scheme.
Main issues
7. The Council’s objections relate to the single storey side extension and the formation
   of the driveway with dropped kerb to the front. The main issues are firstly, with
   regard to the side extension, the effects on the visual amenities of the host property
   and the wider locality and secondly, with regard to the proposed formation of the
   driveway with dropped kerb to the front, the effects on the visual amenities of the
   host property and the wider locality and on highway and pedestrian safety.
Reasons
The appeal site
8. No. 1 Charnwood Bank is a 3-bedroom detached house which occupies a prominent
   corner plot at the junction with White Lee Road. At the rear, the property benefits
   from 2 off-street parking spaces and a detached garage served by a vehicular access
   off White Lee Road. There is a small front garden mainly laid to grass across which
   is a pedestrian path linking the front entrance to the pavement in Charnwood Bank.
The single storey side extension
9. Situated well within settlement limits, the principle of extending the dwelling is not at
   issue. The appellant wishes to provide improved accommodation for the occupants.
   The original and simple built form of no. 1 remains substantially intact.
10. The single storey side extension would utilize matching bricks and tiles and follow
    the advice for such extensions in the SPD by not extending more than two thirds of
    the width of the original house, not exceeding a height of 4m and being set back at
    least 500mm from the principal building line to Charnwood Bank. In addition to this,
    being set below footpath level along White Lee Road and between 1m and just
    over 2m from the side boundary leaving space for a side passage, being visually
    separated from the rear extension and being finished with a lean-to roof, I consider
    that the extension would have a reasonably low profile, not lead to an unduly
    cramped form of development and be seen as a small scale, subservient addition in
    keeping with the character and appearance of the host building.
11. Some observers might perceive a building line along this section of White Lee Road
    consisting of the terraced houses at 2-8 White Lee Road, 1 and 2 Charnwood Bank
    and 18 White Lee Road. However, to the extent that there is a building line, it is a
    2-storey one that is also quite limited in length and not clearly defined owing to the
    change in gradient, the curvature of White Lee Road, the different proximities and


                                             2
 Appeal Decision 6012527


    levels of the various buildings in relation to that road, the separation of the buildings
    from each other and intervening features in the case of the substation and parking
    court between the appeal property and 2-8 White Lee Road.
12. In my opinion, the only realistic comparison in terms of a notional building line is
    with the partner property at 2 Charnwood Bank. Upon close inspection, I saw that
    the 2-storey gable end of this property is positioned closer to White Lee Road and
    at a notably higher level. This will remain the dominant property, even if the
    proposed side extension was to be built, whether looking uphill or downhill on White
    Lee Road. So, following the advice in paragraph 4.3 of the SPD, in these
    circumstances and looking at the proposal on its merits, if the extension would be
    slightly in advance of the 2-storey gable end of 2 Charnwood Bank, no material
    harm would occur. That the extension would have windows overlooking each street
    would also be appropriate for this corner plot.
13. I find on this issue that the single storey side extension, by virtue of its siting,
     design, scale and relationship to the established building lines, would be in keeping
     with the visual amenities of the host property and the wider locality. So, there would
     be no conflict with Policy LP24 of the Kirklees Local Plan 2019 (KLP) which seeks
     to promote good design or with key design principles 1 and 2 of the SPD.
Formation of driveway with dropped kerb to the front
14. Small front gardens predominantly laid to lawns, some with shrub planting, are an
    attractive feature at many of the houses within Charnwood Bank. Such gardens
    appear to part of the original layout. The greenery provides for some pleasant
    visual relief to the compact layout of detached and semi-detached houses.
15. The works proposed at no. 1 would replace the lawn in the front garden with a block
    paved drive. This would facilitate the parking of a car shown to be positioned at an
    obvious angle to the street on ground that falls quite sharply towards the front of the
    house. Contrary to paragraphs 4.41 and 4.43 of the SPD, this part of the scheme
    would not carefully balance the requirement for off-street parking against the
    retention of soft landscaping areas within the curtilage of the property nor retain as
    much of the soft landscaping as possible; rather it would result in a prominent part
    of the street scene being dominated by a large area of hard surfacing and an
    awkwardly parked car raised above the floor level of the house and right in front of
    it. This would appear cramped and visually unsatisfactory, spoiling the appearance
    of the house and detracting from the visual amenities of the townscape hereabouts.
16. There is a further complication. Vehicles manoeuvring at an angle and across a
    change in gradient over the front drive onto or off Charnwood Bank, utilising a new
    2.5m wide dropped kerb extremely close to the corner of the junction with White
    Lee Road, would not be conducive to minimizing the scope for conflict between
    pedestrians, cyclists and vehicles. In particular, even without the boundary fencing,
    there would be minimal intervisibility between the driver of a car manoeuvring at the
    appeal property and oncoming vehicles, cyclists and pedestrians approaching uphill
    along White Lee Road and turning into Charnwood Bank.
17. I agree with the appellant that the formation of the driveway and dropped kerb can
    be considered separately from the extension proposals, but I am not convinced that
    the harm to the visual amenities of the host property and the wider locality and to


                                             3
 Appeal Decision 6012527


    highway and pedestrian safety can be mitigated by the imposition of planning
    conditions. In any event, the appellant has not suggested any specific conditions.
18. Since the 2 existing off-street car parking spaces and detached garage associated
    with the appeal property, even if it had 4 bedrooms as proposed, are sufficient and
    visually unobtrusive, this is not a case where the proposed driveway would provide
    valuable, safe and suitable parking space that would not otherwise be available.
19. I find on this issue that the proposed formation of driveway with dropped kerb to the
    front would have adverse effects upon the visual amenities of the host property and
    the wider locality and upon highway and pedestrian safety. There would be conflict
    again with KLP Policy LP24 and also with the aims of KLP Policies LP21 and LP22
    which call for safety in relation to highways/access and parking respectively. This
    part of the scheme would also run counter to key design principle 15 of the SPD.
Concluding comments
20. Planning law requires that applications for planning permission be determined in
    accordance with the development plan, unless material considerations indicate
    otherwise. The national decision-making policies in the Framework are a material
    consideration in making these decisions but they do not pull me in a different
    direction in this case. I have also taken account of the absence of objections from
    local residents, but this is not sufficient to outweigh the harm that I have described
    under the second main issue.
21. As no material harm would result from the erection of the side and rear extensions, I
    shall issue a split decision on this appeal: this will permit those parts of the proposal
    but not the other part of the development proposed, the formation of the driveway
    with dropped kerb to the front.
22. I have included the standard condition setting a time limit for the development to
     commence. Rather than use a separate condition, the submitted plans, so far as
     they are relevant, are referred to in the main body of the decision in the interests of
     certainty. In the Council’s Questionnaire, 2 planning conditions are suggested in the
     event of the appeal succeeding. I see no necessity for the first because the
     boundary treatment is not strictly before me and reducing its height would have no
     relevance to the side and rear extensions I am permitting. The second relates to
     materials and is somewhat excessive in its scope for this proposal in this locality. In
     the interests of preserving the character and appearance of the area, the condition
     should simply ensure that the materials to be used in the construction of the
     external surfaces of the extensions should be as stated on the submitted drawings.
23. I find no other matters to outweigh the findings that have led to my decision on this
     appeal.



Andrew Dale
INSPECTOR




                                              4
