    Appeal Decision
    Site visit made on 7 September 2026
    by P B Jarvis DipTP MRTPI
    an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
    Decision date: 28 September 2026


    Appeal Ref: 6012945
    73 Hale Lane, Barnet, London NW7 3PX
    •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
        to grant planning permission.
    •   The appeal is made by Mr David Weinberg against the decision of the Council of the London
        Borough of Barnet.
    •   The application Ref. is 26/0735/HSE.
    •   The proposed development is loft conversion and extension including hip to gable sides and rear
        dormer window.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for loft conversion and
   extension including hip to gable sides and rear dormer window at 73 Hale Lane,
   Barnet, London NW7 3PX in accordance with the terms of application ref:
   26/0735/HSE and subject to the following conditions:
        1) The development hereby permitted shall be begun within three years of the date
           of this decision.
        2) The materials to be used in the external construction of the extensions hereby
           permitted shall match those used on the existing dwelling.
        3) This development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
           following approved plans: 1:1250 scale Location Plan, 414:03 (first floor plan
           existing), 414:04 (loft level plan existing), 414: 05 (roof plan existing), 414:06
           (elevations existing), 414:11 (site layout plan existing and proposed), 414:13
           Rev.A (first floor plan proposed), 414:14 Rev.A (loft level plan proposed),
           414:15 Rev.A (roof plan proposed), 414:16 Rev.A (elevations proposed).
Preliminary Matters
2. A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
   August 2026. The policies relevant to this appeal have not materially changed
   therefore further comments have not been invited from the parties and it is not
   considered that any prejudice arises as a result.
3. Both parties have referred to a lawful development certificate which was granted in
   October 2025 (LDC) relating to a roof extension involving hip to gable with two side
   dormer windows, one relocated rooflight on side elevation and new rear gable
   window at the appeal site1. I have taken this into account in the decision below.

1
    LPA ref: 25/3797/192

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012945


Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect on the character and appearance of the host dwelling
   and wider street scene.
Reasons
5. The appeal site comprises a large detached residential property located on the
   western corner of Hale Lane and Hale Drive. It is of brick and render elevations
   with a large tiled hipped roof. The side elevation facing Hale Drive contains a
   number of distinctive lead paned windows including a bay window with timbered
   gable roof projection above.
6. The proposals would involve the enlargement of the rear hipped roof to create two
   gable ends along both side elevations. In views along Hale Lane, this would add
   considerable bulk to the roof form though its setback from the retained front hipped
   roof element would ensure that this would be recessive and not unduly bulky in
   appearance.
7. The new proposed gable end would be readily visible within the street scene of
   Hale Drive and increase the prominence of the roof form. Notwithstanding that it
   would be noticeably different from the existing hipped roofslope and would not be
   set down from the ridge of the existing roof, the new gable end would nevertheless
   be sympathetic to the overall character and appearance of the host dwelling. In
   addition, given that the dwelling is set back from the pavement edge it would not be
   unacceptably overbearing.
8. The new gable on the western flank elevation of the dwelling would also be readily
   visible within the street scene. However, the position of the dwelling set back from
   the road frontage, behind a reasonably sized front garden, and the retained front
   hipped roof element would ensure that it would not be unduly overbearing in views
   from Ashbourne Grove.
9. The Council’s Residential Design Guidance SPD (2016) (RDG) provides detailed
   guidance that seeks to ensure that extensions to dwellings are generally
   subordinate to the original house, respect it and are not overly dominant. Whilst the
   new gable end roof additions would not be subordinate, in that they would be of the
   same ridge height as the main rear roof, the resulting roof form would be consistent
   with the character of the existing dwelling. The increased roof bulk and gable ends
   would not be overly dominant in the wider street scene within which front gable
   projections are evident.
10. With respect to the proposed flat roofed rear dormer, I saw at the time of the site
    visit that there are a number within the rear roofslopes of properties to the west of
    the appeal site along Ashbourne Grove. Thus, they do form part of the existing
    character of the immediate locality of the appeal site. That proposed on the appeal
    site would be larger and more readily visible and prominent within the street scene,
    but it would not be an incongruous feature. Whilst it would occupy more than half
    the width of the rear roofslope, it would be well positioned within it, set down from
    the ridge and up from the eaves with reasonable separation from the sides. Whilst
    the centrally positioned windows would read better if there was more separation
    between them, they would not unacceptably detract from the appearance of the
    rear elevation.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
 Appeal Decision 6012945


11. The proposed rear dormer would therefore generally satisfy the RDG which states
    that dormers should be carefully positioned and designed, sited to the rear and set
    in from the roof edges and ridge. The proposal would accord with this guidance and
    whilst exceeding the recommended width it would, nevertheless, be sympathetic to
    the design of the extended dwelling.
12. The LDC granted in October last year provided for a rather different roof alteration
    with new rear gable and longer dormer additions in the side roofslopes, creating a
    significant additional bulk to the rear roof. The flank gable ends proposed through
    this appeal scheme would be more prominent in street scene views but, for the
    reasons set out above, would nevertheless be acceptable.
13. Overall, I find that whilst the proposal would be clearly visible within the street
    scene it would not be unduly prominent or overbearing. Nor would it be
    unacceptably out of keeping with the established character of the wider area which
    whilst demonstrating a predominance of hipped roofs, does include a number of
    feature gable ends and rear dormers.
14. Therefore, the proposal would accord with Policy D3 of The London Plan (2021)
    and Policies CDH01 and CDH05 of the Barnet Local Plan 2021-2036 (2025) which,
    amongst other things, seek to promote high quality design through a design-led
    approach to the optimisation of the capacity of sites and which respond sensitively
    to the character of the existing context and complement the existing building
    particularly in terms of style, form and materials.
15. The development would also satisfy Framework policies the objective of which is to
    promote high quality places through development proposals that respond to context
    so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings.
     Conditions
16. In addition to the standard time condition, conditions to refer to the approved plans
    and to ensure that matching materials are used are necessary in the interests of
    proper planning and the visual amenity of the area.
Conclusion
17. I conclude that the appeal should be allowed.

P B Jarvis
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
