 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 25 August 2026
 by J Davis BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 1 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012920
 17 Totteridge Drive, High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, HP13 6JH
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Wajid Hussain against the decision of Buckinghamshire Council.
 •    The application Ref is PL/26/00339/FA.
 •    The development proposed is described as ‘loft conversion (Hip-to-Gable) with front dormer.’


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Application for costs
2. An application for costs was made by Mr Wajid Hussain against Buckinghamshire
   Council and this is the subject of a separate Decision.
Preliminary Matter
3. The National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was revised in August
   2026. In this instance, the issues most relevant to the appeal are unaffected by the
   revisions to the Framework. I am therefore satisfied that there is no requirement to
   seek further submissions on the revised Framework, and that no party would be
   disadvantaged by such a course of action.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
   appearance of the existing dwelling and the surrounding area.
Reasons
5. The appeal property is a two-storey, semi-detached dwelling. Whilst Totteridge
   Drive contains a variety of house types, including bungalows and chalets, the
   appeal property is positioned within a row of houses of a similar original design,
   character and appearance.
6. The appeal proposal is for a hip-to gable extension, with front and rear dormers.
   The Council raise no objection to the hip-to-gable extension which would be similar
   to that already carried out at 19 Totteridge Drive, or to the rear dormer. I agree with
   their assessment that these alterations would satisfactorily integrate with the host
   dwelling and the surrounding area. I shall therefore restrict my further consideration
   to the proposed front dormer.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012920


7. The Council’s Householder Planning and Design Supplementary Planning
   Document (2020) (SPD) whilst non-statutory, sets out useful guidance for
   householder development. It advises that dormer windows and alterations to the
   roof can have a serious impact on the appearance of a dwelling and that dormers
   should therefore be located on the rear of dwellings and kept as small as possible.
8. The proposed front dormer would be set down from the ridgeline of the dwelling
   and would also be set up from the eaves and set in from the side elevations. It
   would, nonetheless, exceed the width of the two-storey bay window below resulting
   in it appearing overly large in relation to existing window openings and other design
   features of the dwelling. Its box-like, flat roof form would sit awkwardly and look out
   of place with the hipped roof detail over the bay window. Overall, I find that it would
   be an overly dominant feature which would be harmful to the character and
   appearance of the dwelling and thus, the wider area. It would also conflict with the
   design guidance set out in the SPD.
9. From my observations on site, there are few examples along Totteridge Drive of
   two storey dwellings with front dormers, and none within the immediate row of
   houses within which the appeal property sits. The proposed dormer, due to its size,
   scale and flat roof design, would therefore stand out as a particularly incongruous
   feature in this part of the street scene.
10. I acknowledge that several of the bungalows / chalet-style dwellings along the road
    have front dormers and I have paid particular regard to the examples highlighted by
    the appellant at 45, 46 and 47 Totteridge Drive which are chalet style dwellings
    further to the west of the site. However, these front dormers are small in size,
    incorporate a hipped roof and are of an appropriate scale and design in relation to
    their host dwellings. There will always be circumstances where the guidance within
    the Council’s SPD is applied flexibly, and these examples do not provide sufficient
    justification for the appeal proposal which I have considered on its own merits and
    have found to be inappropriate in terms of its size, scale and design.
11. The appellant has also referred to other front dormers in the wider area, including
    at 73 Adelaide Road which I understand was allowed on appeal although I have not
    been provided with any further details. In any event, these developments are not
    viewed in the same context of the appeal site, and I therefore afford them little
    weight.
12. In conclusion I find that the proposed development would have a harmful effect on
    the character and appearance of the existing dwelling and surrounding area and
    accordingly, would fail to comply with Policies CP9, DM35 and DM36 of the
    Wycombe District Local Plan (2019) and the SPD which seek (amongst other
    things) to ensure development demonstrates attractive and high quality design and
    respects the character and appearance of the existing property and surrounding
    area. It would also fail to comply with the high-quality design objectives set out in
    the Framework.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
 Appeal Decision 6012920




Conclusion
13. For the above reasons and having considered all matters raised, I conclude that the
    appeal should be dismissed.



J Davis
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     3
