Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 19 August 2026
by Mr C J Tivey BSc (Hons) BPl MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date:27 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012259
 12 The Grove, Luton LU1 5PE
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Sonia Aiken against the decision of the Council of the Borough of Luton.
 •    The application Ref. is 26/00281/FULHH.
 •    The development proposed is for a timber garden outbuilding incidental to the main dwelling.


 Decision
 1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a timber garden
    outbuilding incidental to the main dwelling at 12 The Grove, Luton LU1 5PE in
    accordance with the terms of the application, Ref. 26/00281/FULHH, subject to the
    following conditions:
       1)      The development hereby permitted shall be maintained in accordance with
               the following approved plans: TG001, TG002, TG003, TG004 and TG005.
       2)      The development hereby permitted shall not be used other than for purposes
               incidental to the dwelling known as 12 The Grove, Luton LU1 5PE.
 Preliminary Matters
 2. A new National Planning Policy Framework (Framework) was issued on 17 August
    2026 which replaced the previous version published in December 2024, and all
    other iterations. Paragraph 1 of Policy S4, as set out therein, stipulates that
    development proposals within settlements should be approved unless the benefits
    of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies in the framework.
 3. Policy L2 of the Framework stipulates that substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits where development proposals would achieve, amongst other things, the
    creation of additional homes or floor space within settlements through additional
    development within existing plots, provided that it is consistent with the overall
    street scene (Policy L2, para. 1.d i.). Furthermore, paragraph 1.d.iii. of Policy L2
    states that where the development would involve the use of residential curtilages, it
    should not occupy more than twice the footprint of all existing buildings on the site
    and, following development, should retain at least 50% of the non-developed area
    within the curtilage of the existing buildings, unless additional development can be
    accommodated without harm to the overall character of the area. Policy DP3 of the
    Framework sets out the key principles for well-designed places.



 https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012259


4. I consider that this new national policy does not affect the substance of the
   proposal before me and therefore it was not necessary to refer back to the parties. I
   am also aware that the application, the subject of the appeal, was retrospective in
   nature, however, that in itself does not constitute development for which planning
   permission is required and therefore I have simplified the description of
   development in the banner heading and decision above. I have determined the
   appeal on this basis
Main Issues
5. The main issues are the effect of the appeal proposal upon the character and
   appearance of the area and upon the living conditions of 11 The Grove, with
   specific reference to outlook.
Reasons
6. A very sizeable attached outbuilding has been constructed along the eastern
   boundary of the site’s rear garden and which runs for the majority of its depth. I
   understand that it essentially comprises 3no modular units which have been
   merged into one structure. It is attached to the rear of the host dwelling, and its
   intended use is for purposes incidental to the residential enjoyment of the host
   dwelling, which has primarily come about to accommodate the appellant’s child’s
   special educational needs.
7. The garden within which the outbuilding is located is well screened by mature
   vegetation to the rear and western side boundary and due to the size of the plot
   has enabled a relatively generous area of private amenity space to remain; and
   following development retains at least 50% of the non-developed area within the
   curtilage of the existing building.
8. The outbuilding has a shallow, mono-pitched roof with the eaves to the rear only
   marginally higher than the fence along the boundary shared with no11, which itself
   also has a very generous rear garden. I note the Council’s concerns with regard to
   an almost continuous expanse of built form along the boundary, however, by virtue
   of its limited height, I consider that it does not appear visually intrusive or
   overbearing to the occupants of the neighbouring property. With the rear garden of
   the host dwelling being visually self contained in all other directions, I consider that
   the outbuilding is not unduly obtrusive within the rear garden scene.
9. Whilst the length of the outbuilding is such that one would not normally consider it
   to be subordinate to the depth of the main range of the host dwelling as an
   extension, in this case and notwithstanding its attachment it is more akin to a
   garden structure in its design and appearance. Considering the fact that it is
   concealed from public views, on balance, I find that it does not give rise to
   demonstrable harm to the character and appearance of the area or to the living
   conditions of the occupants of no11.
10. I therefore find that the proposal complies with Policies LLP1, LLP19 and LLP25 of
    the Local Luton Plan 2011 – 2031 which together, in addition to applying a
    presumption in favour of sustainable development, require extensions to dwellings,
    amongst other things, to ensure that they do not adversely affect the amenity of
    nearby occupiers in respect of visual intrusion, having regard to detailed matters of
    design and scale, whilst also being flexible to accommodate changing living and
    working requirements of all the members of the community.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
Appeal Decision 6012259




Conclusion and Conditions
11. For the reasons set out above and having regard to all other matters raised, I
    conclude that the appeal should succeed.
12. As the outbuilding has already been constructed, there is no need to impose the
    standard time limit condition, however, I consider it is appropriate to require the
    proposed development to be maintained in accordance with the submitted plans
    and pursuant to the Council’s suggestion, I have imposed a standard Planning
    Inspectorate condition regarding the use of the building for incidental purposes
    only, in the interests of protecting the character and appearance of the area as well
    as the living conditions of the occupants of neighbouring dwellings.


C Tivey
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
