 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 3 September 2026
 By G Powys Jones FRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 15 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012101
 The Brass Bell, Warren Road, Kingston Upon Thames, KT2 7HR
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as
     amended) against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Creed-Miles against the decision of the Royal Borough of
     Kingston Upon Thames.
 •   The application Ref is 26/00032/HOU.
 •   The development proposed is the erection of 3 bay garage with store.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed, and planning permission is granted for the erection of 3 bay
   garage with store at The Brass Bell, Warren Road, Kingston Upon Thames, KT2
   7HR in accordance with the terms of the application Ref 26/00032/HOU, subject to
   the conditions set out in the attached Schedule to this decision.
Main Issue
2. This is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the host
   property and its surroundings.
Reasons
3. The host property, a relatively modern detached dwelling, fronts a private road and
   forms part of a carefully laid out residential development set within an attractive
   parkland setting being part of the Kingston Hill/Coombe Hill Strategic Area of
   Special Character, a designated non heritage asset. A golf course lies on the
   opposite side of the road.
4. The forecourt in front of the house is hard surfaced, used for parking, and accessed
   via an electronically operated sliding gate. It is also fenced on three sides.
   Between the fence and the private road is a green strip, about a meter or so wide.
   Within the strip grows a healthy holly hedge, which is measurably taller than the
   fence.
5. The appellants propose the erection of a garage/store in the forecourt, sited
   adjacent to the fence fronting the private road. This would be open fronted, with a
   green roof, which would be a little higher than the fence.
6. The Council’s concern as to the building’s size are noted, but to my mind, its scale,
   shape and height are entirely proportionate to that of the host property; it would not
   appear out-of-place. It is also carefully sited so that it would be effectively
   screened by the fence leaving only a small part of the garage’s rear elevation

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012101


     protruding above it. That small protruding element would be screened by the holly
     hedge. Those passing on the private road would not therefore be aware of its
     presence given the level of screening in being along the site’s frontage and that of
     the private road generally.
7. Since the holly hedge is not covered by the blanket Tree Preservation Order
   protecting the wider parkland, the Council is concerned it could be removed without
   the requirement for a consent. Judging from what I saw, and the submitted
   Arboricultural Impact Assessment, the hedge would not be at undue risk during the
   construction process should reasonable care be exercised. Furthermore, as
   suggested by the appellant, a condition could secure its retention and replacement,
   should it become necessary.
8. The Council’s Residential Design Supplementary Planning Document presumes
   against the siting of outbuildings forward of the building line, as would be the case
   here. However, local circumstances are such that the effect of the proposal on its
   surroundings would be minimal and a departure from this guidance is therefore
   justified.
9. In conclusion, I find the development would sit acceptably in its visual and spatial
   context, not resulting in harm to the host property, its surrounding and the heritage
   asset. Accordingly, no conflict arises with those provisions of policies DM10 and
   DM12 of the Kingston Core Strategy and policy D3 of the London Plan requiring
   development to be of a good design respecting local distinctiveness and to
   preserve the significance of heritage assets.
Conditions
10. The Council has suggested the imposition of several conditions. Those identifying
    the approved plans and one in respect of materials are imposed in the interests of
    certainty and amenity, albeit that an amended form of wording is adopted.
11. As suggested by the appellant, and in the interests of visual amenity, conditions
    relating to the proposed green roof, the fence and holly hedge are imposed.
Other matters
12. I have taken account of the references made to the planning history of the site,
    other development plan policies and to the National Planning Policy Framework. I
    have taken account of the appellant’s references to existing similar development
    both within and adjacent to the CA, where the CA’s setting is affected.
13. No other matter raised is of such strength or significance as to outweigh the
    considerations leading me to my conclusions.

G Powys Jones
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
 Appeal Decision 6012101


SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS
     1)     The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
            date of this decision.
     2)     The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
            the following approved plans: Drawings Nos PL101; PL102; PL103; PL104 &
            PL105.
     3)     The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
            development hereby permitted shall match those of the existing dwelling.
     4)     Within 3 months of this permission details of the green roof shall be
            submitted to the local planning authority for its written approval, together with
            a time-table for its completion and proposals for its future maintenance and
            retention. The green roof shall thereafter be installed in accordance with the
            approved details and retained thereafter.
     5)     The fence and holly hedge on the site frontage shall be retained during and
            after construction, and in the event that either is removed at any time,
            thereafter, they shall be replaced within an agreed time frame in accordance
            with details previously approved in writing by the local planning authority.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          3
