 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 5 August 2026
 by N McGurk BSc (Hons) MCD MBA MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 28 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012173
 Sandals School Bungalow, West Lane, Baildon, Bradford, BD17 5DH
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr Andrew McNicholas against the decision of the City of Bradford
     Metropolitan District Council.
 •   The application Ref is 25/04280/HOU.
 •   The development proposed is the erection of a timber fence 1.2m high onto existing wall (overall
     height 1.73m and 1.95m) with vehicle and pedestrian gate on West Lane boundary and a 1.8m high
     timber fence to the boundary with Sandal School.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. The development the subject of this appeal has already taken place.
3. The application follows an investigation into an enforcement complaint and seeks
   retrospective permission for the retention of the development.
Main Issue
4. The main issue in this case is the effect of the development on highway safety.
Reasons
5. The appeal property is a detached dormer bungalow, set back from West Lane
   behind a front garden and parking area, which are themselves set back behind a
   low stone wall and a tall timber fence and tall gates forming part of the proposal the
   subject of this appeal.
6. Vehicular access to the property from West Lane is across a pavement via what
   currently comprises a gated driveway. Immediately adjacent to the appeal property,
   to the north-east, is a separate vehicular access serving the neighbouring Sandal
   Primary School.
7. West Lane is a busy road passing through Baildon village. It is subject to traffic
   calming and a 20mph speed limit as it passes the appeal site, due to its proximity to
   the school. Given its immediate proximity to the school, there are significant
   pedestrian and vehicular movements related to school activities, most notably
   during the school’s drop-off and pick-up periods.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
    Appeal Decision 6012173


8. The development comprises a close-boarded timber fence erected on top of the
   low stone boundary wall to the front of the property, with an overall height of
   between 1.73m and 1.95m along this West Lane frontage, together with tall, close-
   boarded vehicle and pedestrian gates, and a further 1.8m high timber fence to the
   boundary with the school.
9. During my site visit, I observed that the height and solid, close-boarded nature of
   the fence and gates substantially obscure the driver’s view of the footway and
   carriageway when exiting the site. Whilst I acknowledge the appellant’s evidence in
   relation to there being some visibility from a driver’s eye position at a point set back
   within the site, I find that a vehicle exiting the access would need to advance onto
   the footway itself before the driver is able to achieve clear visibility of pedestrians
   approaching from, or present within, either direction. Equally, pedestrians on the
   footway would have limited opportunities to see an emerging vehicle until it has
   already reached such an advanced position.
10. This is a matter of particular concern given the site’s immediate proximity to Sandal
    Primary School. During the school’s drop-off and pick-up periods, I find that the
    footway directly in front of the access would be used by significant numbers of
    children and accompanying adults of all ages. The combination of a vehicle
    needing to be substantially advanced towards West Lane in order to achieve
    visibility, together with the corresponding difficulty for pedestrians in anticipating an
    emerging vehicle until a late stage, creates a materially increased risk of conflict
    between vehicles and pedestrians of all ages, including very young children, at this
    location.
11. The appellant states that his own use of the access rarely coincides with school
    opening and closing times. However, I have no substantive evidence before me to
    demonstrate that this would always be the case for any occupier, and an
    assessment of highway safety must have regard to the reasonable use of the
    access at any time, not only during peak school-related pedestrian activity.
12. Taking all of the above into account, I find that the development harms highway
    safety, contrary to the National Planning Policy Framework and to Policy DS4 of the
    Bradford Core Strategy Development Plan Document1, which together amongst
    other things, seek to provide for highway safety.
Other Matters
13. In support of his case, the appellant draws attention to the Council’s assessment of
    a related application at the site, in which the case officer recorded that the
    development would not affect sight lines. However, this related to a different
    proposal and notwithstanding this, I have found that the development the subject of
    this appeal results in harm and hence the conclusion below.
14. The appellant refers to other boundary treatments within the vicinity, including a
    fence located opposite the site and a further boundary treatment near the school’s
    bus turning circle, which he states are of a similar or greater height and have not
    been subject to enforcement action. However, there is no substantive evidence
    before me to demonstrate that the circumstances of these other developments,
    including their relationship with the highway and any associated visibility
    considerations, are so similar to those of the appeal site as to provide for direct

1
    Bradford Core Strategy (2017).


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         2
 Appeal Decision 6012173


     comparison. Notwithstanding this and in any case, I have found that the
     development would result in harm to highway safety and hence the decision below.
15. The appellant explains that the fence was erected for safety reasons, to prevent
    children climbing onto the boundary wall and refers to the presence of a nearby
    speed bump and the set-back position of the gates as mitigating factors. Whilst I
    acknowledge these factors, I do not find that they overcome the harm to highway
    safety identified.
Conclusion
16. For the reasons given above, the appeal does not succeed.

N McGurk
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      3
