Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by David Troy BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1 October 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6012098
125-133 Old Brompton Road, London, SW7 3RP
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Patrick Thomas of JOLT Charge Limited against the decision of Royal
     Borough of Kensington and Chelsea.
•    The application Ref is PP/26/00150.
•    The development proposed is the installation of one JOLT Unit (Electric Vehicle Charge Point, with
     integral double-sided LCD screen) and associated electrical connection works.

Appeal B Ref: 6012102
125-133 Old Brompton Road, London, SW7 3RP
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Patrick Thomas of JOLT Charge Limited against the decision of Royal
     Borough of Kensington and Chelsea.
•    The application Ref is CA/26/00151.
•    The advertisement proposed is the installation of one JOLT Unit (Electric Vehicle Charge Point, with
     integral double-sided LCD screen) and associated electrical connection works.

Decisions
1.     Appeals A and B are dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     Appeal A concerns the refusal of planning permission to erect a JOLT Unit (JOLT).
       Appeal B concerns the refusal of express consent to display advertisements on the
       JOLT. I have considered each on its individual merits, however, as they raise
       similar issues I have combined both decisions into a single decision letter.
3.     With respect to Appeal B, Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements)
       (England) Regulations 2007 (the Regulations) specify that decisions must be
       based solely on considerations of amenity and public safety. Therefore, while I
       have taken the development plan policies referred to by the Council into account,
       they have not been determinative in respect of Appeal B.
4.     Since the determination of the application an updated and revised National
       Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026.
       The main parties have been consulted and provided with an opportunity to provide
       comments on it in relation to these appeals. I have therefore considered the
       development against the relevant policies in the Framework.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6012098 and 6012102


Main Issues
5.     The main issues in relation to Appeal A are the effect of the proposed
       development on the character and appearance of the area, including the setting of
       the Boltons Conservation Area (CA) and the Thurloe/Smiths Charity CA, and
       highway safety.
6.     The main issues in relation to Appeal B are the effect of the proposed
       advertisement on amenity and public safety.
Reasons
Appeals A and B - Character and Appearance/Amenity
7.     The appeal site comprises of a footpath outside Nos. 125-133 Old Brompton
       Road, a modern glazed commercial car showroom, currently being refurbished. It
       is located on a busy road surrounded by a range of commercial and residential
       properties, with a number of cycle hire stations positioned alongside the roadside
       kerb outside the front of the commercial office building at No. 123 Old Brompton
       Road. This provides a busy and vibrant mixed use character to the area.
8.     The public realm in the vicinity of the appeal site is defined by the relatively wide
       and open nature of the footway. The existing street furniture and other structures
       are limited and well spaced, including a road sign and lamp posts. This enables a
       good degree of openness within the footway, with a relatively uncluttered
       pedestrian area, with a notable absence of illuminated advertisements within the
       footway.
9.     The proposed JOLT would be in an open and prominent position close to the edge
       of the pavement and would be clearly visible to passing pedestrians and motorists.
       Due to its height, width and overall solidity it would be the most prominent feature
       in its immediate setting and would contrast unfavourably with the open feel that is
       a characteristic of the footpath. Thus, despite the commercial backdrop associated
       with the adjacent car showroom and commercial buildings, the proposed JOLT
       would have an undue presence in its setting, appearing as an incongruous and
       uncharacteristic feature, which I consider would adversely harm rather than
       positively contribute to the character and appearance of the area.
10. The nearby commercial buildings display advertisement signage typical of an inner
    City location, with modestly sized fascia signage and projecting signs that are
    proportionate to the scale of the frontages. The double-sided illuminated
    advertisement display screens integrated with the JOLT would be an
    uncharacteristic and prominent feature that would detract from the public realm
    and the open character and appearance of the footway. The fact that the
    illumination levels would be limited and the frequency of image changes could be
    controlled by planning conditions would not be sufficient measures to overcome
    the harm I have found to the visual amenity of the area.
11. The appeal site lies approximately 30m to the west of the Boltons CA boundary
    and approximately 70m to the east of the Thurloe/Smiths Charity CA boundary.
    The CAs also cover a number of the nearby streets. Given the location of the
    appeal site within the setting of the CAs, special attention must be paid to
    considering the impact of the development on the significance of the designated
    heritage assets and to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6012098 and 6012102


       appearance of the CA. The historic and architectural significance of the CAs with
       their older more traditional buildings with large red brick and stucco fronted
       Victorian terraced houses along the nearby streets can be readily appreciated
       within the immediate vicinity of the site.
12. I consider that the proposed JOLT and advertisement, by virtue of their siting and
    design, would have a negative material impact on how the Boltons CA is viewed
    and appreciated and as such would fail to preserve or enhance the Boltons CA.
    The proposed JOLT, however, would be located some distance from the Thurloe/
    Smiths Charity CA and would be separated by the number of intervening
    buildings/structures. Consequently, I do not find harm in relation to this aspect and
    the setting of the Thurloe/Smiths Charity CA would be preserved.
13. Whilst the degree of harm resulting from the proposed JOLT and advertisement on
    the significance of the Boltons CA would be at the lower level, in accordance with
    Policy HE6 (4) of the Framework, that harm should be weighed against any public
    benefits of the proposals.
14. I have considered the appellant’s comments regarding the benefits of improving
    electric vehicle charging infrastructure in line with the policies in the Framework
    and the various public benefits put forward by the appellant. These benefits
    include the inclusive design to ensure usability by all drivers, including those with
    mobility impairments; delivery of publicly accessible and affordable competitively
    priced on-street charging facility powered by renewable energy, including a free
    daily 7kWh allowance to all users funded through advertising revenue and serving
    the high proportion of residents lacking off-street parking in the Borough.
15. The appellant has also highlighted the potential wider benefits associated with the
    increased footfall and expenditure in local businesses whilst vehicles are being
    charged as well as supporting the national and local policy objectives for
    decarbonisation, air quality improvements and transition to zero and low emission
    vehicles. However, I find insufficient public benefits arising from the proposals to
    offset the identified harm to which I attach substantial weight.
16. Accordingly, for these reasons, I conclude for Appeal A that the proposed
    development would have an unacceptably harmful effect on the character and
    appearance of the area, including the setting of the Boltons CA. It would therefore
    be contrary to Policies CD1, CD2, CD3, CD4, CD15 and TR4 of the Kensington
    and Chelsea Local Plan 2024 (KCLP), which, amongst other things, seek to
    ensure that developments are designed and sited so as to respect the local
    character, preserve or enhance the character and appearance, views and the
    significance of designated heritage assets, including conservation areas and their
    settings.
17. With regard to Appeal B, I conclude the proposed advertisements would have an
    unacceptable harmful effect on visual amenity. Though not determinative, I have
    taken account of Policies CD1, CD2, CD3, CD4, CD15 and TR4 of the KCLP,
    which in addition to above, seeks to resist advertising that harms amenity and
    contributes to street clutter in the streetscape.
Appeals A and B - Highway Safety/Public Safety
18. The proposed JOLT would be positioned close to the edge of the relatively wide
    pavement. Old Brompton Road is a principal strategic transport route, and it was

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6012098 and 6012102


         apparent from my site visit on a weekday that the footfall on the footpath was
         relatively light, with a limited, but steady flow of pedestrians. Although this was just
         a snapshot in time, I am mindful of the Council’s highway comments regarding the
         potential higher levels of footfall in this location and that it is likely to be materially
         greater, particularly at peak times and weekends.
19. I note the appellant’s comments that the proposals would accord with the
    Transport for London Streetscape Guidance 2022 on pedestrian flow, where
    unobstructed footway should not fall below 2000mm in width, leaving around 2.1m
    of unobstructed footpath width available in front of the adjacent commercial unit
    and about 450mm to the road kerbside edge. The residual footway width in this
    location would also be line with the 2m minimum clear footway width required by
    the Council’s Transport and Streets Supplementary Planning Document 2016.
    However, this does not take into account the potential footfall and the width and
    alignment of the pavement which narrows outside the adjacent commercial office
    building at No. 123 Old Brompton Road immediately to the east of the site. I
    observed many pedestrians naturally move out to the edge of the pavement and
    across the position of the proposed JOLT which formed a natural desire line for
    pedestrians in this location.
20. Consequently, given the use of the space available on the footpath and the
    potential footfall in this busy location, I consider, in my view, that the proposed
    JOLT in this position would cause an undue obstruction to pedestrians and impede
    the free flow of pedestrian movements, including those with mobility impairments.
    As the proposed advertisements would be integral to the JOLT’s structure, it
    follows that this would also result in a harmful obstruction that would compromise
    the free and safe movement of pedestrians.
21. Therefore, for the reasons given, I conclude with regard to Appeal A that the
    proposed JOLT would have a harmful effect on highway safety with particular
    regard to the free and safe movement of pedestrians. Consequently, the proposal
    would be contrary to Policy TR6 (f) of the KCLP and Policy T4 of the London Plan
    2021 (LP) insofar as they relate to ensuring development protects the safety and
    free flow of the transport network; does not reduce access to, or the attractiveness
    of existing footways and maintains a high quality, safe and accessible pedestrian
    environment where the transport impacts are appropriately mitigated.
22. For Appeal B, I conclude that the proposed advertisements would cause harm to
    public safety. Though not determinative, I have taken into account Policy TR6 (f) of
    the KCLP and Policy T4 of the LP as outlined above.
Other Matters
23. I have noted the other development in the area drawn to my attention by the
    appellant. However, the illuminated display consented on the nearby Bus Shelter
    on Old Brompton Road1 has different development characteristics to the appeal
    scheme and involves the replacement of an existing advertisement at the Bus
    Shelter. As a consequence, whilst I have taken this into account, it does not
    materially alter my conclusions on the appeal proposals.
24. In support of the appeals, the appellant has included references to similar JOLT
    structures installed across London. However, I have not been provided the full

1
    Ref CA/24/07110


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      4
Appeal Decisions 6012098 and 6012102


       details of these to know how directly comparable they are to the current proposals,
       which in turn limits their relevance. In any event I have determined the appeals
       before me on their own merits.
25. The appellant states that the proposals would contribute towards improving
    publicly available on-street electric vehicle infrastructure in line with the Framework
    and the Government’s EV Infrastructure Strategy. I have considered the various
    other public benefits put forward by the appellant in the main issues above,
    including the higher utilisation rates of the JOLT as compared to other public
    charging facilities. Nonetheless, given the limited scale of the proposals, these
    benefits would be modest and there is no indication that they could not be
    achieved in a less harmful manner than proposed. Therefore, the above combined
    benefits would not be sufficient to outweigh the harm I have identified in this case.
Conclusion
26. With regard to Appeal A, having regard to all other matters raised, I conclude that
    the proposed development is not in accordance with the development plan when
    read as a whole and Appeal A should be dismissed.
27. For the reasons given above, I conclude Appeal B should be dismissed.

David Troy
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
