Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 August 2026
by N Bowden BA(Hons) Dip TP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1st September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012127
21 Dickinson Square, Croxley Green, Rickmansworth, Hertfordshire WD3 3HA
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Nicholas Russ against the decision of Three Rivers District Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/0423/RSP.
•    The development proposed is for replacement of the front door.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for replacement of the
       front door at 21 Dickinson Square, Croxley Green, Rickmansworth, Hertfordshire
       WD3 3HA in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 26/0423/RSP.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
       17 August 2026. As the changes to the Framework could be considered material
       to the outcome of the appeal, I consulted the parties in relation to this and, where
       comments were made, have taken these into account in my decision here.
3.     I have adjusted the description of development given on both the application form
       and decision notice in the banner heading and in my formal decision here. This is
       to remove reference to the development being retrospective as, whilst this is
       correct as a matter of fact, it is not development within the definition given at s55 of
       the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended).
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is whether the proposed development would preserve or enhance
       the character or appearance of the Dickinson Square Conservation Area (DSCA).
Reasons
5.     The appeal site is within the DSCA. This is a tightly drawn area which is focused
       around the small area of green space that is surrounded by Victorian terraced
       cottages. These sit together with a small handful of semi-detached homes. The
       homes themselves are of a relatively uniform, rhythmic appearance but are,
       nevertheless, finely detailed including the use of London stock bricks with
       decorative terracotta brick banding, quoins and arches. Many of the original
       windows and doors are in evidence including the use of sash windows with
       multiple panes to the upper sash.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012127


6.     The area was designated as a conservation area in 1995 and an Article 4
       Direction1 made a year later in order to control the insertion of unsuitable windows,
       doors or other alterations. Nevertheless, as referenced in the Conservation Area
       Appraisal, some unsuitable alterations had already taken place and many of these
       are still in evidence today.
7.     The significance of the DSCA is as an example of a paternalistic Victorian planned
       development for local mill workers. It is an unusual form of development for this
       part of the country making it locally unique. Dickinson Square has retained this
       distinctiveness which sets it apart from other nearby 19th century development, or,
       more commonly for the locale, 20th century suburban development.
8.     The proposal seeks to retain a recently installed replacement front door to the
       property. The door is of a traditional appearance albeit that it has replaced a pre-
       existing timber door and the one in place now is uPVC imitation timber.
9.     S72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
       requires that special attention shall be paid to the desirability of preserving or
       enhancing the character or appearance of that area. Policy HE6 1. of the
       Framework further sets out that when considering the potential effect of a
       development proposal on the significance of a designated heritage asset,
       substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation.
10. The Council have stated that the door is not of timber construction and no
    evidence has been provided to show that the pre-existing door was not an original
    and/or could not have been refurbished or replaced. Conversely, the appellant has
    provided evidence to suggest that the pre-existing door was not an original and, in
    any case, was in a very poor condition and incapable of being practicably
    refurbished.
11. I accept the comments of the Council’s Conservation Officer insofar as the existing
    door is not made of timber. Detailed scrutiny of it will reveal that it is indeed a
    modern uPVC replica. Even so, it is a compelling replacement and does not stand
    out as being an unsuitable addition. This sits in stark contrast to many less
    sympathetic additions to other properties, although I do accept some of these pre-
    dated the conservation area designation and Article 4 Direction.
12. Whilst I agree with the Council, that a timber replacement door would be
    preferable, I am unable to conclude that the door that has been installed is harmful
    to the DSCA. It would therefore preserve both the character and appearance of
    this heritage asset. As such, the proposal complies with policies CP1 and CP12 of
    the Three Rivers Core Strategy, policies DM1, DM3 and Appendix 2 of the Three
    Rivers Development Management Policies Local Development Document and
    provisions of the Framework.
13. In reaching my conclusions here, I have also considered the comments of the
    appellant insofar as they relate to security and energy efficiency. These factors
    also weigh in favour of granting permission for this proposal. However, as I have
    found the proposal acceptable on its own merits, I do not need to consider these
    further.


1
 The Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) Order 1995, since revoked and replaced by The Town and
Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              2
Appeal Decision 6012127


Conditions
14. The development is retrospective, is substantially complete and creates no wider
    issues. Having regard to the Planning Practice Guidance and Framework, no
    conditions are required.
Conclusion
15. The proposal would preserve the character and appearance of the DSCA and
    would therefore comply with the policies of the development plan. The material
    considerations do not indicate a decision other than in accordance with it and
    therefore, for the reasons given above, the appeal is allowed.



N Bowden
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
