 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 29 August 2026
 by J D Westbrook BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 8 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012506
 64 Holmsley Lane, Woodlesford, Leeds, LS26 8RY
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Layla Baker against the decision of Leeds City Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00772/FU
 •    The development proposed is the erection of gates and a fence to the front boundary.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. The gates and fence are already in place such that this application is of a
   retrospective nature.
Main Issue
3. The main issue is the effect of the gates and fence on the character and
   appearance of the area along Holmsley Lane.
Reasons
4. No 64 is a double-fronted detached house situated on the northern side of
   Holmsley Lane. At the time of my visit, the 1.8 metre high fence and gates were in
   place and the gates were open. The fence and gates are described in the
   application as comprising a black polyester powder-coated steel frame, with
   composite dark grey infill panels. There is one fixed panel from the boundary with
   No 62, with a pedestrian gate adjacent. The remaining element of the gate consists
   of sliding panels to provide vehicular access from a dropped kerb around the
   middle of the front boundary. There is a 2 metre high hedge along the western end
   of the front boundary which is largely obscured by the sliding gate when open.
5. The Council contends that the boundary treatment, by virtue of its prominence,
   scale and materials, appears as a disproportionately large/high, stark and obtrusive
   addition to the Holmsley Lane street scene, resulting in harm to the character of the
   surrounding area.
6. Policy P10 of the Council’s Core Strategy (CS) indicates that alterations to existing
   buildings and spaces should provide good design appropriate to its location, scale
   and function. Saved Policy GP5 of the Council’s UDP Review (UDP) indicates that
   development proposals should resolve detailed planning considerations (including
   access, landscaping and design). Policy N25 of the UDP states that boundaries of

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012506


     sites should be designed in a positive manner, using walls, hedges, or railings
     where appropriate to the character of the area.
7. The Council’s Householder Design Guide (HDG) gives guidance on walls, fences
   and hedges. It states that changes to front boundaries will normally be considered
   acceptable where the height, material and style of boundary treatment reflect the
   local character, but proposals which seek to erect large fences, walls and solid
   gates to the fronts of properties and adjacent to public areas will not normally be
   acceptable. Moreover, applications which seek to dramatically vary the height,
   materials or style of front boundaries will not normally be acceptable.
8. The local character along this part of Holmsley Lane is established on the southern
   side of the road by generally low brick or stone walls, some with low hedges
   behind. Vehicular access points to these properties either have no gates or else
   low gates using lightweight wrought iron. On the northern side of the road, in the
   vicinity of the appeal property, the boundaries are formed by 2 metre high hedges
   also having either no gates or wrought iron gates. The gates and fence at the
   appeal property are significantly out of character with their surroundings in terms of
   height, design, materials and visual bulk.
9. From the information available to me, it would appear that the appeal property was
   originally served by a single joint access and drive for the three dwellings at Nos
   64, 66 and 68. The substantial front boundary hedge extended for almost the whole
   length of these houses and continued at the front of No 62. The shared driveway
   has now been blocked off between Nos 64 and 66 by the use of planters and pots,
   and the front garden at No 64 paved over to create a separate parking area. In my
   opinion, something of the coherence of the grouping of the three houses has been
   lost by the development of the gate and fence at No 64.
10. The appellant has referred to the planting of small trees in the front garden of the
    property as an example of strengthening the landscaping of the site. However,
    these are not readily visible in the street scene, and, in any case, do not form part
    of the front boundary. The appellant also makes note of certain examples of similar
    materials used within the front boundaries of houses in nearby roads. I note these
    examples, but they are few and far between and would appear to be smaller, or
    less bulky examples, and are not in such prominent positions as that of the appeal
    property, which is situated in a highly visible location on a busy main road. Finally,
    the appellant contends that the gate and fence are necessary for family security.
    However, I do not consider that the development as erected is the only way of
    ensuring security and, in this case, is inappropriate in its setting.
Conclusion
11. In conclusion, I find that the gate and fence do not reflect the local character along
    Holmsley Lane. They represent significant variation in the height, materials and
    style adopted for the front boundary treatments of properties in the vicinity and are
    harmful to the character and appearance of the area. On this basis, they conflict
    with Policy P10 of the CS, saved Policies GP5 and N25 of the UDP, and guidance
    on walls, fences and hedges in the HDG. Accordingly, I dismiss this appeal.

J D Westbrook
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
