 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 18 August 2026

 by Megan Thomas K.C. Barrister-at-Law
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 17 September 2026

 Appeal Ref: 6012221
 10 Broomfield Ride, Oxshott, Leatherhead, Surrey KT22 0LW
 • The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 • The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Flett against the decision of Elmbridge Borough Council.
 • The application ref. is 2026/0334.
 • The development proposed is a single storey side extension with rooms in the roof space
     incorporating dormer window and garage below, first floor/roof rear extension with
     balustrading, conversion of existing garage into living space and alterations to fenestration
     following partial demolition of existing house.



Decision

1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a single storey side extension
   with rooms in the roof space incorporating dormer window and garage below, first floor/roof
   rear extension with balustrading, conversion of existing garage into living space and alterations
   to fenestration following partial demolition of existing house in accordance with the terms of
   planning application ref.2026/0334, subject to the following conditions:

    1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from the date of
       this decision.

    2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in strict accordance with the
       following plans: Proposed Site Plan 002, Existing Elevations 013, Existing Site Plan 001,
       Existing Ground Floor Plan 009, Existing Second Floor Plan 011, Existing First Floor Plan
       010, Existing Roof Plan 012, Proposed CGI Views 008, Proposed Elevations 007, Proposed
       First Floor Plan 004, Proposed Ground Floor Plan 003, Proposed Second Floor Plan 005
       and Proposed Roof Plan 006.

    3) Prior to any demolition works required to carry out the first floor development hereby
       permitted, notwithstanding any materials details shown on the approved plans or set out in
       the Planning Application Form or accompanying documentation, details and samples of
       the materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the first floor
       development hereby permitted shall have been submitted to and approved in writing by the
       local planning authority. Similarly, details and samples of the proposed terrace
       balustrade(s) shall be supplied and approved in writing. Development shall be carried out
       in accordance with the approved details /samples.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012221


Procedural Matters

2. Since the Council decided the planning application, the Government has published a revised
   National Planning Policy Framework ‘NPPF’ (on 17th August 2026). The main parties were
   invited to comment on the relevance to the appeal of the 2026 revised NPPF and where
   comments have been made I have taken them into account in coming to my decision.

3. In the box heading above, I have used the description of development set out on the
   appellant’s appeal form as it is fuller and more accurate than the description given on the
   planning application form.

Main Issue

4. The main issue in the appeal is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
   appearance of the host dwelling and area.

Reasons

5. The appeal site comprises a detached part single part two storey house with additional
   roofspace accommodation, front forecourt area and a rear garden. It is located on the western
   side of Broomfield Ride which is within the Crown Estate in Oxshott. It is a gated residential
   area characterised by low density, very large homes, typically detached sitting on spacious
   plots.

6. No.8 Broomfield Ride is to the north west of the appeal site, and no.12 is to its south east. All
   three are large detached dwellings in their own grounds. The appeal dwelling is within the
   built-up settlement of Oxshott.

7. The appeal site has electronic gates through which the front elevation of the dwelling can be
   seen. There is a single storey pool house at the rear accommodating an indoor swimming
   pool, and there is a part first floor rear terrace with metal balustrading. The rear garden and
   side boundaries in particular are well-vegetated and views to the rear first floor terrace from
   outside the site are screened mostly by vegetation.

8. The proposal includes a single-storey side extension with rooms in the roof space
   incorporating a dormer window and garage below, following the partial demolition of the flat
   roof single storey side/rear extension (towards the side of no.8). It also includes a first
   floor/roof rear extension (with dormer style additions) following removal of the existing terrace
   and dormers including part of the dwelling. There would be some balustrading to the rear,
   replacement of some of the ground floor rear doors and conversion of the existing garage into
   living space.

9. The bulk of the proposed development would take place on the north-western side (no.8 side)
   of the dwelling using an area of parking in the corner of the property which is bounded by the
   end of the pool house and the north western flank of the main dwelling which has three garage
   doors. No.8 is generally not visible from this area. The boundary treatment includes mature
   vegetation. The proposed north western flank of the new side extension would protrude further
   towards the boundary with no.8 than the northwestern flank of the pool house, but by a small
   amount and would leave an acceptable gap to the common boundary. No.8 is not built up to
   the common boundary with the appeal site and overall the resulting development would not
   lead to nos 8 and 10 being unduly close to one another so as to disrupt the pattern or grain of
   development in the Crown Estate. The gaps between dwellings in the area generally would
   continue to be respected by the proposed development.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             2
 Appeal Decision 6012221


10. From the front, there would be new ground floor garages, a new door and accommodation in
    the roofspace above signalled by a new round-topped dormer window and the extension of the
    ridgeline of the lower of the two main roof ridges.

11. The dwelling is visually well-balanced from the front with the central gable flanked by ‘wings’ of
    similar widths and on the north-western side of the plot the single storey pool house is
    recessed. Whilst the proposal would bring the massing wider and further forward than the
    pool house eastern wall, the new single storey side element would be reasonably well set back
    from the building line of the main dwelling and would have two garage doors signalling ancillary
    accommodation. As a result, it would not unduly interfere with the balance of the main
    dwelling and would be subservient in nature. From the front the new roof, which would mainly
    house the rooms behind, would be recessive and there would be a hipped roof over the new
    garages which would leave a visual gap at roof level thereby reducing the massing nearest the
    common boundary with no.8 and allowing the extension to sit comfortably within the appeal
    site plot.

12. From the rear, the proposed side extension element would form and connect with the wider
    first floor/roof level rear extension. It would not increase the height of the latter, and whilst it
    would be wider, it would be viewed from ground level in the context of the existing single storey
    pool house and, as I was able to confirm on my site visit, for a ground floor observer, its full
    width would be partially screened and its impact softened given its first floor corner position.

13. Turning to the proposed design of the new first floor rooms and elongated first floor extension,
    whilst there are some dwellings of contemporary design on the Crown Estate, it is important
    that the host dwelling is able to accommodate a partially contemporary design solution
    without unduly harming the more traditional build character of the appeal dwelling. I have
    come to the view that with the use of more sympathetic external materials, the bolder and
    more angular proposal would not harm the more traditional character and appearance of the
    host dwelling. In particular, the style would suit the replacement ground floor rear doors and
    would not simply be a pastiche of the main block and south wing of the building.

14. Turning to the proposed materials of the first floor extension, the proposed dark stained timber
    cladding would not be sympathetic to the existing brick and render and the zinc roof would be
    too harsh and cold. The proposed white render infill panels would be unduly stark and the
    glass privacy screens/balustrading too intrusive owing to their height. These matters are
    capable of being overcome by a suitably-worded condition. Therefore, I have attached a
    planning condition to require that the local planning authority approve the external surface
    materials (and balustrade details), in order to avoid harm to the character and appearance of
    the host dwelling.

15. With the caveat above, I have concluded that the host dwelling would not have its character or
    appearance unduly harmed by the proposed development, and in coming to this view, I have
    considered the limited existing streetscene views and also private views of the dwelling
    whether those are experienced by the occupants themselves or by neighbours. It remains
    important in the interests of good planning that proposed development does not unduly
    detract from the appearance or character of a host building even if the building would normally
    only be viewed from private viewpoints including on-site views. This is reflected in NPPF policy
    DP3(2)(g) which articulates the important principle of creating visually attractive, distinctive
    and characterful development, which means ensuring additions to host dwellings do not
    unduly harm their character or appearance per se.

16. I have come to the view that the proposals would not be incongruous, dominating,
    disproportionate or overly bulky, subject to more appropriate materials being used at the rear
    first floor extension than first put forward. The plot ratio of the enlarged dwelling would be


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               3
 Appeal Decision 6012221


    comparable to that of no.8 to the north even though it may be modestly outside the range
    expected in the Elmbridge Design Code (2024). The Floor Area Ratios design principle in the
    Code does not apply to householder development.

17. The proposal creates additional floorspace within an existing plot within a settlement. It falls
    within the terms of NPPF L2(1)(d) including (i) (ii) & (iii) of (d). In particular in relation to
    L2((1)(d)(i) the proposal would be consistent with the overall street scene. I have given
    substantial weight to the benefits of making effective use of land, which would be achieved by
    this proposal. The proposal would meet the requirements of DP3(1) relating to design, with the
    addition of an external materials condition (condition 3 above). My view is that DP3(5) does not
    apply in this case.

18. In NPPF DP3 “Key principles for well-designed places”, DP3(3) indicates that substantial
    weight should be given to compliance with relevant development plan policies when assessing
    the design quality of proposals. As I have come to the conclusion that policy CS17 of the
    Elmbridge Core Strategy (adopted 2011) and policy DM2 of the Elmbridge Development
    Management Plan (adopted 2015) are met, I have accorded those compliances with
    substantial weight in the decision-making process. Following S4 “Principle of development
    within settlements”, the proposed development should be approved because the benefits of
    doing so would not be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against
    the national decision-making policies in the NPPF.

19. I conclude that the proposed development would not harm the character or appearance of the
    host dwelling or the area and would accord with policy CS17 of the Elmbridge Core Strategy
    (adopted 2011) and policy DM2 of the Elmbridge Development Management Plan (adopted
    2015).

Other Matters

20. I have noted that the appeal site is in a more elevated position than no.8 Broomfield Ride but
    this does not give rise to an unduly oppressive impact caused by the development or a loss of
    privacy for no.8’s occupants given the separation distances involved and mature vegetation
    present. For the same reasons I do not consider that the proposals would result in
    unacceptable noise disturbance for any neighbours.

Conditions

21. I have considered the imposition of conditions in the light of advice in NPPG. For the
    avoidance of doubt, I have included a condition specifying which plans are approved plans and
    required development to be in accordance with those plans. For the reasons given above, I
    have included a condition which requires that external materials of the first floor development
    (and details of the balustrades) need to be submitted to and approved in writing by the local
    planning authority before demolition at first floor level takes place.

Conclusion

22. Having considered all representations made, for the reasons given above the appeal is allowed
    and planning permission is granted with conditions.

Megan Thomas K.C.                    Inspector




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             4
