Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 1 September 2026
by Richard Gilbert BA (Hons) MSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012730
65 Essex Street, Halifax, Calderdale HX1 3UE
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Nazam Hussain against the decision of Calderdale Metropolitan Borough
     Council.
•    The application reference is 26/00459/HSE.
•    The development proposed is addition of front and rear dormer.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.     During the course of the appeal a new National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published on the 17 August 2026. Whilst the format has altered,
       any considerations that are material to this decision have not fundamentally
       changed. I am satisfied that this has not prejudiced any party and I have had
       regard to the latest version in reaching my decision.
Main Issue
3.     The Council have not raised concerns regarding the proposed rear dormer
       described in the development description and set out on the submitted plans.
       Consequently, the main issue of the appeal is the effect of the proposed front
       dormer on the character and appearance of the appeal property and the
       surrounding area.
Reasons
4.     The appeal property is a mid-terrace dwelling which fronts onto Essex Street. Like
       the majority of its neighbours, it has a pitched slate roof that culminates in a
       chimney stack. The character and appearance of the street is established through
       the consistent run, and uninterrupted views of, roof slopes that provide uniformity
       to the street scene. This uniformity is strengthened by the even-spacing of tall,
       upright windows to the front elevations of dwellings along the street. However, it is
       also weakened by the infrequent presence of front dormers to a number of
       dwellings on the street, including at 59 Essex Street (No.59).
5.     The proposed development includes installation of a pitched roof dormer to the
       front roof slope. The Calderdale Placemaking & Design Guide Supplementary
       Planning Document (July 2024) (SPD) states that dormer windows must be
       sensitively designed and located so that they do not detract from the character of
       the building or surrounding area. To achieve this, the SPD states that dormer


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012730


       windows should not dominate the original roof slope and should not occupy more
       than half the width or depth of the roof. Furthermore, the proportion and
       arrangement of their windows should echo those on the floors below.
6.     The proposed front dormer would consume more than half the width and depth of
       the front roof slope, preventing it appearing as a subordinate architectural feature.
       Furthermore, the window within the dormer would have a horizontal emphasis
       contrary to the vertical format of the windows in the elevation below. The
       combination of these design characteristics would result in the proposal
       dominating the front roof slope and reading as an incongruous extension upon it.
       Hence, the introduction of the dormer would be harmful to the appearance of the
       appeal property whilst simultaneously eroding the character of Essex Street.
7.     The dormer would be finished in slate to help it integrate into the surrounding roof
       slope. However, the use of a sympathetic material would not be sufficient to
       disguise the overall mass of the dormer upon the appeal property. It would
       therefore be insufficient to alleviate the harm it would otherwise incur in respect of
       character and appearance.
8.     Although front dormers are present, they are a minority feature in the street that
       does not establish its overarching character. As such, their presence, including the
       example nearby at No.59, does not overcome the harm that I have otherwise
       found, and in fact point to a need for such proposals to be carefully controlled if the
       character and appearance of the area is to be safeguarded. As such, I attribute
       limited weight to a comparison with them and they do not persuade me that the
       appeal proposal is acceptable.
9.     For the reasons set out above, the proposed development would have a harmful
       effect on the character and appearance of the appeal property and the surrounding
       area. Conflict therefore arises with Policy BT1 of the Calderdale Local Plan
       2018/19 – 2032/33 (adopted March 2023) which seeks the design style proposed
       in new developments to respect or enhance the character and appearance of
       existing buildings and surroundings, taking account of its local context and
       distinctiveness.
Conclusion
10. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

Richard Gilbert
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
