Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 1 September 2026
by J Hills MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 10 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012154
Broom Farm, Dene Road, Norton Fitzwarren, Taunton, Somerset TA4 3LX
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the
     Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended)
     (the GPDO).
•    The appeal is made by G Fenn & Conway against the decision of Somerset Council.
•    The application Ref is 06/25/0030/CQ.
•    The development proposed was originally described as “building to dwelling siting and location as
     per plans”.


Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and prior approval is granted under the provisions of Article
       3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3 Class Q of the Town and Country Planning (General
       Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) for change of use
       from an agricultural building to a dwellinghouse (class C3) at Broom Farm, Dene
       Road, Norton Fitzwarren, Taunton, Somerset TA4 3LX in accordance with the
       application ref 06/25/0030/CQ and the details submitted with it including plans:
       Location plan dated 03/10/2024; MGR/24/0276/BP01A; MGR/24/0276/P01;
       MGR/24/0276/P02; MGR/24/0276/P03; MGR/24/0276/P04; MGR/24/0276/P05;
       and 24.14683.1.TAP. The approval is subject to conditions set out by paragraph
       Q.2(4) of the GPDO in that development must be completed within a period of 3
       years from the date of this decision as well as the provisions specified in
       paragraph W.
Preliminary matter
2.     The description of development in the formal decision above is taken from the
       Council’s decision notice and appellant’s appeal form. It is more accurate than the
       original description in the application form which is shown in the banner above. It is
       also noted that the description of this type of application falls within the context of
       the GPDO.
Background and main issue
3.     The Planning Practice Guidance states that permitted development rights are a
       national grant of planning permission which allow certain building works and
       changes of use to be carried out without having to make a planning application.
       Permitted development rights are subject to conditions and limitations to control
       impacts and to protect local amenity.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012154


4.     The GPDO says that the change of use of a building that is part of an established
       agricultural unit or a former agricultural building and any land within that building’s
       curtilage to a residential use, together with reasonably necessary building
       operations, is permitted development.
5.     Paragraph Q1 of the GPDO sets out circumstances where development is not
       permitted, including part (j) if it would consist of building operations other than the
       installation or replacement of windows, doors, roofs, or exterior walls, to the extent
       reasonably necessary for the building to function as a dwellinghouse. The Council
       refers to Q1 (i)(i)(aa) in its decision notice, though it is clear from the submissions
       that it takes issue with (j).
6.     Additionally, part (p) applies where the building does not have suitable existing
       access to a public highway. These are the main matters in dispute between the
       parties. While not a reason for refusal, the Council raises questions over the
       continued agricultural use of the barn following a period of inactivity in 2024 as well
       as highways impacts of the development. In all other respects, the Council is
       content that the proposal complies with Class Q, and I find no reason to disagree.
7.     I therefore consider the main issue to be whether the proposal would amount to
       permitted development.
Reasons
8.     The Council is concerned that while individual elements of the proposal may
       comply with the GPDO, the cumulative works that include a new floor and
       enclosure of 2 of the 4 elevations are not minor and would be tantamount to a new
       build. Within that context, the appeal building comprises a substantially
       constructed stone and brick building with a roof tiled covering. The structural report
       indicates that the primary roof structure is in reasonable condition and following
       repair, would be capable of supporting slight additional loading. I find no
       substantive reason to disagree.
9.     The proposal would need a new concrete floor slab, and the plans show a first
       floor would be added. This floor may connect to the existing walls at a mid-height
       to provide restraint. The PPG says that internal works are not generally
       development. For the building to function as a dwelling it may be appropriate to
       undertake internal structural works, including to allow for a floor, the insertion of a
       mezzanine or upper floors within the overall residential floor space permitted, or
       internal walls, which are not prohibited by Class Q. None of the internal works
       proposed would deviate from those specified in the PPG. Moreover, there is no
       requirement that works are ‘minor’ or that they cannot be ‘essential’. In this
       particular case, they would not be unusually excessive, but rather, present as a
       simple and logical way to make the building habitable.
10. Externally, one gable end is open below flimsily clad, rusted metal sheeting. This
    sheeting is attached to an existing ‘A’ frame and would need to be replaced. The
    elevation below would require a new wall incorporating windows and doors.
    Although this would introduce a new external wall, it would be confined to the
    existing gable opening and would follow the building’s established form. In that
    context, I do not consider that the gable-end works would, of themselves, amount
    to a substantial rebuilding operation.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012154


11. The position is different on the front elevation. This contains three large brick
    supporting columns that it is said can be repaired with some stitching for
    completeness and used as part of the scheme. The proposed patio doors and
    timber cladding above would infill the openings between those columns, rather
    than replace the structural frame of that elevation. While those infill sections would
    not be insignificant in scale, they would sit between retained masonry elements
    and would read as a subordinate intervention within the existing building.
12. The gable wall and the front elevation infill would both be constructed off the new
    floor. However, given the retention of the principal stone walls, including the
    expansive rear elevation and buttresses, these works would still read as limited
    and subservient elements within the context of the building as a whole. Subject to
    limited repairs, the retained fabric would be capable of being used to facilitate the
    development. Overall, having paid regard to the Hibbitt judgement, I do not
    consider that the totality of interventions expressly permitted by the GPDO mean
    this building needs to be substantially rebuilt to convert to a residential use. The
    proposal complies with Q1.(j)(i)(aa).
13. Turning to access arrangements, it is claimed that at the time of the officer
    assessment, a permitted track stopped some 50m short of the appeal building.
    However, photographic evidence said to have been provided at the time of the
    application shows a track and some exposed membrane meeting a corner of the
    barn. The Council disputes the timing of this information and there is no firm
    evidence to corroborate the dates. Nevertheless, the Council refers to its own site
    visit photographs. Some of these are of extremely poor quality, though still indicate
    the presence of a wide access track close to the barn. Based on what is available
    to me, a track probably existed between the appeal building and highway by the
    time the application was made.
14. While parts of this track were noticeably coarse and made from rubble, it was
    evidently substantial in its construction. There is no dispute it is suitable for
    agricultural vehicles. Given the rural location, it is unlikely that an appropriate
    vehicle associated with a residential occupancy would be unable to use the
    access. Any possible future topping to the existing access track to facilitate a
    smoother connection for all users is outside the scope if this appeal. In any case, I
    took the opportunity to repeatedly walk up and down the short track, which was not
    noticeably challenging. Additionally, the proximity of associated farming activity
    and the shared courtyard entrance did not strike me as being overtly restricted or
    unsafe within the terms of part (p) or condition Q.2.-(1)(a).
15. The Council says that since the track’s construction, the appeal building’s
    agricultural use has ceased and questions whether the access remains reasonably
    necessary for agricultural purposes. At the time of my visit there were large stacks
    of hay within the appeal building which would be likely to require a suitable
    vehicular access for movement. Even if there have been periods of inactivity
    during survey work or other times, this is not uncommon for agricultural buildings.
    Therefore, on the balance of probabilities, failure to satisfy the relevant
    requirements of Class Q has not been shown. Nor is the lawfulness or continued
    compliance of the access track under its own permitted development regime a
    matter for me to determine in this appeal. In this particular set of circumstances, an
    access track has been formed and suitably connects the appeal building to the
    highway.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6012154


Other matters
16. The appeal site is connected to the Somerset Levels and Moors Ramsar Site,
    which is said to be sensitive to additional phosphate loading.
17. The grant of planning permission under Article 3(1) of the GPDO is subject to the
    provisions of the GPDO for each class of development and compliance with
    regulations 75 to 78 of the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017
    (the Habitats Regulations). Effectively, Article 3(1) provides a pre-commencement
    condition which must be met, where the development would affect a European
    protected habitat, such as this, before the works can be undertaken as permitted
    development. This includes a separate application to the local planning authority
    under regulation 77 of the Habitats Regulations to allow it to undertake an
    appropriate assessment. Depending on the outcome, this would determine
    whether, in terms of that matter, the scheme could be undertaken as permitted
    development under the GPDO.
18. A regulation 77 application can be submitted and potentially approved after the
    grant of prior approval. Therefore, I do not need to consider this matter further as
    part of this appeal.
Conditions
19. Any prior approval and planning permission granted for development under the
    GPDO is subject to the condition that it must be completed within a period of 3
    years starting with the prior approval date, as well as the provisions of paragraph
    W. This requires development to be carried out in accordance with the details
    submitted with it, which would include the tree appraisal plan. As I have listed the
    submitted plans in my decision, a condition is unnecessary.
20. I have not imposed the suggested condition requiring details of a parking layout as
    there is evidently sufficient circulation space around the appeal building to achieve
    safe, off-street parking.
21. Suggested conditions in respect of possible future lighting and details of bird and
    bat boxes are noted. Within that context, I have paid regard to S40 of the Natural
    Environment and Rural Communities Act 2006 in respect of the purpose of
    conserving biodiversity. However, the GPDO does not, in Article 3(1), or otherwise,
    provide that permitted development is subject to the S40 duty. Moreover,
    biodiversity is not reasonably related to any of the prior approval matters. I have
    therefore not imposed the Council’s suggested biodiversity conditions.
Conclusion
22. For the reasons given, the appeal succeeds.


J Hills
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
