Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 September 2026 by Ellie Nutman BA (Hons)
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012425
21 Belgrave Gardens, London NW8 0QY
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Andrew Galen against the decision of City of Westminster Council.
•   The application Ref is 26/03027/FULL.
•   The development proposed is replacement of the existing rear double-height conservatory with a
    brick-built predominantly glazed rear addition.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for replacement of the
   existing rear double-height conservatory with a brick-built predominantly glazed
   rear addition, at 21 Belgrave Gardens, London NW8 0QY in accordance with the
   terms of the application, Ref 26/03027/FULL, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: ‘Location Plan’, am254-DFP-AR-061-204-R00
              ‘Plans - Proposed’, am254-DEL-AR-062-204-R00 ‘Front & Rear Elevations –
              Proposed’, am254-DSC-AR-063-201-R00 ‘Section A - Existing & Proposed’,
              am254-DSC-AR-063-204-R00 ‘Section B - Existing & Proposed’.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. A Revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
   17 August 2026. There have been some layout and subsequent paragraph
   numbering changes, as well as minor relevant alterations to the ways in which
   heritage matters are considered. I am however satisfied that, having reviewed the
   relevant changes, they do not have a material bearing on the substance of the main
   issue or indeed the arguments of the main parties thereon. Since they would not
   therefore be prejudiced, I have proceeded without further consultation.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is whether the proposed development would preserve or enhance
   the character or appearance of the St John’s Wood Conservation Area (CA).

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012425


Reasons for the Recommendation
5. The significance of the CA derives in part from its leafy, residential character, and
   was originally envisaged as an Arcadian Suburb. Terraces are generally tightly
   planned on modest plots. The appeal building sits within such a terrace and the
   appeal proposal would replace the existing two storey conservatory structure,
   infilling the space between the outrigger and neighbouring wall. The gardens and
   spaces to the rear of these terraces are close-knit and the existing structure
   appears to be the only of its kind within this row. The rear elevation and garden
   area are not readily visible from the public street scene.
6. The proposed extension would be in the same position, retain the same general
   form and scale, and serve the same function as the existing two-storey
   conservatory. Whilst the proposal would introduce a more contemporary design
   approach, the existing conservatory is itself a later addition rather than an original
   component of the host building. In effect, the development would replace one non-
   original rear extension with another of comparable size and siting.
7. I have been provided with no compelling evidence to demonstrate why a
   contemporary design response would be inappropriate in this location. The
   significance and character of the terrace row would be unaffected from the street
   scene. The appeal proposal would be confined to the rear and would replace an
   existing structure. Although the Council emphasises that the existing conservatory
   is a lightweight and subordinate addition, I note that the appeal proposal would
   retain the same overall scale and flat-roofed form whilst incorporating substantial
   areas of glazing. As such, I do not consider that the replacement of the existing
   structure would result in any increase in visual prominence.
8. Furthermore, the existing two-storey conservatory already appears to be a unique
   feature within this terrace row. Its presence indicates that the structure is not a
   characteristic or historically significant element of the terrace group that materially
   contributes to the significance of the conservation area. In these circumstances, I
   find that the replacement extension would preserve the character and appearance
   of the conservation area. Accordingly, the proposal would accord with Policies 42,
   44 and 45 of the City Plan (2026) which require development to have regard to the
   character and appearance of the existing area, adjacent buildings and to ensure
   heritage assets and their settings are conserved and enhanced, in a manner
   appropriate to their significance.
Conditions
9. In addition to the standard time limit condition, it is necessary to require the
   development to be carried out in accordance with the approved plans in the
   interests of certainty and enforcement.
10. The Council refers to Policy 40 of the City Plan (2026), which seeks to promote
    zero-carbon development and reduce energy demand. The proposal incorporates
    high-performance double glazing. Whilst the Council indicates that a condition
    requiring a green roof would have been imposed had planning permission been
    granted, Policy 40 contains no specific requirement for such. There is nothing to
    suggest to me that the use of the glazing specified would not meet the aspirational
    aims of this policy. I have not, therefore, recommended a condition requiring a
    green roof.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012425


Conclusion and Recommendation
11. For the reasons given above, the proposal would accord with the development
    plan. I therefore recommend it be allowed.

Ellie Nutman
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
12. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed. Planning permission is therefore granted, subject
    to the conditions set out above.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
