Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 21 September 2026
by Alison Fish BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 01 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012844
1 Beech Close, Cheadle, Staffordshire ST10 1SN
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Steve Boswell against the decision of Staffordshire Moorlands District
    Council.
•   The application Ref is SMD/2026/0147.
•   The development proposed is double storey side extension.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2. The Government published a revised version of the National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework) on 17 August 2026. The policy emphasis of the parts
   of the Framework most relevant to this appeal have not fundamentally changed.
   Therefore, I will not prejudice any party by taking the Framework into account in
   reaching my decision.
Main Issue
3. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
   appearance of the host dwelling and area.
Reasons
4. The appeal property is one half of a semi-detached pair of dwellings located in a
   predominantly residential area. Although the surrounding area contains a range of
   dwelling types and architectural styles, the host dwelling and its immediate
   neighbours generally share a consistent design approach. In particular, they
   incorporate first floor accommodation within flat roof dormers on both the front and
   rear roof slopes, with roofs descending to eaves at single storey height.
5. The appeal property occupies a generous corner plot at the junction of Beech
   Close with Thorley Drive. The proposal includes the demolition of the existing flat
   roof single garage to the side of the property and the erection of a two storey
   extension to provide additional family accommodation. The generous plot size
   means that the proposed extension would not diminish the useable garden area.
6. The proposed extension would be set back 2.7 metres from the front elevation of
   the existing dwelling. However, this set back would not result in the extension
   appearing subordinate to the main dwelling or preserve its legibility. The substantial
   scale and massing of the extension, its comparable footprint to the existing living

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012844


     accommodation, extensive two-storey rear flat roof projection and elevated eaves
     line would create a visually dominant addition that would fundamentally alter the
     character and proportions of the building. Together, these elements would result in
     an extension that would compete with, rather than appear subordinate to the host
     dwelling. This would erode its original form and architectural identity.
7. Given the appeal site's prominent position within the street scene, and
   notwithstanding the presence of the existing boundary hedge, the extension would
   be highly visible from public vantage points and would appear as an overly large
   and incongruous addition. This would be to the detriment of the character and
   appearance of the host dwelling and surrounding area. This harm could not be
   overcome by a condition to secure matching external materials.
8. The proposal is contrary to Policy DC1 of the Staffordshire Moorlands Local Plan,
   adopted September 2020 (LP) which seeks to promote development which is high
   quality and appropriate to the character of the area.
Other considerations
9. The extension which has been carried out at 5 Beech Close is not the same as the
   proposed extension. In that case, the extension incorporates a continuation of the
   existing flat roof dormer to the front of the property with eaves at single storey level
   and an extension to the rear which replaces the flat roof dormer. In addition, rather
   than occupying a prominent corner plot, it is located between two existing
   properties, so it is less conspicuous from public vantage points. For these reasons,
   the extension at number 5 is not comparable in design terms or siting, so attracts
   limited weight.
10. Whilst the appeal site does not lie in conservation area or affect a listed building
    this does not diminish the need for high-quality design. The lack of harm in respect
    of highway safety and the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers are neutral
    factors.
11. The fact that the Council did not engage in discussions regarding amendments to
    the scheme is not relevant to my consideration of the substance of the appeal.
Final Balance
12. Policy DC1 of the LP is consistent with national decision-making policy DP3 in the
    Framework, which seeks proposals that respond to their context, so that they
    integrate with and enhance their surroundings. For the reasons given above, the
    proposal would fail to respond to its context and this would be harmful to the
    character and appearance of the host dwelling and area. Consequently, the
    proposal would fail to comply with one of the national decision-making policies
    which state that development proposals should be refused in specific
    circumstances, as set out in policy S4(2)(c).
13. I have found that the limited benefits of approving the proposed development would
    be substantially outweighed by adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework, and the presumption in favour
    of sustainable development set out in policies S3 and S4 of the Framework does
    not apply.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012844




Conclusion
14. The proposed development would be contrary to the development plan and there
    are no other considerations, including the Framework, which outweigh this finding.
    Consequently, with reference to Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory
    Purchase Act 2004, the appeal is dismissed.

Alison Fish
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
