 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 14 August 2026
 by Jonathan Price BA(Hons) DipTP DMS MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 25 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012175
 Creeky Cottage, 48 Mill Street, Brightlingsea, Essex CO7 0SZ
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Gary Campbell against the decision of Tendring District Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00215/FULHH.
 •    The development proposed is erection of ground floor and part first floor side extension, extension of
      first floor terrace and formation of a new front porch, together with associated alterations.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the erection of ground
   floor and part first floor side extension, extension of first floor terrace and formation
   of a new front porch, together with associated alterations, at Creeky Cottage,
   48 Mill Street, Brightlingsea, Essex CO7 0SZ, in accordance with the terms of the
   application 26/00215/FULHH and subject to the following conditions:
     1) The development hereby permitted shall begin no later than three years from
        the date of this decision.
     2) The development hereby permitted shall accord with the following drawings:
        0350-A-001 location and block plan, 0350-A-002 proposed outline plan,
        0350-A-100 existing floor plans and elevations and 0350-A-200 proposed floor
        plans, elevations and section.
Preliminary Matter
2. The Government published the revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) on 17 August 2026, after this appeal was made. Although this makes
   substantial amendments, its policies over achieving well-designed places remain
   generally consistent with those of the previous version. With regard to the issues in
   this appeal, it has not been found necessary to seek the further views of parties
   over this recently published Framework.
Main Issue
3. The effects of the proposal on the character and appearance of the terraced
   dwelling and its surroundings.
Reasons
4. The proposal relates to the end dwelling in a terrace of quite modest cottages, in
   terms of their scale and architecture. This row sits apart from the built-up edge of
   Brightlingsea, framed by views over the adjacent coastal saltmarsh and estuary.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012175


     Such a setting is quite sensitive to change and the end of this terrace is a visually
     prominent aspect of this. Although the alterations made to individual homes, such
     as in external finishes and fenestration, has created some variation and informality
     to the terrace, its overall form and character remains coherent.
5. The fact the terrace is neither listed nor within a conservation area does not
   preclude the requirement for contextually sympathetic designs, as necessary to
   satisfy policies SP7 and SPL3 of the Tendring District Local Plan 2013-2033
   (TDLP). Due to its position within an open setting, any changes to this end terrace
   would be prominent within the wider coastal landscape.
6. Creeky Cottage has already been the subject of side and rear extensions of a
   subsidiary scale. The existing additions feature weather board cladding, so that part
   of this scheme would not appear inappropriate and is reflective of the local
   vernacular. The greater set back and reduced ridge height to the two-storey
   elements proposed, compared to an earlier refused scheme1, would better
   establish the subordinate nature of the additions.
7. This proposal would still serve to significantly enlarge a dwelling, the modest scale
   of which is integral to its present character. However, taking all of the above
   considerations into account to reach a balanced conclusion, I am satisfied the
   design and subordinate scale of this proposal would preserve the understated
   character of the terrace and be sympathetic in appearance relative to the site
   sensitivities discussed.
Conclusion
8. The extensions proposed would not have a materially harmful effect on the
   character and appearance of the terraced dwelling and its surroundings and so
   satisfy TDLP policies SP7 and SPL3, as well as the key principles for well-designed
   places in Policy DP3 of the Framework. Subject to conditions establishing a
   standard three year time limit for commencement and specifying the approved
   drawings, I therefore conclude that the appeal succeeds.

Jonathan Price
INSPECTOR




1 Council ref 24/00489/FULHH




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
