 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 8 September 2026
 by Lynne Evans BA MA MRTPI MRICS
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 15 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012494
 Hole Barn Farm, Brighton Road, Henfield BN5 9SU
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mrs Janet Millman against the decision of Horsham District Council.
 •    The application Ref is DC/26/0274.
 •    The development proposed is single storey infill extension and conversion of garage into annexe
      accommodation including 1 no. bedroom, lounge kitchen and bathroom.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for single storey infill
   extension and conversion of garage into annexe accommodation including 1 no.
   bedroom, lounge kitchen and bathroom at Hole Barn Farm, Brighton Road,
   Henfield BN5 9SU in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref:
   DC/26/0274, subject to the conditions set out in the schedule at the end of this
   decision letter.
Preliminary Matters
2. A new National Planning Policy Framework (Framework) was issued on 17 August
     2026, which replaces the previous Framework published in December 2024 and all
     other iterations. I have therefore written to seek the views of the Appellant and the
     Council on the revised Framework as pertinent to this appeal. I have taken the
     further representations received into account.
Main Issue
3. The main issue in this appeal is whether the proposed development would accord
   with the development plan in terms of the location of new development.
Reasons
4. The appeal property is a detached dwelling on a large plot on the east side of a
   private road leading off the A281, in a countryside location. There are a small
   number of other dwellings served by the same lane and a scattering of dwellings on
   both sides of the A281 with open countryside between.
5. The proposal relates to conjoining two existing outbuildings close to the existing
   house with a modest new addition to create a self-contained annexe for the existing
   resident of the main house, with her family moving into the main house. The
   proposed annexe would contain full facilities including a kitchen and dining area, as
   well as snug and one bedroom with bathroom facilities.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012494


6. The planning application was submitted on the basis of it being an annexe to the
   main dwelling. The Council accepted the householder application on this basis and
   the decision notice specifically refers to annexe accommodation.
7. Policy 28 of the Horsham District Planning Framework (2015) (DPF) relates to
   replacement dwellings and house extensions in the countryside, including ancillary
   accommodation, and states that such development will be supported if the
   development can be accommodated appropriately within the curtilage of the
   existing dwelling. Specific further guidance under the policy states that ancillary
   accommodation should meet all other appropriate policies and demonstrate the
   need for additional space cannot be met from an existing dwelling or buildings
   suitable for conversion on the site. The size of the outbuilding should have regard
   to the dwelling they serve and should be grouped with the house. The use of
   ancillary accommodation as a separate dwelling will not be supported.
8. There would be no proposed subdivision of the planning unit, and the proposed
   development would be wholly within the curtilage of the existing dwelling, utilising
   two existing outbuildings, which would be connected through a modest new
   extension. The proposed annexe would be modest in size and scale in relation to
   the main dwelling on the site. The new link would also be moderate in size and
   scale and appropriately designed to maintain the appearance of the two existing
   outbuildings. The siting of the existing outbuildings are close to the main house and
   would continue to be seen as smaller scale outbuildings within the curtilage of the
   main house.
9. The Council’s sole reason for refusal relates to the principle of the proposal in
   terms of it being considered to be tantamount to the creation of a new dwelling. The
   Officer’s report referenced a number of detailed concerns with the layout, scale and
   design, albeit primarily in terms of their concern about the proposed development
   being akin to a new dwelling, most of which I have addressed above. I consider that
   the conversion of the two existing buildings and moderate sized link extension
   between would be of a high standard of design and would continue to respect the
   relationship with the main dwelling.
10. Even if the development could be used as a separate dwelling, there is no separate
    dwelling before me. In any case, if the proposed building were not used as
    proposed, or if there were a material change of use in the future to create a
    separate dwelling, then a separate grant of planning permission would be required.
11. I am therefore satisfied that the proposed development would be acceptable for its
    submitted use and function, as well as in design terms, as an annexe to the main
    dwelling at Hole Barn Farm. It would accord with Policy 28 of the DPF as set out
    above and would not conflict with Policies 2, 3 and 26 of the DPF as well as Policy
    DP3 and Policy S5:1 of the Framework relating to seek high quality design which
    respects its context and appropriate forms of development in the countryside and
    protecting and enhancing the countryside.
Other Considerations
12. I am advised that Hole Farmhouse, to the south of the appeal property, is Grade II
    listed. When considering whether to grant permission for development which
    affects a listed building or its setting, I am required under Section 66 (1) of The
    Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 to have special


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
 Appeal Decision 6012494


     regard to the desirability of preserving the building or its setting or any features of
     special architectural or historic interest it possesses.
13. Given the distance between the proposal and the Grade II listed building and the
    intervening countryside and trees, I am satisfied that there would be no harm to the
    setting of the listed building; its setting would be preserved. The Council also raised
    no concerns in this regard.
14. With regard to water neutrality, the Council has undertaken an Appropriate
    Assessment which demonstrates that the anticipated increase in mains water
    consumption from this development, alongside all other developments granted
    since 31 October 2025, would not exceed 3,240,000 litres per day. This is an
    interim measure agreed between the Council and Natural England to use the
    significant water savings made by Southern Water in 2024/2025 through their
    programme of leakage reduction (amongst other measures) and Natural England’s
    standing advice from November 2025 raises no objection to using these savings to
    allow new development to come forward. The Council confirms that the standing
    advice clarifies that it functions as Natural England’s formal response pursuant to
    Regulation 63(3) of the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 to
    all relevant planning applications which seek to achieve water neutrality using the
    above Southern Water savings.
15. As a result, the Council has concluded that the proposed development would not
    have an Adverse Effect on the Integrity of the Arun Valley site, either alone or in
    combination with other plans and projects, thereby complying with Regulations 63
    and 70 of the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017, Policy 31 of
    the DPF and Policy N6 of the Framework. I have no reason to reach a different
    conclusion.
Conditions
16. Conditions are required to ensure that the materials accord with the details set out
    on the application forms in order to respect the character and appearance of the
    existing property and of the local area. The approved plans require to be listed for
    the avoidance of doubt and in the interests of good planning.
17. Notwithstanding the fact that the sub-division of the planning unit and use of the
    annexe as a separate dwelling would constitute a material change of use requiring
    planning permission, I consider that a condition to control the use of the
    accommodation to be reasonable and necessary to provide clarity about the
    development applied for and to ensure compliance with Policy 26 of the DPF.
Conclusion
18. For the reasons given above and having regard to all other matters raised, I
    conclude that the appeal should be allowed.

L J Evans
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      3
 Appeal Decision 6012494


                                           Schedule of Conditions


     1)      The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
             date of this decision.
     2)      The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
             the following approved plans: 01, 02, 03 and 04.
     3)      The external surfaces of the development hereby permitted shall be
             constructed in the materials set out on the application forms.
     4)      The annexe as shown on the approved plans shall not be occupied at any
             time other than for purposes ancillary to the residential use of the dwelling
             known as Hole Barn Farm, Brighton Road, Henfield, BN5 9SU.


                                              End of Schedule




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             4
