 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 14 August 2026
 by Mrs Chris Pipe BA(Hons), DipTP, MTP, MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 28 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012006
 79 Chevet Lane, Wakefield WF2 6JE
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
     to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr Rahul Yadav against the decision of the Wakefield Metropolitan District
     Council.
 •   The application Ref 25/02151/FUL.
 •   The development proposed is Building of Fence in the front of the property. Addition of electric
     remote controlled double gate and a pedestrian gate to the fence.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed for the Building of Fence in the front of the property. Addition
   of electric remote controlled double gate and a pedestrian gate to the fence at 79
   Chevet Lane, Wakefield WF2 6JE in accordance with the terms of the application,
   Ref 25/02151/FUL and the plans submitted with it.
Procedural Matters
2. The application made clear that the scheme had been submitted retrospectively,
   the proposed development was in place at the time of my site visit I have dealt with
   the proposal accordingly.
3. Since the determination of the application the National Planning Policy Framework
   (2024) has been superseded by the National Planning Policy Framework (2026)
   (the Framework). No party would be prejudiced or caused any injustice by me
   proceeding with the appeal in light of this change in policy.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are the effect of the development on the character and
   appearance of the area.
Reasons
5. The appeal site comprises a detached dwelling located within a predominantly
   residential area. The character of the locality is defined by a variety of boundary
   treatments, including low brick walls, timber fencing, railings and landscaping.
6. The development comprises an uninterrupted length of brick wall with close
   boarded timber fencing and central gates of solid construction. There is
   considerable variation in boundary treatments within the locality, including walls,
   fences and other enclosures which similarly restrict views into the front gardens of
   properties. In this context, the proposed boundary treatment would not introduce an



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012006


     unfamiliar or incongruous form of enclosure. I do not find that the development
     appears visually intrusive or incongruous within its surroundings.
7. The height and form of the boundary enclosure is comparable to other boundary
   enclosures visible within the locality, including those which restrict views into front
   garden/parking areas. Consequently, it does not appear unduly prominent or out of
   keeping with the established pattern of development.
8. I find that the proposed development would not harm the character and appearance
   of the area. There is no conflict with Policies SP23, LP56 LP57 of the Wakefield
   District Local Plan 2036 (2024) which seeks amongst other things that
   developments are of a high quality and appropriate to their location.
9. There is also no conflict with the Framework which seeks to promote high quality
   places and for developments to respond to their context.
Conclusion and conditions
10. For the above reasons I conclude that this appeal should be allowed.
11. Conditions relating to standard time limit for commencement of development, plans
    to be adhered to and materials to be used are not relevant or necessary as the
    development is complete.

C Pipe
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
