 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 20 August 2026
 by Sarah Colebourne MA, MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date:08 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012771
 Poplars Farm, 38 Thrapston Road, Brampton, Huntingdon, PE28 4TD
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr King against the decision of Huntingdonshire District Council.
 •   The application Ref is 26/00091/HHFUL.
 •   The development proposed is a timber carport.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a timber carport at
   Poplars Farm, 38 Thrapston Road, Brampton, Huntingdon, PE28 4TD in
   accordance with the application Ref 26/00091/HHFUL, subject to the following
   conditions:-
         1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years
            from the date of this decision.
         2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
            the following approved plans: 1367/SPLP; 1367-PE.
         3) The brick and tile materials to be used in the construction of the
            development hereby permitted shall match those used in the existing
            dwelling.
Preliminary matter
2. Since the application was determined, a revised National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework) was published in August 2026. However, as any
   policies that are material to this decision have not fundamentally changed, I am
   satisfied that this has not prejudiced any party. I have had regard to the latest
   version of the Framework in reaching my decision.
Main Issue
3. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
   appearance of the area.
Reasons

4. The appeal dwelling is a large, modern two storey house with a wide front
   elevation, one of five dwellings on a private spur off the main Thrapston Road
   which also provides access to a day nursery. It is sited on a wide plot and has an
   attached double garage to one side and a generous parking area that occupies

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012771


     most of the frontage, set back behind a high gate at the access and a tall evergreen
     hedge along the front boundary with the access road that continues to the end
     dwelling and the nursery.
5. The proposed carport would be sited in a corner of the frontage furthest from the
   access and adjacent to a timber fence along the side boundary and the front
   hedge, at a slightly lower ground level than the access road. It would have a
   pitched roof and would be comparable to the size of a single garage. As such, its
   size and scale would be subordinate to this large dwelling and given the size of the
   plot it would maintain its spacious character. The proposed design comprises a
   brick plinth with timber walls and a tiled roof, which would result in a high quality
   and solid appearance that, subject to a condition for matching brick and tile
   materials, would complement the dwelling.
6. Although there are no other structures in frontages of the other dwellings, the
   undeveloped front gardens are not clearly perceived in the street scene due to the
   high, solid fencing that surrounds them and this gives an enclosed character to the
   approach along the access road. I agree with the appellant that the lack of
   uniformity, variety of plot sizes and orientation of the five dwellings means that the
   street scene is not characterised by a rigid or uninterrupted frontage. The appeal
   site and its access are offset from the access road and together with the high
   fencing along the frontages of the other dwellings, this would limit views of the
   carport until the site access is reached. The carport would then be seen in the
   context of the appeal dwelling and its neighbour and the nursery building on the
   opposite side of the access road. Given its discreet position, its modest size and its
   sympathetic design and materials, it would not be at all dominant in the street
   scene and would harmonise acceptably with the other buildings.
7. Although the Huntingdonshire Design Guide SPD (2017) advises that garages and
   carports should be aligned with or set back from the principal elevation, I agree with
   the appellant that as supplementary guidance rather than adopted policy, it should
   be applied flexibly and given the particular circumstances of this site, it is not
   directly relevant. The proposal would accord with development plan policies LP11
   and LP12 in ‘Huntingdonshire’s Local Plan to 2036’ (2019) (LP) which together
   seek to ensure that proposals contribute positively to the area's character,
   successfully integrate with adjoining buildings and create attractive and
   appropriately scaled built frontages. The Framework has similar objectives.
Conditions
8. The condition for materials referred to earlier is necessary and reasonable in the
   interests of the character and appearance of the area. As well as the standard
   commencement condition, a condition is necessary requiring that the development
   is carried out in accordance with the approved plans, to provide certainty.
Conclusion
9. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the proposed development would
   accord with the development plan and there are no material considerations that
   would outweigh that. The appeal should be allowed.

Sarah Colebourne
INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
