 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 8 September 2026
 by Lynne Evans BA MA MRTPI MRICS
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 15 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012252
 4 Denton Road, Eastbourne BN20 7SU
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by St Marys Homes Ltd against the decision of Eastbourne Borough Council.
 •    The application Ref is 250499.
 •    The development proposed is garage conversion with single-storey rear extension to provide 1 no.
      studio unit.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for garage conversion
   with single-storey rear extension to provide 1 no. studio unit at 4 Denton Road,
   Eastbourne BN20 7SU in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref:
   250499, subject to the conditions set out in the schedule at the end of the decision
   letter.
Preliminary Matters
2. A new National Planning Policy Framework (Framework) was issued on 17 August
   2026, which replaces the previous Framework published in December 2024 and all
   other iterations. I have therefore written to seek the views of the Appellant and the
   Council on the revised Framework as pertinent to this appeal. No further
   representations have been received.
Main Issues
3. The main issues in this appeal are:
          •    The effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the local area
               and on Meads Conservation Area,
          •    The effect of the proposal on the living conditions of the neighbouring
               residents at 4 Denton Road, with particular regard to overlooking and loss of
               privacy, and
          •    Whether the proposed development would provide satisfactory living
               conditions for future residents with particular regard to privacy and provision
               of outdoor amenity space.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012252


Reasons
Character and appearance

4. The appeal site comprises a detached double garage set to the side and rear of
   No. 4 Denton Road, a large detached, three storey building which has been divided
   into residential flats, and within a predominantly residential area together with
   institutional and community uses. Denton Road, and particularly on the northern
   side is characterised by large residential dwellings on generous plots, many with
   smaller scale garages to the side. There are also a number of smaller buildings
   interspersed with the larger buildings, some of which are set back from the street
   frontage. The site also lies within Meads Conservation Area.
5. The proposal would retain the existing garage with a single storey extension to the
   rear to convert and to create a studio dwelling. There would be a parking space at
   the front, with amenity space to the rear including provision for a bike store and
   refuse and recycling. In terms of elevations, the front elevation would retain the
   appearance of a garage with ‘mock’ garage doors and high level obscure glazed
   windows.
6. Section 72 (1) of The Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act1990
   requires me to pay special attention to the desirability of preserving or enhancing
   the character or appearance of conservation areas. Meads Conservation Area is
   extensive in coverage and its overall significance relates to the development of this
   part of Eastbourne between 1870 and 1910, with many examples of attractive and
   large scale Victorian and Edwardian buildings.
7. In the Council’s Conservation Area Appraisal (April 2012) (Appraisal) the area is
   divided into 4 character areas, and the appeal site relates to Character Area 4
   entitled Institutional buildings and Edwardian houses to the north. The Appraisal
   refers to the long sweeping vistas along the roads and across neighbouring open
   sites and the openness of the streetscape and specifically refers to the almost
   unaltered group of 16 detached houses on the north side of Denton Road. The
   substantial Edwardian houses on the north side of Denton Road create an
   attractive and coherent frontage which contributes to the significance of the
   Conservation Area.
8. The proposed development would remain separate to and would not physically
   affect the main Edwardian building at No 4. I have taken into account the proposed
   extension to the rear, but overall and particularly in street scene views, the existing
   relationship, in terms of both scale as well as the siting between the main building
   and the smaller garage building to the side would continue with the new
   development. Furthermore, the design approach would be successful in
   maintaining the appearance of a domestic garage building. Given its siting and
   small scale, I do not therefore consider that the proposed development would
   detract from the visual prominence of the larger houses along Denton Road.
9. Moreover, the street pattern along this side of Denton Road already comprises a
   number of smaller buildings in between the larger buildings. Given their smaller
   scale they do not compete with the visual prominence of the Edwardian frontages
   and the proposed development would be readily assimilated into the existing
   pattern of development.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
 Appeal Decision 6012252


10. I am satisfied that the proposed development would respect the character and
    appearance of the local area and the significance of the Conservation Area. It
    would therefore preserve the character and appearance of Meads Conservation
    Area. There would be no conflict with Policies D10 and D10a of the Eastbourne
    Core Strategy (2013) (Core Strategy) and Policies UHT1 and UHT15 of the
    Eastbourne Borough Plan (2003) (Borough Plan) and Policies DP3 and Policies
    HE4, HE5, HE6 and HE9 of the Framework, all of which amongst other matters
    seek a high quality of design which respects the local context and the significance
    of designated heritage assets.
Living Conditions: Neighbouring Residents
11. The proposed dwelling would be single storey with windows primarily to the rear
    and to the side, together with the proposed raising of the existing boundary fencing
    to 1.8m in height. Subject to the imposition of a condition to secure and retain the
    raised boundary fencing, given the single storey form of the dwelling, I am satisfied
    that there would be no material overlooking of the neighbouring flats and rear
    garden area as a result of the proposed development.
12. The future occupiers of the proposed dwelling would walk, drive or cycle along the
    side of the main building where there are ground floor windows and a glazed
    conservatory. There would therefore be direct intervisibility at close range.
    However, the proposed access to the new dwelling already serves the existing
    garage and I have no information before me to indicate that the garage is currently
    related to any of the existing flats at No 4, including the one with the glazed
    conservatory. I do not therefore consider that there would be a material reduction in
    the level of privacy to the occupiers of the flats with windows along the side of the
    main building as a result of the proposed development, compared with the current
    arrangement.
13. Although high level, for the avoidance of doubt, a condition should be imposed to
    ensure that the proposed windows in the front elevation are in obscure glazing and
    so retained and maintained to ensure no overlooking of neighbouring windows.
14. Subject to the imposition of appropriate planning conditions, as referenced above, I
    am satisfied that the proposed development would not result in any material harm
    to the living conditions of neighbouring residents, with particular regard to
    overlooking and loss of privacy. There would be no conflict with Policy B2 of the
    Core Strategy and Policy HO20 of the Borough Plan, which require development
    to protect the residential amenity of existing residents and avoid loss of privacy by
    overlooking from habitable rooms.
Living Conditions: Future Occupiers
15. I am satisfied that the internal space would be generous in size for a studio unit,
    with access to the rear to a good sized area of amenity space to serve the size of
    the dwelling, including provision for a cycle store and refuse and recycling
    provision. Although the outlook from the side facing windows would be restricted
    because of the proposed raised height of the fence, the main habitable space
    would also benefit from generous glazing to the rear. The Council also raised no
    concerns in this regard.
16. I have taken into account the rear facing windows in the residential flats at No 4.
    However, given the siting of the proposed development in relation to the main

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
 Appeal Decision 6012252


     building and the position of the rear facing windows at No 4, I am satisfied that the
     proposed occupiers of the new dwelling would benefit from amenity space that
     would not be directly overlooked by the rear facing windows at No 4, particularly
     closest to the rear of the dwelling. There would be some views towards the rear
     part of the amenity space but given the distances involved and the scale of the
     amenity space to be provided, I am satisfied that the extent of overlooking would
     not materially adversely affect the living conditions of future occupiers.
17. I therefore conclude that the future occupiers of the proposed dwelling would
    benefit from acceptable living standards, with particular regard to the provision of
    amenity space. There would be no conflict with Policy B2 of the Core Strategy, and
    Policy HO20 of the Borough Plan in this regard.
Other Considerations
18. My attention has been drawn to an earlier refusal for the demolition of the existing
    garage and the erection of 1 no. dwelling which was dismissed at appeal under the
    Reference: APP/T1410/W/24/3349103, in March 2025. Each proposal must be
    considered on its individual merits but in so far as the information has been made
    available to me, I have taken it into account. However, the previous scheme
    proposed an alternative siting and form of dwelling to the proposal before me.
19. Given the small scale of the proposal and the provision of a parking space as well
    as cycle storage, as well as the existing garage use, I do not consider that there
    would be any material harm to highway safety or in terms of unacceptable levels of
    noise and disturbance. The Council also raised no concerns in this regard.
20. A number of local residents have referenced the loss of a view as a result of the
    proposed development, but this is not a planning matter and my assessment has
    been based on its planning merits as I am required to do.
Conditions
21. The Council did not seek for any new conditions to be imposed. Conditions are
    required to ensure that the materials accord with the details set out on the
    application forms in order to respect the character and appearance of the existing
    property and of the Conservation Area. The approved plans require to be listed for
    the avoidance of doubt and in the interests of good planning.
22. For the reasons already set out and to protect the living conditions of neighbouring
    residents as well as future occupiers, conditions are required regarding the raising
    of the height of the boundary fence and for the high level glazing in the front
    elevation to be in obscure glass. Conditions are also required to ensure the
    provision of the parking space, cycle store and refuse and recycling facilities to
    ensure a sustainable form of development which also respects the character and
    appearance of the existing property and of the Conservation Area.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     4
 Appeal Decision 6012252


Conclusion
23. For the reasons given above and having regard to all other matters raised, I
    conclude that the appeal should be allowed.



L J Evans
INSPECTOR
                                           Schedule of Conditions


     1)      The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
             date of this decision.
     2)      The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
             the following approved plans: location plan; 2529-01; 2529-02; 2529-03;
             2529-04; 2529-05; 2529-06 and 2529-07 Rev A.
     3)      The external surfaces of the development hereby permitted shall be
             constructed in the materials as set out on the application forms.
     4)      Before the development hereby permitted is first occupied, the cycle store
             shall be erected in accordance with the details shown on Plans 2529-02 and
             2529-06 and shall thereafter be retained and maintained for its intended
             purpose.
     5)      Before the development hereby permitted is first occupied, provision for
             refuse and recycling shall be made in accordance with the details shown on
             Plan 2529-02 and shall thereafter be retained and maintained for their
             intended purpose.
     6)      Before the development hereby permitted is first occupied, the existing
             boundary fence as shown on Plan 2529-07 Rev A shall be raised in height to
             1.8m high and shall be a solid, close boarded fence along its whole length,
             and thereafter retained and maintained.
     7)      Before the development hereby permitted is first occupied, provision for one
             parking space shall be made in accordance with the details shown on Plans
             2529-02 and 2529-07 Rev A and shall thereafter be retained and maintained
             for its intended purpose.
     8)      The high level glazing in the front elevation shall be in obscure glass as
             shown on Plan 2529-05 and thereafter so retained and maintained.


                                                End of Schedule




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             5
