Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 September 2026
by J Buxton BA(Hons) DipArch ARB RIBA
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30th September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6012182
25 Chandler Way, Lowton, Wigan WA3 2LR
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by John & Laura Woodley against the decision of Wigan Metropolitan Borough
    Council.
•   The application reference is A/26/100732/HH.
•   The development proposed is described as a part single storey, part double storey rear and side
    extension.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Background and Main Issue
2. During the course of the appeal a new National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) was published on the 17 August 2026. Whilst the format has altered, any
   considerations that are material to this decision have not fundamentally changed. I
   am satisfied that this has not prejudiced any party and I have had regard to the latest
   version in reaching my decision.
3. The appeal relates to a proposal for a part single storey, part two storey side and rear
   extension together with external alterations to fenestration. Whilst the proposal
   includes a number of elements, I note that the Council's concerns relate to the
   proposed side extension.
4. In light of the above, the main issues are the effect of the proposed side extension on:
       • the character and appearance of the host dwelling and the surrounding area,
         with particular regard to the spacing between buildings; and
       • the living conditions of the occupiers of 23 Chandler Way (No. 23), with
         particular regard to outlook.
Reasons
Character and appearance
5. The appeal property is a semi-detached dwelling positioned at the head of a cul-de-
   sac. The surrounding area is predominantly residential in character and comprises
   detached and semi-detached two-storey dwellings. The buildings are generally set
   within spacious plots and the gaps between them contribute to the open character of
   the street scene, allowing individual properties to be read as separate built forms.
6. The appeal scheme would introduce a side extension positioned approximately
   100mm from the common boundary with No. 23. The ground floor would include a
   kitchen and dining extension to the rear together with a bin store, whilst a bedroom

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012182


     would be provided at first-floor level. The bin store at ground floor level would project
     beyond the front elevation of No. 23.
7. During my site visit I observed that the cul-de-sac's character is derived in part from
   the breaks in built form created by the spaces and driveways between neighbouring
   properties. The proposal would introduce built form in close proximity to No. 23 and
   would substantially diminish the gap between the properties. As a result, the degree
   of separation between the dwellings would be noticeably reduced. The resulting
   relationship would appear cramped and would erode the sense of openness that
   makes a positive contribution to the character of this part of Chandler Way.
   Consequently, the extension would appear discordant and out of keeping with its
   surroundings.
8. I have had regard to the Council's House Extension Design Guide SPD (SPD). The
   SPD recognises that side extensions can affect both the setting of individual
   dwellings and the character of the wider street scene. It therefore seeks to avoid the
   loss of spaces between buildings where those spaces contribute positively to local
   character or where their erosion would create the impression of a more continuous
   built form. In this case, the appeal proposal would conflict with those objectives
   because it would substantially diminish a gap that makes a positive contribution to the
   character of the cul-de-sac.
9. I acknowledge that No. 23 has previously been extended and that the original spacing
   between the properties has therefore been altered. Whilst I have taken this matter
   into account, there nevertheless remains a meaningful gap which makes a positive
   contribution to the character of this part of Chandler Way. The importance of that
   space derives not from the historic layout of the estate but from the role it presently
   plays in maintaining the openness and character of the cul-de-sac. Accordingly, the
   existing alterations to No. 23 do not lead me to a different conclusion.
10. For the reasons above, I find that the proposal would harm the character and
    appearance of the area. It would therefore conflict with Policy CP10 of the Wigan
    Local Plan Core Strategy and Policy JP-P1 of the Places for Everyone Joint
    Development Plan which, amongst other things, seek to secure high-quality
    development that responds positively to local character, respects its context and
    contributes to the creation of attractive and well-designed places.
Living conditions
11. No. 23 has been extended, and, as a result the windows closest to the boundary
    have a direct relationship with the appeal property. Owing to the angled position of
    the dwellings, the proposed side extension would be experienced more directly than
    would ordinarily be the case between neighbouring semi-detached properties. Whilst I
    accept that the proposal would not result in unacceptable overlooking or a significant
    loss of privacy, it would introduce a substantial amount of built form close to the
    common boundary resulting in an overbearing impact. The proposed side wall of the
    bin store would be a prominent feature when viewed from No. 23 and parts of its
    curtilage. Although the first-floor setback and reduced ridge height would lessen the
    visual impact of the proposal to a degree, the additional massing would nevertheless
    result in an unduly tight relationship between the properties and a poor outlook for the
    occupiers of No. 23.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012182


12. For these reasons, I conclude that the proposal would have an unacceptable effect
    on the living conditions of the occupiers of No. 23 with particular regard to outlook.
    Consequently, the proposal would conflict with Policies CP10 and CP17 of the Wigan
    Local Plan Core Strategy and Policy JP-P1 of the Places for Everyone Joint
    Development Plan, which amongst other things seek to safeguard the living
    conditions of existing occupiers and ensure development integrates successfully with
    its surroundings.
Other Matters
13. I have had regard to the examples of other developments referred to by the appellant.
    However, I have been provided with limited information regarding their site context,
    the relationship with neighbouring properties and the planning considerations that
    informed those decisions. Consequently, I am unable to conclude that they are
    directly comparable to the appeal proposal. In any event, I have determined this
    appeal on its own merits.
14. I acknowledge that the appeal proposal incorporates a number of amendments
    intended to address the concerns that led to the refusal of planning application
    reference A/26/100291/HH. These include a greater first-floor setback, a reduced
    ridge height and changes to the roof design. Whilst those amendments reduce the
    visual prominence of the extension to some extent, they do not overcome my
    concerns regarding the substantial reduction of the gap between the dwellings or the
    effect on the living conditions of the occupiers of No. 23.
Conclusion
15. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

J Buxton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
