 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 27 August 2026
 by D J Barnes MBA BSc(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date:11 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012937
 2-4 Chapel Bar, Nottingham NG1 6JQ
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Qiang Cai (HQCC Assets Limited) against the decision of Nottingham City
      Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00291/PFUL3.
 •    The development proposed is a change of front façade and replacement of windows.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matter
2. The updated National Planning Policy Framework was published in August 2026
   but does not raise any new matters which affect the assessment of this appeal
   scheme.
Main Issue
3. It is considered that the main issue is the effect of the proposed development on
   the character and appearance of the host property and the surrounding area.
Reasons
4. The appeal property comprises 2 buildings (2 and 4 Chapel Bar) which forms part
   of a terrace of buildings fronting Chapel Bar and Long Row West situated within
   Nottingham city centre. The buildings within the terrace are of architectural styles
   with, as noted by the appellant, varying shopfront designs at ground floor level.
   Examples of contemporary shopfronts have been identified by the appellant close
   to the property and these were seen during the site visit. The planning
   circumstances of these other shopfronts have not been provided, including what
   style and design of shopfronts they may have replaced and, as such, these other
   schemes being reasons to allow this appeal has been given limited. However, they
   do form part of the character and appearance of the surrounding commercial area.
5. The shopfront of No. 4 is of a more traditional design constructed of materials
   including timber with a curved recessed entrance, carved pilasters and stone stall
   riser. The shopfront of No. 4 is sympathetic to the overall design and appearance
   of this 3-storey building which possesses an ashlar dressing and sash windows

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012937


     with decorative surrounds. No. 2 is also a 3-storey building but is lower in height
     and the shopfront has a more contemporary appearance with a door serving
     residential development above the commercial ground floor use. Above ground
     floor level this building has similar fenestration and external materials as No. 4. By
     reason of its historic and architectural interest, the council considers that the
     property is a non-designated heritage asset.
6. The proposed development would replace the traditionally designed shopfront of
   No. 4 with a shopfront of contemporary design, appearance and materials. There
   would be the loss of the distinctive curved entrance and the other identified features
   which positively contribute to the character and appearance of the property.
   Accordingly, there would be significant harm caused to the character and
   appearance of the property.
7. The property is located within the extensive Old Market Conservation Area where
   there is a statutory duty that special attention shall be paid to the desirability of
   preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of the area. This duty is
   echoed in Policy 11 of the Aligned Core Strategy (ACS) and Policy HE1 of the
   Nottingham City Land and Planning Policies Development Plan Document (DPD).
8. From what was observed during the site visit, the buildings in this part of the
   Conservation Area are generally sited abutting the footways/shared space and are
   of diverse designs, heights and appearance, including the ground floor shopfronts.
   Some of these contemporary shopfronts are not of high-quality design, especially
   where there are fascia advertisements which visually dominate the front elevations.
9. As identified, there would be a material change to the appearance of the property
   and this would affect its contribution to the character and appearance of the
   streetscene within this part of the Conservation Area. However, a further shopfront
   of a contemporary design would have a neutral effect on the character and
   appearance of the Conservation Area in this location. This judgement is based
   upon the established commercial character and the varied appearance of the
   buildings within this part of the Conservation Area, particularly adjacent to the
   property.
10. For the same reasons, no harm would be caused to the heritage significance of the
    Conservation Area, which is a designated heritage asset, and, as such, there would
    not be a conflict with ACS Policy 11 and DPD Policy HE1. However, this lack of
    harm being caused to the heritage significance of the Conservation Area does not
    outweigh the significant harm that would be caused to the character and
    appearance of the property itself.
11. For the reasons given, it is concluded that the proposed development would cause
    unacceptable harm to the character and appearance of the host property and, as
    such, it would conflict with DPD Policy DE4 concerning the design of shopfronts.
    Amongst other matters, this policy expects a high standard of design of
    replacement shopfronts, including being appropriate to the building and its location
    and at least maintaining the existing character, architectural and historic merit and
    design of the building and its shopfront.
     Other Matters
12. The appellant’s claims about the benefits of the appeal scheme have been carefully
    noted, including the use of the commercial floorspace reducing vacancy and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision 6012937


     contributing to the viability of the area, the improved access for people of all
     abilities, security from enhanced outlook towards the public domain and the
     removal of a recessed entrance which currently attracts rough sleepers. However,
     the claimed benefits are collectively judged not to outweigh the unacceptable harm
     which has been identified to the character and appearance of the property.
     Whether a shutter would be an alternative means to deter rough sleeping within the
     recessed entrance is not a matter for determination as part of this appeal.
13. Accordingly, it is concluded that this appeal should be dismissed.



D J Barnes
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      3
