Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
By R Snow BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012411
Washdyke Farm, Long Lane, Stathern, Leicestershire LE14 4HJ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Paragraph Q.2
    of the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as
    amended).
•   The appeal is made by Howard Coy on behalf of H Coy and Son against the decision of Melton
    Borough Council.
•   The application Ref is 25/00803/GDOCOU.
•   The development proposed is change of use from existing original farm buildings to dwelling houses.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. The application was made under Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the Town and
   Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015, as
   amended (hereafter referred to as the GPDO and Class Q). This permits
   development consisting of: (a) the change of use of a building and any land within
   its curtilage from a use as an agricultural building to a use falling within Class C3
   (dwellinghouses) of the Schedule to the Use Classes Order, (b) the extension of
   the building; and (c) building operations reasonably necessary to convert the
   building.
3. Approval is being sought for a change of use and associated building operations
   pursuant to Class Q(a) and Class Q(c) respectively to form 7no. detached dwelling
   houses.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are:

       • whether the proposed development would fall within the scope of Class Q and
         whether the proposal would otherwise comply with the limitations and
         restrictions for being permitted development; and,

       • if it does, whether the location or siting of the building makes it otherwise
         impractical or undesirable for the building to change from agricultural use to a
         use falling within Class C3 (dwellinghouse) of Schedule 1 to the Use Classes
         Order, with particular regard to the living conditions of future occupiers residing
         adjacent to agricultural operations.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012411


Reasons
Permitted development
5. The appeal building is a previously-extended agricultural building of substantial size
   within a working farmstead. Its construction comprises a steel portal frame, a
   concrete floor slab and a roof of profiled sheeting. The building is primarily open to
   the sides, with the gable ends partially enclosed by elements of timber cladding,
   concrete blockwork and profiled sheeting.
6. The submitted plans show that substantial demolition of the existing building is
   proposed, significantly reducing the footprint of the building. Sections of the steel
   portal framework would also be removed to create separation between the
   proposed dwellings. The submissions indicate that proposed walls would be vertical
   larch cladding and roofs would be profiled metal sheeting, suggesting that all
   existing walling and roof coverings would be removed. It appears from the plans
   and my observations on site, that the concrete floor and the steel portal frame
   would be the only elements of the existing building retained, and not in their
   entirety. The 7 proposed dwellings would be constructed by providing each with a
   new external shell consisting of all 4 external walls and new roofing, including
   replacement bracing and structural restraint, built around the sections of steel
   framework retained.
7. Class Q(c) permits building operations which are reasonably necessary to convert
   the building. Paragraph Q.1.(j) confirms that this includes the installation or
   replacement of windows, doors, roofs or external walls, water, drainage, electricity,
   gas or other services to the extent reasonably necessary for the building to function
   as a dwellinghouse; and partial demolition to the extent reasonably necessary to
   carry out these building operations.
8. The Planning Practice Guidance explains, in paragraph 105, that the permitted
   development right assumes that the agricultural building is capable of functioning
   as a dwelling. It is not the intention to allow rebuilding work which would go beyond
   that reasonably necessary for the conversion of the building to residential use.
   Therefore, it is only where the existing building is already suitable for conversion to
   residential use that the building would be considered to have the permitted
   development right. The guidance draws attention to the relevant case law, Hibbitt
   and another v SSCLG and Rushcliffe Borough Council (2) [2016] EWHC 2853
   (Admin) which has also been referenced by both parties. That case addresses the
   distinction between conversion and rebuilding, with the latter not being permitted by
   Class Q. The judgment between the two is one of fact and degree.
9. The application was accompanied by a Structural Engineers’ Report based on a
   visual survey. This concludes that the building is generally in good structural
   condition with no widespread signs of instability or significant structural defects that
   would be expected to compromise the suitability of the building for conversion to
   residential use. Notwithstanding this, it remains the case that the proposal must
   maintain the character and substance of a conversion and not a re-build to benefit
   from the Class Q permitted development rights.
10. On the evidence before me, the appeal building would be stripped back to part of
    its skeletal frame and is not therefore capable of functioning as 7 detached
    dwellings without extensive demolition and substantial rebuilding. Whilst on a literal
    interpretation, the installation of walls and roofs could be determined to fall within

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012411


     the limitations of paragraph Q.1.(j), I find that due to the cumulative extent of
     building works required to provide, amongst other things, a total of 28 new external
     walls and 7 roofs, the resultant development would be so far removed from the
     design and form of the existing building, that is not the case here. In common with
     the Hibbitt case, the proposed development would, in all practicable terms, be
     starting afresh with only minimal help from the original building.
11. In my judgment, and taken cumulatively, the scale and extent of the works
    proposed go well beyond what could reasonably be described as a conversion,
    notwithstanding the re-use of the steel portal frame. A significant proportion of the
    existing building would be removed and the extensive works required to form 7
    detached dwellings would not amount to a conversion of the existing building, but
    rather a rebuild. They would not therefore, fall within the parameters of Class Q.
12. I therefore conclude that the works do not constitute the change of use of the
    building and that the works necessary to facilitate the use of the building as 7
    dwellings would not fall within the scope of those permissible under Class Q.
    Accordingly, they would not be permitted development and the appeal must fail.
Living conditions
13. Given my conclusion above, I have no need to consider further matters requiring
    prior approval under Q.2.(1) (a-g), including whether the location or siting of the
    building makes it otherwise impractical or undesirable for the building to change
    from agricultural use to a use falling within Use Class C3 (dwellinghouses).
Other Matters
14. I have been provided with an example of a separate Class Q application approved
    by the council in February 2026 (LPA ref: 25/01258/GDOCOU). It is suggested that
    the case is comparable to that before me. I have limited details of that case before
    me, including neither the plans nor the structural report. I cannot therefore
    determine the relevance of that case. The provided officer’s report suggests that
    the roof of the building in that case would be predominantly retained and it appears
    therefore that the extent of works was not, on the face of it, directly comparable.
    Irrespective of this, I have found that for the reasons above, the proposal before me
    does not fall within the scope of Class Q.
Conclusion
15. For the reasons set out above, I conclude that the proposal would not constitute
    permitted development under Schedule 2, Part 3, Class Q of the GPDO. The
    appeal is therefore dismissed.



R Snow
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
