 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 25 August 2026
 by Philip Willmer BSc Dip Arch RIBA
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 21 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012194
 Dalby, 70 Halsford Park Road, East Grinstead, West Sussex, RH19 1PS.
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Ms Amy Loosley against the decision of Mid Sussex District Council.
 •   The application Ref is DM/26/0452.
 •   The development proposed is two-storey side and rear extension. Introduction of render to partially
     replace hung tile cladding at the front elevation.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issues
2. I consider there are two main issues in this case:
     •   The effect of the proposed development on the architectural integrity of the host
         property and thereby the character and appearance of the street scene, and;
     •   whether the proposed two-storey rear extension would result in an unacceptable
         loss of light and outlook to 72 Halsford Park Road.
Reasons
Character and appearance:
3. Dalby, 70 Halsford Park Road is a two-storey, detached dwelling, set back from the
   road and located on the west side of street. It is one of a small enclave of detached
   dwellings on this side of the road.
4. The properties in this group are generally positioned on their plots so as to be set in
   from their side boundaries with only single storey garages being built up to the
   boundary on one side. This has given them an overall generous spacious
   appearance which is a particular character of this group. Further, the surrounding
   dwellings, which generally comprises two-storey, semi-detached houses, again due
   to their layout, serve to reinforce the spacious character of the street as a whole.
5. The appellant proposes, following the removal of a single storey lean-to style
   garage and workshop to the north side, and single storey flat roof addition to the
   rear, a two-storey side and rear extension. In addition, the design proposes
   replacing the existing tile hanging to the gable facing the street with render.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012194


6. Although modest in scale the removal of the rather unattractive utilitarian
   garage/workshop is the be welcomed. The overall composition of the house as
   extended would, apart from the unfortunate area of flat roof over the walk-in closet,
   be appropriate in scale and well mannered. The flat roof, which would be visible
   from the street, would be in direct contrast to the overall vernacular design of the
   house as extended and would therefore appear incongruous.
7. I note the Council’s concern in respect of the removal of tile hanging to the front
   gable and its replacement with white render. Nevertheless, given the other
   examples of render in the street I consider it to be one of the overall palate of
   materials found locally, and therefore acceptable in principle. Further, in this case it
   would serve to visually break up the overall rather bland mass of tile hanging to
   street elevation of the house and would therefore be an appropriate design detail.
8. Further, the introduction of a hip over the new en-suite shower room/closet would to
   some extent reduce the visual mass of the side extension when viewed from the
   street.
9. Nevertheless, the front elevation of the side extension would run through flush with
   the existing front façade of the house, it would thereby result in the house as
   extended appearing wider than the other houses in this enclave. In addition, as the
   house would be extended right up to the boundary with No 68 the proposed
   extension would severely diminish the visually spacious quality of this property and
   the group of houses of which it is part.
10. For the foregoing reasons I consider that the proposed extension would cause
    significant harm to the architectural integrity of the host property and thereby the
    character and appearance of the street scene. To allow it would therefore be
    contrary to the aims and objectives of Policy DP26 of the Mid Sussex District Plan
    2014-2031 (Adopted March 2018) (LP), Principles DG49 and DG50 of the Mid
    Sussex Design Guide Design Guide Supplementary Planning document SPD
    (Adopted November 2020) (SPD), Policy EG3 of the East Grinstead
    Neighbourhood Plan November 2016 (NP), and the National Planning Policy
    Framework (the Framework) as they relate to, amongst other things, the quality of
    development, and the need to protect the character and appearance of the area.
Living conditions
11. The Council were concerned when determining the planning application that the
    proposed rear extension would result in an unacceptable loss of light and outlook to
    the kitchen of No 72 served by the ground floor window at the western end of the
    north wall of the property. The Council identified that in respect of this window the
    proposed two-storey extension would fail the 25 degree test set out in the BRE
    good practice guide.
12. No 72 is a detached chalet bungalow the rear wall of which would project beyond
    the rear wall of Dalby as extended. The separation distance between the proposed
    two-story rear extension to Dalby and the flank wall of No 72 would be about 4.5
    metres or so. The kitchen window identified by the Council faces north.
    Furthermore, from the evidence before me I note that the kitchen directly adjoins
    the conservatory at the rear of No 72 and therefore takes light from it and gives
    views of the rear garden beyond.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision 6012194


13. Given all of these considerations I am not persuaded on balance that the proposed
    extension, while failing the BRE 25 degree test, would in this case result in such an
    unacceptable loss of light and outlook to the users of the kitchen at No 72 as to
    cause harm to their living conditions. The proposed development would therefore
    accord with the objectives of LP Policy DP26, NP Policy EG3, the SPD and the
    Framework as they seek to protect residential living conditions.
Other Matters
14. I note that there were no objections to the development in terms highways,
    environmental health or ecology, and that the Town Council supported the
    proposal. However, the absence of harm is a neutral factor in my considerations.
15. Further, I appreciate that the appellant not only engaged constructively with the
    local planning authority and made genuine and material design revisions to try and
    address pre-application issues raised by the local planning authority. In the light of
    this the appellant has raised concerns that the Delegated Report failed engage
    adequately with the revisions made by the appellant in the light of those
    negotiations. This is however not relevant to my consideration of the planning
    merits of this appeal which I have considered on the planning merits of the proposal
    before me.
16. Furthermore, whilst I am sympathetic to the fact that the appeal proposal is a
    redesign, taking into account issues raised during earlier considerations with the
    Council, I can only assess the current proposal on the basis of the design before
    me.
17. My attention has been drawn to a number of side and rear extensions for which
    planning permission has been granted elsewhere in Halsford Park Road. Whatever
    the background to those cases, their existence is not an appropriate justification for
    permitting the development here which I have considered on the basis of its
    particular design and planning merits.
Conclusions
18. For the reasons set out above I have concluded that the proposed development
    would not adversely affect the living conditions of the occupiers of No 72 in terms of
    loss of light to or outlook from their kitchen. However, I consider that this factor is
    outweighed by the unacceptable harm that would ensue to the architectural
    integrity of the host property and thereby the character and appearance of the
    street scene. To my mind these are compelling objections. I have considered all
    the other matters raised, but none change my overall conclusion, reached on the
    planning merits of the proposal, that the appeal should be dismissed.



Philip Willmer
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
