Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 September 2026
by N Bromley BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012391
40 Lowlands Avenue, Streetly, Sutton Coldfield B74 3QN
    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    The appeal is made by Mr. Mani Johal against the decision of Walsall Metropolitan Borough Council.
    The application Ref is 26/0106.
    The development proposed is described as “Retrospective planning application for first floor side
     extension and loft conversion with dormer”.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    The address of the appeal site given on the original planning application form was
      incomplete. Therefore, the address in the banner heading above is taken from the
      appeal form as it is more comprehensive.
3.    I have assessed the appeal scheme based on the plans before me, but I observed
      at the time of the site visit that the external works of the development were largely
      complete. I have dealt with the appeal on that basis.
4.    During the appeal process a new National Planning Policy Framework
      (Framework) was published on 17 August 2026. As the policy content of the
      Framework, insofar as it relates to this case, has not significantly changed, I have
      not sought submissions on the new Framework, and I am satisfied that no party’s
      interests have been prejudiced by taking this approach. I have had regard to the
      Framework in reaching my decision.
Main Issues
5.    The main issues are the effect of the development on:
               the character and appearance of the area; and
               the living conditions of the neighbouring occupiers of 30 and 32 Blackwood
                Drive, with regard to outlook and privacy.
Reasons
Character and appearance
6.    The appeal site comprises a two-storey, semi-detached house, at the end of a row
      of residential properties that front Lowlands Avenue, close to the junction with
      Blackwood Drive. The property has a frontage parking area, and a sizeable rear
      garden.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012391


7.       The street scene is characterised by traditional two storey semi-detached houses
         within a quiet, suburban residential setting. While many of the houses along the
         road retain their original appearance, a number have been extended. Indeed, there
         are numerous examples of first floor side extensions and roof additions within the
         street scene. In particular, reference has been made to the existing roof alterations
         to 41, 43 and 45 Lowlands Avenue.
8.       When viewed from the front of the host property the appeal scheme has a similar
         appearance to the extension and roof alteration at 41 Lowlands Avenue (No 41),
         which has previously had planning permission1 granted. However, the roof
         alteration to No 41 is not prominent due to its size and position towards the rear of
         the property. The limited spacing between dwellings also restricts views of that
         development from the road. This is also the case for other roof alterations in this
         part of the street scene.
9.       In contrast, the appeal scheme, comprising a hip to gable enlargement and rear
         dormer window, is a large, bulky extension to the roof. It is prominent due to the
         juxtaposition of the host property with the adjacent house, 32 Blackwood Drive (No
         32), which is set back from Lowlands Avenue by its side garden, allowing views of
         the large roof addition. In particular, the hip to gable enlargement is tall and with its
         connection to the first-floor extension it has a notable mass. Combined with the
         dark grey tile hanging, the appeal scheme has a dominant, abrupt appearance that
         is incongruous within the street.
10. My attention has been drawn to a rear dormer window at 5 Lowlands Avenue (No
    5) which is highly visible from that part of the road. Even so, it has a traditional
    design that sits comfortably within the rear roof slope of that house. As such, it is
    not comparable to the appeal scheme. Likewise, a small dormer window in the
    side roof slope of No 32 is a proportionate addition to that property and despite it
    being visible it is not dominant. Given this, these examples do not add weight in
    favour of the development, and I have determined the case before me on its own
    merits.
11. For the reasons outlined above, I conclude that the development unacceptably
    harms the character and appearance of the area. Therefore, it conflicts with
    Policies GP2 and ENV32 of the Walsall Unitary Development Plan 2005 (the
    WUDP), and Policies CSP4, ENV2 and ENV3 of the Black Country Core Strategy
    2011 (the BCCS), which together and amongst other things, seek to resist poorly
    designed developments, and expect all development to make a positive
    contribution to the quality of the environment.
Living conditions
12. Windows in the rear elevations of 30 Blackwood Drive (No 30) and No 32 have an
    outlook towards the side boundary of the appeal site and the side wall of the first-
    floor side extension and the hip to gable enlargement, with dormer window.
13. The first-floor side extension and the roof enlargement increase the amount of built
    development at the end of the gardens of No 30 and No 32. However, the hipped
    roof of the first-floor extension slopes away from the side boundary. In addition, the
    hip to gable enlargement, with dormer window, is set away from the boundary. In
    combination with the separation distance and juxtaposition of the appeal scheme

1
    Council reference: 23/0768


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
Appeal Decision 6012391


       with the rear ground floor windows of No 30 and No 32, the extension and roof
       alterations are not overbearing. Therefore, the appeal scheme does not
       unacceptably harm the outlook from the rear ground floor windows of No 30 and
       No 32.
14. Landing and bathroom windows in the side and rear elevations of the extension
    and dormer window could be controlled by a suitably worded planning condition to
    ensure that the existing obscure glazing in those windows is retained. How those
    windows open could also be restricted. Furthermore, a rear bedroom window in
    the dormer window is a considerable distance away from the rear elevations of
    neighbouring properties along Blackwood Drive and Frankburn Road. Therefore,
    the appeal scheme would not result in a significant loss of privacy to the occupiers
    of neighbouring houses.
15. For the above reasons, I conclude that the development would not cause
    unacceptable harm to the living conditions of the neighbouring occupiers of 30 and
    32 Blackwood Drive, with regard to outlook and privacy. As such, it would not
    conflict with Policies GP2 and ENV32 of the WUDP, and Policies CSP4, ENV2 and
    ENV3 of the BCCS. These together, and amongst other things, seek good place
    making and developments that do not result in overlooking and loss of privacy.
Other Matters
16. Reference has been made to a possible fallback position should the appeal be
    dismissed. Notably, the construction of a hip to gable extension to the existing
    dwelling along with a rear box dormer, which I am told could be constructed under
    the provisions of Schedule 2, Part 1, Class B of the Town and Country Planning
    (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015. The appellant suggests
    that they would unquestionably look to adjust the works carried out on site to bring
    them in line with Permitted Development requirements.
17. For significant weight to be afforded to a fallback position it would need to be
    equally or more harmful than the appeal scheme. Plans have not been submitted
    to show the extent of a development that could be carried out as a fallback.
    Particularly when compared to the appeal scheme. Even so, the appellant
    suggests that the alterations to the roof that could be carried out as a fallback
    would not be as great as the appeal scheme. In these circumstances, and on the
    evidence before me, I am not persuaded that the fallback position would be as
    harmful as the appeal scheme, and I afford the matter limited weight.
18. The proposal would provide additional living accommodation for the occupiers, but
    any associated benefits would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects
    of the development on the character and appearance of the area.
Conclusion
19. The development conflicts with the development plan and the material
    considerations do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in
    accordance with it. Accordingly, for the reasons given, the appeal is dismissed.

N Bromley
INSPECTOR



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
