 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 21 August 2026
 by Victor Callister BA(Hons) PGC(Oxon) DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 2 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012774
 1 Beamway, Dagenham, Barking and Dagenham RM10 8XR
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Julian Hall against the decision of the London Borough of Barking and
      Dagenham Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00353/HSE.
 •    The development proposed is a new extension to front at ground floor level. Creation of new
      cloakroom. Single storey extension to front of property. Materials to match
      existing. Flat roof with canopy arrangement to blend in with canopy as existing. Extension size
      1.5mx2.2m.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a new extension to
   front at ground floor level. Creation of new cloakroom. Single storey extension to
   front of property. Materials to match existing. Flat roof with canopy arrangement to
   blend in with canopy as existing. Extension size 1.5mx2.2m at 1 Beamway,
   Dagenham, Barking and Dagenham RM10 8XR in accordance with the terms of the
   application, Ref 26/00353/HSE, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
              following approved plans: 000 1BW, 1BW 002, 1BW 003A, 1BW 004A, 1BW
              005, 1BW 006, 1BW 007A, 1BW 009A and 100 1BW,
Preliminary Matters
2. Subsequent to the decision made by the Council on the application to which this
   appeal relates, the Government published a revised National Planning Policy
   Framework (August 2026) (the Framework). I consider that there have been no
   major changes relevant to the main issues in this appeal. It will therefore not
   prejudice any party by making my decision with regard to the revised Framework.
Main Issue
3. The main issue is the effect on the character and appearance of the host dwelling
   and that of the local area.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012774


Reasons
4. The appeal dwelling is a two storey semi-detached house. It is located in a street
   fronted by a variety of predominantly residential properties varying in type, scale and
   age. The majority of the older semi-detached and terraced properties have
   undergone some form of alteration and extension, although the majority of
   extensions are to the rear of these properties. However, as well as having a rear
   extension, the appeal dwelling has been the subject of substantial side extensions.
5. The existing side extensions are set back from the original front elevation and sit
   predominantly behind a brick built electricity substation that sits on its own plot that
   the appeal plot wraps around. The rear of this substation aligns with the original
   front elevation of the appeal dwelling, and, due to its scale, position and industrial
   appearance, appears as a prominent and detrimental element within the existing
   street scene. Its appearance is softened somewhat by the two storey side
   extensions to the appeal dwelling. These infill much of the original gap that would
   have been between the appeal dwelling and its detached neighbour, and within
   which the sub-station would have originally appeared more prominently and as a
   significantly more discordant element within the residential streetscene.
6. The appeal proposal is for a relatively small single storey extension that would sit in
   front of the existing frontmost two storey side extension, with its front wall aligning
   with the original front elevation. The proposed extension would have a flat roof, but
   this would sit behind an extension to the existing front entrance canopy. This
   proposal follows a refusal of an earlier application that included a rear extension that
   is now omitted and includes design changes, including the proposed extended
   porch canopy.
7. Although the appeal dwelling has been the subject of existing substantial rear and
   side extensions that demonstrably alter the visual balance between the appeal
   dwelling and its semi-detached pair, as set out above, these extensions are set well
   back from the street frontage and result in other benefits to the local streetscene, as
   detailed above. The appeal proposal is not of a scale that would read as a
   significant increase in scale of the appeal dwelling, but, due to its proposed
   positioning to the side of the existing main entrance, being set in line with the
   original front elevation and the extension of the existing canopy, it would appear as
   a complimentary and subordinate addition to the appeal dwelling.
8. As such, the proposal would not result in any detrimental effect on the character and
   appearance of the appeal dwelling and would not add significantly to the existing
   bulk and visual imbalance between the appeal dwelling and its semi-detached pair.
   Consequently, due to its small scale and matching of design and materials to
   existing, would not result in the appeal dwelling detracting from the local street
   scene. Therefore, I find that the proposal accords with the design advice for front
   extensions and porches set out in Section 5.1 and 5.2 of the Barking and
   Dagenham Residential Extensions and Alterations Supplementary Planning
   Documents (2012) (the SPD).
9. For these reasons, I find that the proposal would not result in any significant harm to
   the character and appearance of the appeal dwelling and that of the local area. As
   such, it would accord with Policies SP2, DMD1 and DMD5 of the London Borough of
   Barking and Dagenham’s Local Plan (2024), Policy D1 of the London Plan (2021)
   and Policy DP3 of the Framework. Collectively these seek development that is of


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
 Appeal Decision 6012774


     high quality design, is sympathetic and subordinate to the design of the original
     dwelling and relate to their local area.
10. The Council’s decision finds that the appeal development is contrary to policy D4 of
    the London Plan (2021). As policy D4 relates to policy guidance and design
    management procedures for London planning authorities, I have not come to this
    same conclusion.
Conditions
11. I have only attached the standard timing of implementation and compliance with
    approved plans conditions.
Conclusion
12. The appeal is allowed.



Victor Callister
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     3
