Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 September 2026
by Gary Deane BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 01 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012392
40 Brook Avenue, Timperley, Trafford WA15 6SJ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Robert Lee against the decision of Trafford Metropolitan Borough Council.
•   The application reference is 119061/HHA/26.
•   The development proposed is the erection of a double storey extension to the rear of the property.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural and preliminary matters
2. The submitted plan denotes the external area above the single storey element of
   the proposed rear extension as a ‘terrace area’. Nevertheless, the written evidence
   refers to this area as a balcony. For consistency, I shall do the same.
3. The appellant has referred to an amended scheme that incorporates a parapet wall.
   However, no such wall is shown on the plans that were before the Council when
   the decision was taken to refuse planning permission. The appeal must be
   determined on the basis of the proposal as it shown on those drawings.
4. A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
   17 August 2026. It replaces the previous version to which the Council has referred.
   As the Framework is a material consideration, I have had regard to it in reaching
   my decision. The Framework does not raise any new matters that are
   determinative to the outcome of this appeal.
Main issue
5. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of
   the occupiers of 38a Brook Avenue with particular regard to privacy.
Reasons
6. The proposal is to extend the appeal property, which is a 2-storey detached
   dwelling, with a part single storey, part 2-storey rear addition that would include a
   first-floor balcony enclosed by a glass balustrade. The new balcony would form a
   platform on which people would be able to gather and stand or sit outside. Views
   from this vantage point would be possible towards the side and rear of the property
   that is adjacent to the site, which is 38a Brook Avenue.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012392


7. The elevated position, outward projection and position of the new balcony close to
   the shared boundary with No 38a would provide views towards the rear garden of
   this neighbouring property. These views would not be available to the same extent
   from the existing first-floor rear windows of No 40.
8. In my experience, some mutual overlooking is a common characteristic of
   properties that stand side by side in built-up areas. However, in this case, a person
   standing on the proposed balcony would have direct views towards the back
   garden of No 38a from a raised position and at reasonably close range. This
   arrangement would cause significant harm to the neighbours’ enjoyment of their
   rear garden due to an unacceptable loss of privacy.
9. The new balcony would also allow some views back towards the first-floor rear
   windows of No 38a. Those views would be at an oblique angle and would be more
   limited than those of the neighbouring rear garden. Nevertheless, this adds to the
   overlooking problems that I have identified.
10. On the main issue, I conclude that the proposed development would cause
    significant harm to the living conditions of the occupiers of No 38a. As such, it
    conflicts with Policy L7.3 of the Trafford Local Plan: Core Strategy. This policy
    states that development must not prejudice the amenity of the occupants of
    adjacent properties by reason of overlooking, amongst other things. It is also
    contrary to the guidance in the Council’s Supplementary Planning Document SPD4:
    A Guide for Designing House Extensions and Alterations insofar as it aims to
    safeguard residential amenity.
Other matters
11. An interested party raises several additional concerns including potential noise and
    general disturbance from the use of the proposed balcony, its design and the effect
    on the character and appearance of the local area. I have taken these matters into
    account along with all the submitted evidence. However, given my findings on the
    main issue, these considerations have not been critical to my decision.
Conclusion
12. The proposed development would conflict with the development plan. There are no
    material considerations, including the Framework, which indicate that the decision
    should be taken otherwise than in accordance with the development plan.
13. For the reasons set out above, and having regard to all other matters raised, I
    therefore conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

Gary Deane
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
