 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 18 August 2026
 by Martin H Seddon BSc MPhil DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 24 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012129
 184 Armadale Road, Bolton BL3 4TP
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr T Fiaz against the decision of Bolton Council.
 •   The application Ref is 00104/26.
 •   The development proposed is installation of 1.87 metre boundary fence.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issues
2. The main issues are:
     •   the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area, and
     •   the effect on highway safety.
Preliminary Matter
3. The new boundary fence was constructed prior to the application to the Council. I
   have determined this appeal based upon the Council’s description of development.
Reasons
Character and appearance
4. The appeal concerns a two-storey semi-detached dwelling located in a corner
   position near the junction of Armadale Road and Birkenhills Drive. The property is
   within a modern housing area which is characterised by its open plan layout with
   mainly grassed areas fronting the individual houses, some of which include hedges
   and shrubs. There is also a large area of open space almost opposite the appeal
   site which adds to the green and pleasant setting of the overall development.
5. The appeal property previously included a significant grassed area which was
   separated from the side of the building by a wooden fence. The new fence which
   has been erected is around 1.87 metres in height. It is built in good quality timber
   with concrete posts and extends from the driveway following the bend in Armadale
   Road to the boundary of the appeal property with 1 Barrisdale Close. A gap has
   been left between the fence and the footway. The fence has curtailed the linear


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012129


     green area which originally included the grassed area next to the side of 1
     Barrisdale Close.
6. The appellant advises that the fence is located at a corner plot which naturally
   requires a different treatment from mid-terrace or internal plots. In this respect the
   appellant considers that corner plots frequently require greater enclosure owing to
   their increased exposure to public view and greater vulnerability to trespass and
   anti-social behaviour. I am advised that repeated fly-tipping has become a
   persistent problem at the corner of the appeal site. However, no evidence has been
   submitted to demonstrate that problem. I accept that the fence would provide
   greater privacy for the appellant’s property and that there is no harm to the living
   conditions or amenity of residents from loss of outlook. Nevertheless, that must be
   balanced against the loss of the open plan nature of the site within the wider public
   context. I find that the fence is harmful to the character and appearance of the
   surrounding area because of its location in a prominent position near to the road
   and because of its height and extent. It also is significantly harmful to the open plan
   design and character of the locality.
7. The fence conflicts with guidance in the Council’s Supplementary Planning
   Document – House Extensions (SPD) which states that where a residential area is
   open plan proposals for new walls or fences that front the highway should be
   avoided as this will harm the overall character of the estate. The SPD also indicates
   that fences abutting a pavement should not result in narrow strips of land which
   cannot be maintained as they result in land becoming an eyesore and overgrown.
   The appellant advises that he is fully committed to maintaining the strip of land
   between the fence and the footway. However, that may not always be the case in
   the event of a change in ownership of the property.
8. The appellant has drawn my attention to other examples of boundary fencing and
   hedges at other locations within the same housing estate. I have no information as
   to how these other examples of fencing came about. Whilst these other instances
   are a material consideration, I must determine this appeal based upon its particular
   site circumstances having regard to relevant development plan policies.
9. I find that the boundary fencing has a significant harmful effect on the character and
   appearance of the area. It therefore fails to comply with policy JP-P1 of the Places
   for Everyone Joint Development Plan which, amongst other things, seeks to ensure
   distinctive places with a clear identity, and with high quality and well managed
   green infrastructure.
Highway safety
10. Armadale Road is a significant distributor road serving the residential area and a
    bus route. The Highway Authority considered that the visibility splay for the
    driveway had been plotted incorrectly and that the envelope needed to be indicated
    to the kerb line on the bend. The appellant has submitted a revised drawing in this
    respect. However, no technical response is available from the Highway Authority.
11. The appellant maintains that the fence does not materially impede visibility for
    motorists exiting the driveway or travelling along Armadale Road and alleges that
    there is no objective evidence demonstrating that it has caused accidents or unsafe
    highway conditions. It is stated that concerns expressed by third parties largely
    reflect subjective perceptions rather than technical evidence.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
 Appeal Decision 6012129


12. At my site visit it was apparent that the part of the fence, separated from the
    driveway of the appeal building by a small, grassed area, blocks views of traffic
    travelling downhill around the bend towards the junction of Armadale Road and
    Birkenhill Drive, whereas the view of approaching traffic downhill along Armadale
    Road would have been greater when the fence was not in place. Birkenhill Drive
    serves a significant number of properties with associated traffic. Drivers wishing to
    make a right turn into Birkenhills Drive when approaching from the north-east will
    now have lesser degree of visibility of vehicles travelling towards them, downhill
    along Armadale Road, than previously when the bend in the road was next to a
    grassed area.
13. Pedestrians crossing Armadale Road at the south-east side of the fence would
    also have limited visibility of oncoming vehicles from the direction of the junction
    with Birkenhills Drive because of the location, curvature, and height of the fence.
    Whilst the submissions of third parties do not represent technical evidence it is
    clear to me that the fence would have a detrimental effect on vehicular and
    pedestrian users of the highway network at this point giving rise to potential
    highway safety issues. Therefore, there would be conflict with policies JP-C5 and
    JP-C8 of the Places for Everyone Joint Development Plan which concern the
    principles of streets for all and the transport requirements of new development.
The Planning Balance
14. The appellant submits that the development delivers clear benefits by improving the
    security, appearance, and maintenance of the property without causing harm to the
    amenity of neighbouring residents. In addition, that the highway reason for refusal
    is based upon an alleged lack of supporting evidence rather than any demonstrated
    highway danger. However, I consider that the alleged lack of harm from the
    boundary fence and claimed benefits are outweighed by the harm to the character
    and appearance of the area and the potential harm to highway and pedestrian
    safety.
Conclusion
15. For the reasons given above, the development conflicts with the development plan
    as a whole and should be dismissed.

Martin H Seddon
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
