 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 19 August 2026
 by Ian McHugh DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 10 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012706
 81 Marleston Lane, Middlebeck, Newark on Trent, NG24 3WD
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr John Mersh, Palmers of Trent Bridge, against the decision of Newark and
      Sherwood District Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00481/HOUSE.
 •    The development proposed is to extend existing fence boundary to hedge line to increase garden
      space.

Procedural Matter
1. On 17 August 2026, the Government published the National Planning Policy
   Framework 2026 (NPPF). It does not contain any provisions that raise material
   issues in respect of this appeal and I have not found it necessary to seek
   comments from the main parties. Where relevant, I have made reference to the
   2026 version in my reasoning below.
Decision
2. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issues
3. The main issues are:
          •    The effect of the proposal on the appearance of the streetscene.
          •    The effect on the living conditions of the occupants on number 2 Raddle
               Way (number 2).
Reasons
Appearance of the Streetscene

4. The appeal property is a recently built detached dwelling, which is situated on a
   corner plot at the junction of Marleston Lane and Raddle Way. As is common on
   modern estates, the side garden area of the property is open with fencing to the
   rear garden set-back from the Raddle Way road frontage.
5. The appellant seeks to reposition the existing timber fencing onto the side
   boundary of the dwelling and it would return roughly half way along the side wall of
   the property. As a result, some of the side garden plus the front garden area would
   remain open.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012706


6. The Council states that the repositioning of the fence would result in an overly
   dominant feature because of its height, length and prominent position. It argues
   that it would be out of keeping with the open and verdant character of the area and
   harmful to the visual amenity of the streetscene. The Council also points to a
   conflict with its Design Code for this part of the development, which sought to
   achieve a spacious layout and sense of openness in the area.
7. The Council’s decision notice cites a conflict with Core Policy 9 of the Newark and
   Sherwood Core Strategy (2019) and with Policies DM5 and DM6 of the Newark and
   Sherwood Amended Allocations and Development Management DPD (2013).
8. These policies seek to ensure (amongst other things) that the design of new
   development is of a high standard and has regard to the character of the area.
   These requirements are also reflected in the guidance contained in the Council’s
   Supplementary Planning Document – Householder Development.
9. In addition, Policy DP3 of the NPPF 2026 states that development proposals
   should respond to their context so that they integrate with and enhance their
   surroundings.
10. Whilst there are other examples of enclosed side gardens in the locality, I
    recognise that the open areas on corner plots can make a positive contribution to
    the streetscene. In this case, whilst the fencing would be repositioned up to the
    side boundary of the plot, an area of landscaping would be retained between the
    fence and the public pavement and the road. Consequently, the open and verdant
    appearance of the corner facing Raddle Way would largely be retained. Therefore,
    I do not find against the proposal on this issue.
Living Conditions
11. Number 2 contains a main ground floor window close to the existing rear boundary
    of the appeal property. Whilst the existing fence projects beyond this window, it
    would extend significantly further forward as a result of the appeal proposal. It
    would be 1.8m high and I consider that it would have an overbearing impact on the
    outlook from the window and front garden of number 2.
12. On this issue, I therefore conclude that there would be harm to the amenity of the
    occupants of number 2. Consequently, the proposal would conflict with Policies
    DM5 and DM6 of the Amended Allocations and Development Management DPD
    (2013). These policies seek to ensure that new developments do not have an
    adverse impact on neighbours.
13. I have noted that the appellant has suggested amending the proposal in order to
    overcome the Council’s concerns. However, planning appeals are not a
    mechanism for making amendments and I am required to determine the proposal
    as submitted to the Council.
Conclusion
14. For the reasons given above in relation to living conditions, it is concluded that the
    appeal be dismissed.



Ian McHugh             INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
