 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 24 August 2026
 by John D Allan BA(Hons) BTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 15 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012278
 2 Tregaron Avenue, Hornsey, Haringey, London N8 9EY
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr B Connor against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
      Haringey.
 •    The application Ref is HGY/2026/0783.
 •    The development proposed is the erection of a glass conservatory extension.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2. During the course of the appeal, the revised National Planning Policy Framework
   2026 (the Framework 2026) was published. Both parties were invited to comment
   about the relevance of the Framework 2026 to their case.
Main Issues
3. The main issues are the effects of the proposal upon the character and appearance
   of the host property and wider area, and upon the living conditions at 4 Tregaron
   Avenue with particular regards to visual impact and privacy.
Reasons
Character and Appearance
4. The appeal relates to a detached, part two-storey part three-storey dwelling with a
   lower ground floor to the rear leading to a modest sized private garden set below
   street level. The immediately adjoining property to the east side at No 4 is two-
   storey front and rear. No 2 has previously been extended with side and rear
   extensions and is separated from the side boundary and flank wall of No 4 by the
   width of a narrow passage. The area is residential in character comprising a mix of
   property types and styles, many of which have been altered in a variety of forms
   beyond their original appearance.
5. The appeal property has an existing narrow rear outrigger across part of its rear
   elevation which reads as a flat roof, three-storey feature with a terrace above when
   viewed from the garden and its surrounds. To the side of this and across the
   remaining width of the property nearest to No 4 is a flat roof extension at lower
   ground and ground floor levels. The proposal is to add a contemporary, frameless

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012278


     glass conservatory as a reading room, infilling at first-floor level over the existing
     rear extension to a depth of just over 3.5m, and to be accessed from one side via
     an internal corridor within the outrigger. The extension, described as having a flat
     glass roof, which would be tucked below the eaves to the house, would be set back
     from the parapet of the existing flat roof area by 600mm to the rear and side
     nearest to No 4.
6. The appellant has described the seamless structural glass construction of the
   proposed conservatory, which I accept would be both lightweight in appearance
   and subordinate in scale relative to the size of the dwelling overall. As a sedentary
   glazed box, the addition would be fairly non-intrusive without significantly impacting
   the architectural composition of the existing building. However, as an internal living
   space it would likely function with fixtures and fittings, including illumination from
   within during hours of poor daylight and darkness, all of which along, with its
   occupancy by any number of persons, would be evident from outside due to its
   visual transparency. As such, it would not always be invisible to the eye, instead at
   times appearing as an active and uncontained illuminated box.
7. A suggestion by the appellant that the proposal would be an improvement to the
   dwelling’s rear elevation is unfounded. I saw nothing about the appearance of the
   existing dwelling to be visually unappealing or which would significantly benefit from
   the extension. My overall impression is that despite its fully glazed form, the
   proposal would add a functioning living space that would be openly seen from the
   wider surrounds of neighbouring properties. Due to its size, elevated position and
   choice of materials, the conservatory would appear as an incongruous adjunct that
   would be both visually intrusive and alien in its setting, neither reflecting nor
   complementing the form of the building. As such it would detract from the character
   and appearance of the existing dwelling to the detriment of the wider visual
   amenities of the surroundings.
Living Conditions
8. No 4 is unextended to the rear and sits close to the appeal property, with its rear
   elevation marginally set behind the two-storey scale of No 2. The proposed
   conservatory would project over 3.5m beyond the rear elevation of No 4, nearest to
   a first-floor window which is understood to serve a bedroom.
9. As a lightweight glazed structure, the extension would be unlikely to significantly
   impact levels of daylight to any living spaces within No 4. Due also to the north
   facing rear elevations of these properties, there would be little, if any,
   overshadowing or impact upon levels of direct sunlight to the neighbouring
   property.
10. The side wall of the conservatory is proposed to be obscurely glazed up to a height
    of 1.7m above its floor level. This would mitigate any direct overlooking from the
    internal space towards No 4 and could be secured by condition. However, because
    of the extension’s transparency, its use and function would not go unnoticed. As
    such, there would be a clear and unreasonable perception of being overlooked,
    both at a common first-floor level between the neighbouring properties from within
    the nearest living space at No 4, and from above within the garden area set nearest
    to the rear elevation of the neighbouring property, where levels of privacy can
    usually be expected to be at their highest and enjoyed without fear of intrusion.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision 6012278


11. In addition, due to its depth and position close to the boundary with No 4, the
    physical presence of the extension associated with its use would create a sense of
    additional built form that would be visually intrusive at close quarters in the outlook
    from the nearest first-floor window and from the nearest adjoining garden space.
    This in turn would create an overbearing impression that I consider would be further
    harmful and unneighbourly.
Conclusions
12. By failing to sensitively integrate with its surroundings through preservation of the
    character and appearance of the dwelling and wider area, and by failing to maintain
    acceptable living standards for the neighbouring occupiers, there would be clear
    conflict with Policies DM1 and DM12 of the Development Management
    Development Plan Document, adopted in 2017, and with Policy SP11 of Haringey’s
    Local Plan Strategic Policies 2013 - 2026, adopted in 2013. Between them these
    seek to ensure that new development is of the highest quality that respects and
    contributes to local character and takes account of the privacy and amenity of
    neighbouring uses. For the same reasons, notwithstanding the sustainable qualities
    of the proposal in terms of the site’s location and the innovative design of the
    conservatory, the proposal overall would fail to accord with all the principles
    required for making effective use of land and achieving well-designed places within
    the national decision-making policies L2 and DP3 of the Framework 2026.
13. Therefore, for the reasons given, the appeal is dismissed.



John D Allan
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
