 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 26 August 2026
 By Michael Evans BA MA MPhil DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date:02 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012981
 Sunny Side, 41 Lemon Grove, Whitehill, Bordon, Hampshire GU35 9BD
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Paul King against the decision of East Hampshire District Council.
 •    The application Ref is EHDC-25-1177-HSE.
 •    The development proposed is a front porch.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a front porch, at
   Sunny Side, 41 Lemon Grove, Whitehill, Bordon, Hampshire GU35 9BD, in
   accordance with the terms of the application, Ref EHDC-25-1177-HSE and the
   plans submitted with it, subject to the following conditions:
     1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
        date of this decision.
     2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
        following approved plans: 001.0, 002, 003, 003.1 and 004.0.
     3) The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
        development hereby permitted shall match those used in the existing dwelling.
Main Issues
2. The main issues in this appeal are:
     -   The effect on the character and appearance of the host dwelling, locality and
         streetscene.
     -   The effect on the living conditions of the occupiers of the adjacent dwelling at 43
         Lemon Grove, with regard to outlook, daylight and sunlight.
Reasons
Character and appearance
3. The proposal concerns a chalet style detached dwelling. The front porch addition
   would abut the boundary with the adjacent property at No 43, while projecting
   forward of the front of the host dwelling. However, it would have a fairly modest
   depth by comparison with that of the main flank wall and its width would be a
   particularly small proportion of that of the front elevation of the dwelling. The eaves
   level of its roof would be slightly below that of the main roof of the property. The

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012981


     hipped roof form would also significantly limit its bulk. Consequently, rather than
     being unduly dominant and competing with the host dwelling, the single storey front
     extension would be a subservient feature.
4. The adjacent two storey property at No 39 projects significantly forward of the front
   of the host dwelling. Further to the west the building line exhibits significant
   variation. Beyond the dwelling immediately to the east is a block of flats with a
   noticeably stepped front elevation. The front extension would not project nearer to
   the street than the dwelling at No 39. As a result, the extended dwelling would be
   compatible with the pattern of development in the vicinity, with no adverse effect
   arising in relation to building lines.
5. Due to the above factors, the porch would not appear incongruous or visually
   intrusive and the character and appearance of the host dwelling, locality and
   streetscene would not be harmed.
6. There would be compliance with East Hampshire District Local Plan: Joint Core
   Strategy (JCS), Adopted June 2014, Policy CP29, which among other things, seeks
   to ensure that development respects the characteristics of the area.
7. The most relevant part of the Council’s Residential Extensions & Householder
   Development Supplementary Planning Document, July 2018, concerns front
   extensions. The key points of this part indicate that porches should be subservient
   to the original building and not upset building lines and local character, which would
   be complied with in this case.
Living conditions
8. The nearest window in the front of the neighbouring bungalow at No 43 is fairly
   wide and set back from the boundary. In this context and despite it abutting the
   boundary, the pitched and hipped roof form, together with the relatively modest
   height of the extension, would prevent any undue reduction in outlook, daylight or
   sunlight at the adjacent property.
9. For these reasons it is concluded that the living conditions of the occupiers of the
   adjacent dwelling would not be harmed. JCS Policy CP27 is the most relevant of
   those referred to in the Council’s decision notice in relation to this matter. The
   scheme would accord with the aims of this policy to prevent overshadowing having
   an unacceptable effect.
Conclusion
10. The proposal would not result in any harm and comply with the development plan.
    There are no other material considerations that indicate a decision should be made
    other than in accordance with the development plan. Accordingly, the appeal is
    allowed.
Conditions
11. In the interest of certainty, a condition specifying the approved plans should be
    imposed. The materials used should match those of the host dwelling to protect the
    appearance of the locality.
M Evans
INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
