 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 27 August 2026
 by D J Barnes MBA BSc(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date:11 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012686
 Trinity Point, New Road, Halesowen B63 3HY
 •    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
      Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
      consent.
 •    The appeal is made by Kevin Sharkey (Trinity Point West Holdings Limited) against the decision of
      Dudley Metropolitan Borough Council.
 •    The application Ref is P26/0341.
 •    The advertisement proposed is the siting of 1 no. internally illuminated digital display board


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. The Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements) (England) Regulations
   2007 (the Regulations) require that applications for the display of advertisements
   are considered in terms of amenity and public safety. Although the Council has
   referred to Policy D12 of the Dudley Borough Development Strategy (DBDS) which
   it considers relevant to this appeal it cannot, by itself, be decisive but is a material
   consideration in the determination of this appeal.
3. The updated National Planning Policy Framework was published in August 2026
   but does not raise any new matters which affect the assessment of this appeal
   scheme.
Main Issue
4. It is considered that the main issue is the effect of the proposed advertisement on
   visual amenity.
Reasons
5. The main part of appeal property is 6-storeys in height site above a ground floor
   level providing access to the building and car parking spaces. There is a 3-storey
   addition projecting towards New Road. By reason of its fenestration, the design of
   the property has a strong horizontal emphasis with alternate bands of glazing and
   cladding albeit with brick being the predominant external material at ground floor
   level.
6. The proposed advertisement is a LED screen which would be erected on the side
   elevation of the 3-storey projection. The appeal scheme would be visible when


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012686


    travelling west along New Road. The illuminated images displayed on the
    proposed advertisement would be static but would change at frequent intervals.
    The appellant has identified that the level of illumination emitted by the proposed
    LED screen would accord with the guidance provided by the Institution of Lighting
    Professionals during both the daytime and nighttime periods.
7. The property is situated adjacent to a roundabout within an area comprising a mix
   of uses. Erected on the appeal property and other near-by buildings are a variety
   of advertisements of different designs and sizes which vary in height above ground
   level. Some of the signs are illuminated and others are simple hanging banners.
8. There is a freestanding LED advertisement erected on the side elevation of a 2-
   storey building sited adjacent to the roundabout. The available evidence indicates
   that this LED advertisement replaced an illuminated billboard style sign albeit the
   full planning circumstances have not been provided. However, this advertisement
   is not elevated above ground level to the same height as the appeal scheme and is
   viewed against the context of a 2-storey brick wall and trees.
9. Although the appeal scheme would not be disproportionate in size when compared
   to the property as a whole, it would visually and physically dominate the side
   elevation of the projection. The siting of the proposed sign would cause harm to
   the character and appearance of the property because it would substantially
   obscure 2 bands of glazing and 1 complete band of cladding of the projection’s side
   elevation. This siting would not respect the horizontal emphasis of the property’s
   design and would materially change the visual appearance of the projection.
10. The identified harm would be accentuated by the appeal scheme’s visual
    prominence associated with its elevated siting, size and illumination in a location
    where other elevated signs erected on near-by commercial buildings, including the
    3-storey office building on the opposite side of New Road, are of a smaller scale
    and do not possess the same level of illumination.
11. For the reasons given, it is concluded that the proposed advertisement would
    cause unacceptable harm to the visual amenity and it would also conflict with
    DBDS Policy 12 concerning signs not being detrimental to the appearance of the
    buildings on which they are displayed and avoiding obscuring any elevational
    design details. For the reasons given, it is concluded that the appeal should be
    dismissed.



D J Barnes
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
