Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 19 August 2026

by Andrew Dale BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date:03 September 2026


 Appeal ref. 6012024
 124 Ferrars Road, Sheffield S9 1SA
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mrs Suriya Khan against the decision of Sheffield City Council.
 •   The application ref. is 26/00753/FUL.
 •   The development proposed is: Single storey rear extension with WC/shower for disability use.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary matters
2. The grounds of appeal express dissatisfaction with the Council for failing to give an
   opportunity to make changes to the extension which is needed for the appellant’s
   disabled son and for allegedly not visiting the appeal site. However frustrating such
   concerns might be, the chosen householder appeal procedure does not permit the
   Council to respond directly to the points raised and these are not matters for me as
   part of my remit in determining this appeal, which is confined to the particular
   planning merits of the scheme as submitted to the Council.
3. A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
   17 August 2026. The new 2026 version does not however materially differ from the
   previous version insofar as it relates to the main issues in this householder appeal.
   The cases of the main parties will not therefore be prejudiced by my reference to
   the new version. I have proceeded on this basis.
Main issues
4. The main issues are the effect of the proposed extension upon the living conditions
   of the occupiers of the terraced host property, with particular reference to the
   provision of private outdoor amenity space and its effect upon the residential
   amenity of the neighbouring dwellings at 122 and 126 Ferrars Road, with particular
   regard to the potential for loss of daylight, sunlight, outlook and privacy.
Reasons
5. The appeal concerns a 2-storey, terraced house in an established residential street.
   Like the other houses in the same terrace on the western side of Ferrars Road, it
   was built with a rear off-shot or outrigger. Whilst the host property has a single


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012024


    storey, lean-to style, rear off-shot about 3m in depth, some other properties such as
    no. 122 to the north were built with a 2-storey rear off-shot. Beyond the original
    off-shot at no. 122, there is a single storey addition of more recent construction, an
    old brick shed and a sizeable outbuilding which appears to be unfinished.
6. The appellant seeks to elongate the rear off-shot to provide a larger kitchen and a
   bathroom. The extension would have a depth beyond the existing rear off-shot of
   about 5m and a width of about 2.46m and be set away from the boundary wall to
   no. 122 by about 1.175m. The route of an existing right of way across the garden to
   no. 122 would be adjusted. The appellant explains how the scheme would allow for
   a second toilet/shower room which would greatly improve the living conditions of a
   family member with an extensive set of special needs.
7. Planning law requires that applications for planning permission be determined in
   accordance with the development plan, unless material considerations indicate
   otherwise. The most relevant policies of the development plan include policy CS 74
   of the Sheffield Core Strategy 2009 (SCS) and saved policies H14 and BE5 of the
   Sheffield Unitary Development Plan 1998 (SUDP). These policies, which all
   encourage good design in various ways, accord with the broad thrust of the
   Framework. I have also been referred to the Council’s Designing House Extensions
   Supplementary Planning Guidance (SPG). The SPG is not policy in itself but it
   carries weight as a material consideration in decision making.
The provision of private outdoor amenity space
8. The proposal would result in the rear garden being somewhat smaller. The Council
   estimates that the existing rear amenity area amounts to about 57 sq.m and that
   about 40.5 sq.m would remain if the extension was to be built. These estimates
   have not been disputed by the appellant. They appear to me to be broadly
   accurate. The separation distance to the back boundary would be just over 7m if
   the new right of way is not excluded.
9. Guideline 4 of the SPG states that overdevelopment of a house plot with extensions
   that leave little garden space will not be permitted. In most circumstances the
   Council considers a garden size of 50 sq.m the minimum for houses with 2 or more
   bedrooms. A minimum separation distance to the back boundary of 10m is also
   normally required for reasons of neighbour’s privacy as well as amenity. Any
   extensions that would reduce garden areas below this size are unlikely to be
   considered acceptable, but exceptions may be made in areas of terraced housing.
10. Whilst these guideline dimensions would not be met, the remaining garden would
    still be of a size, shape and configuration which would provide a flexible outdoor
    area for this terraced house, including sufficient space for some forms of recreation
    and play, sitting out and relaxation, hanging washing and bin storage. The
    appellant may wish to forego the benefits of a larger garden, so as to provide the
    desired ground floor bathroom space for the family member with special needs.
    The separation distance to the back boundary would not lead to adverse
    implications for privacy or amenity as the sole rear-facing window would be to the
    bathroom and could be fitted with obscure glazing. No harm to the overall character
    of the area has been alleged by the Council. I consider that it would be reasonable
    to exercise the exception provided for in Guideline 4 of the SPG in this area of
    terraced housing.


                                            2
 Appeal Decision 6012024


11. I find on the first main issue that the proposed extension would not result in
     overdevelopment or unsatisfactory living conditions for the occupiers of the
     terraced host property, with particular reference to the provision of private outdoor
     amenity space. Consequently, it would not conflict with policy H14 of the SUDP, the
     most relevant development plan policy for this issue, which states, amongst other
     things, that new development will be permitted provided that the site would not be
     overdeveloped and there would be no serious loss of existing garden space which
     would harm the character of the neighbourhood.
Residential amenity of 122 and 126 Ferrars Road
12. In general, the off-shots and narrow side yards at the rear of these terraced
     properties have a close-knit relationship such that the occupiers tend to be mutually
     dependent on the maintenance of what openness there is at the rear of their
     dwellings in order to preserve their rather limited outlooks.
13. The extension would result in a significant depth of built development closer to the
    boundary with no. 122 than the existing outrigger at no. 124 and notably higher
    than both the existing boundary treatment and any wall or fence which could be
    constructed on that boundary as permitted development.
14. The rear ground floor of no. 122 has a window to a habitable room in the main rear
    wall very close to the common boundary and there are other ground floor windows
    in the opposing wall of its own rear off-shot and single storey addition. Even though
    the subject extension would have a single storey built form, it would impinge to an
    unacceptable degree upon the outlook from those adjacent ground floor windows,
    because of its proximity, height and excessive depth, reaching about 5m beyond
    the rear off-shot and about 8m beyond the main rear elevations of nos 122 and
    124. The extension would present a far more solid and oppressive sense of
    enclosure close the boundary to no. 122, give rise to a tunnelling effect and appear
    unduly overbearing and visually obtrusive to those neighbours.
15. The extension would inevitably cause at least some diminution of natural daylight
    reaching the rear ground floor rooms of no. 122. There would also be an adverse
    effect on the level of sunlight reaching those windows and some of the rear yard
    outside, particularly in the afternoon. This would compound its visually obtrusive
    effect and the loss of outlook. The extension would cause a loss of privacy for the
    occupiers of no. 122 since the proposed kitchen window would directly face
    towards a kitchen window in the side of no. 122 only about 3m away at a point
    where there is gap in the concrete panel boundary structure. Should the gap be
    filled in, that boundary structure is otherwise only about 1.55m high which is
    insufficient to materially alleviate the overlooking.
16. The extension would have no windows facing towards no. 126 and given that the
    extension would lie to the north of no. 126, there is unlikely to be any material loss
    of sunlight experienced by those neighbours. Daylight and sunlight are however
    different. Given the extent of its rearward projection, the extension would inevitably
    cause a loss of outlook to the rear window in the rear off-shot of no. 126 and at
    least some reduction in natural daylight reaching that window.
17. Guideline 5 of the SPG expects unreasonable overshadowing and overdominance
    of neighbouring dwellings to be avoided and in this regard advises that a single


                                             3
 Appeal Decision 6012024


    storey extension built adjacent to another dwelling may not extend more than 3m
    beyond that other dwelling. There would a very clear infringement of the guideline
    in this case. Guideline 6 of the SPG states that extensions should protect and
    maintain minimum levels of privacy. The scheme has not been designed with this
    guideline uppermost in the mind insofar as 122 Ferrars Road is concerned.
18. I find on the second main issue that the proposed extension would harm the
    residential amenity of the neighbouring dwellings at 122 and 126 Ferrars Road,
    with particular regard to the potential for loss of daylight, sunlight, outlook and
    privacy. As the design, form and layout of the scheme would not take sufficient
    account of the amenity of adjacent residential properties, there would be conflict
    with the design principles and aims of policy CS 74 of the SCS and policies H14
    and BE5 of the SUDP. Furthermore, the scheme would diverge too far from the
    design guidance set out in the SPG.
Other material considerations
19. In addition to other buildings, I saw that a single storey extension extends
    significantly beyond the original rear building line at 122 Ferrars Road. This is also
    well illustrated in the photographs within the appellant’s statement. The appellant,
    perhaps understandably, is perplexed as to why a similar development was not
    permitted by the Council at no. 124. However, I do not have any planning history
    about this neighbouring property before me for comparison purposes. In particular,
    no evidence has been submitted to show that any of the developments at the rear
    of no. 122 beyond its original 2-storey rear off-shot benefit from planning
    permission. Insofar as the second main issue in this appeal is concerned, there is
    variation in the physical context in that there are no immediate neighbouring
    dwellings on the northern flank of no. 122. The SPG notes that in some areas it will
    be possible to point to extensions permitted in the past that do not follow the
    guidelines and that examples of poor quality extensions will not normally be
    allowed to determine the quality of future extensions. This other case therefore has
    little bearing on the appeal before me which must be determined on its own merits.
20. I understand that the extension is required to help meet the needs of an individual
     family member with disabilities, a protected characteristic under the Equality Act
     2010 to which the Public Sector Equality Duty (PSED) applies and to which I have
     had due regard. I am also mindful of Article 1 of the First Protocol and Article 8 as
     set out under the Human Rights Act 1998, which require that decisions ensure
     respect for private and family life and the home.
21. Whilst the proposed development may provide more suitable accommodation to
    meet the needs of a family member, it does not follow from the PSED that the
    appeal should necessarily succeed. In the absence of any substantiated evidence, I
    have no way of knowing whether this particular proposal is the only means of
    improving the appellant’s home to meet those needs or whether such needs could
    be met in a less harmful way. Moreover, the larger part of the floor plan in the
    extension would be given over to a kitchen enlargement. In my view, the harm that
    would be caused to the residential amenity of the neighbouring dwellings outweighs
    the proposal’s benefits in terms of eliminating discrimination against persons with a
    protected characteristic. Moreover, whilst dismissing the appeal could interfere with
    the appellant’s human rights, these are qualified rights such that an interference



                                             4
 Appeal Decision 6012024


    may be justified where that is lawful and in the public interest. In this case, I
    consider that interference with those rights would be in accordance with the law
    and in pursuance of the well-established and legitimate aim of protecting the living
    conditions of neighbouring occupiers.
22. The concerns raised by the occupiers of both neighbouring properties about the
    proposed alterations to the right of way are noted. However, I agree with the
    Council that such shared private routes are a civil matter between neighbours. Any
    private law matters or disputes are more usually addressed by a solicitor who,
    amongst other things, would review the deeds of the affected properties.
Conclusion
23. For the reasons given and taking into account all other matters raised by all the
    parties, my finding on the second main issue is decisive to the outcome of the
    appeal. There is conflict with the development plan. I find no material
    considerations of sufficient weight to justify a grant of planning permission. The
    objections to the project could not be overcome by planning conditions. I therefore
    conclude that this appeal should not succeed.



   Andrew Dale
    INSPECTOR




                                            5
