 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 22 September 2026
 by Nicola Davies BA DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date:01 October 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012522
 Units 1-2, 3 Meadow Road Industrial Estate, Dale Road, Worthing, WEST SUSSEX
 BN11 2RU
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr Derrick Pountney of Pountney Tyres Limited against the decision of
     Worthing Council.
 •   The application Ref is AWDM/0338/26.
 •   The development proposed is the change of use of first floor from industrial (Use Class B2) to a
     small housing in multiple occupation (HMO) (Use Class C4) for on-site staff; new external fire
     escape; and roller shutter door to workshop.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) has
   been published since the planning application was determined by the Council. I
   have had regard to the revised Framework in reaching my decision.
3. I have taken the description of proposed development from the Council’s decision
   notice as this reflects the change of description that has been agreed between
   parties. In addition, I have had sight of correspondence relating to the site address.
   The address that I have used in the banner heading above appears to have been
   agreed between parties and has been used within the Council’s decision letter.
Main Issues
4. The main issues raised by this appeal are: -
     a) The loss of protected industrial floor space; and
     b) The effect of living at this location on the living conditions of future occupiers.
Reasons
Loss of industrial floor space
5. Policy DM11 of the Worthing Local Plan identifies Meadow Road Industrial Estate
   as a key employment area that seeks to protect and enhance employment sites.
   Part a) of this policy protects against the loss of existing premises, sites or
   floorspace which are used for, or last used for, employment uses, located within the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012522


     Key Employment Areas, to other uses. The proposal would result in the loss of
     employment floorspace and, as such, this would conflict with Part a) of Policy
     DM11.
6. Part c) of Policy DM11 recognises that these key employment areas are essential
   in maintaining a strong and diverse supply of employment sites and premises to
   meet the needs of the local economy. It also states that only in exceptional
   circumstances, where there is clear and robust evidence that the introduction of
   alternative uses is required to retain a diverse and resilient local economy, will such
   a change be considered. Part c) sets out criteria by which such proposals are to be
   assessed.
7. The appellant recognises that the first floor use would fall within a C4 small HMO
   use class. The Council has concluded that a new planning unit would be created.
   However, the appellant contends that the HMO would be ancillary to the B2 use as
   it would be occupied by staff pertaining to the business in a similar way to that of a
   caretaker flat above a factory or manager’s accommodation above a pub or at a
   holiday park. An HMO occupied by up to 6 unrelated individuals is different to
   those ancillary accommodation uses. The business operates daytime working
   hours and there is no significant activity during evenings or weekends. I do not
   consider that the HMO would be subordinate to or incidental to the B2 use of the
   building given its permanent occupation beyond normal working hours and days.
8. The proposed HMO would support the B2 industrial unit that operates at ground
   floor and is to assist with the ongoing viability of the business that operates at the
   site. It is highlighted that the accommodation would increase the business’s
   resilience, productivity and competitiveness as a job that comes with
   accommodation assists recruitment, staff retention and attracts seasonal staff and
   overseas workers. I accept that this would be a benefit of the proposal for the
   appellant.
9. At present the first floor space is underutilised and could be provided to staff cost
   free. Whilst it may not be suitable for the current occupiers for B2 usage or storage
   and is not needed by the appellant for office purposes, using the site for residential
   purposes would result in the inability of other business to operate at the site as a
   direct result of the loss of employment floorspace. This would negatively impact
   upon this key employment area and, as such, does not provide a justification for the
   loss of this space for employment purposes.
10. The proposed use of the first floor would negatively impact on the functioning of the
    key employment area. This is one of the criteria set out within Policy DM11. Whilst
    the accommodation may provide a benefit for the appellant this would not support a
    loss of employment floor space that would justify a departure from Policy DM11 of
    the Local Plan. As such, the proposal conflicts with Policy DM11 of the Local Plan.
Living conditions of future occupiers
11. The area is industrial in nature with a waste management site close by. Given the
    nature of the uses there would be lower levels of air quality and noise pollution than
    that within residential areas. I saw at my visit that there are movements by both
    vehicles and lorries, which are likely to emit pollutants, and that this part of the
    estate is heavily parked up by both vehicles and lorries. Future occupiers are
    extremely likely to experience issues related to air and noise pollution, as well as


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision 6012522


     issues to do with vehicle activity, which would result in harm to their living
     conditions. I acknowledge that some effects from the land uses may be lower
     outside of the main operating hours, nonetheless air pollutants can linger and other
     equipment, such as, air conditioning units and lighting may be in use 24 hours a
     day.
12. Further to the above, the site is located centrally within the industrial estate.
    Access and egress to the HMO would be through the estate and through those
    vehicular activities within the estate. There would be no separate dedicated
    pedestrian access for occupants. As such, this would give rise to conflict between
    pedestrians and vehicles and this would not be a safe environment for occupiers.
    Even if activities at the site would be reduced outside of normal working hours,
    given the nature of the locality and the multiple types of vehicles in the area, the
    site would not feel safe.
13. In addition, as noted above, there would be no dedicated route through the estate
    to the entrance of the accommodation, which is located toward the rear of the
    building. Whether or not anti-social behaviour would take place at the estate
    outside of operational hours, the perceptions of living within the estate would not be
    one of a safe place.
14. I acknowledge that the area has high accommodation costs relative to local wages
    and the workers themselves may be accepting of residing at the accommodation.
    Whilst some effects from the land uses may be lower outside of the main operating
    hours, for the above reasons the estate does not provide a suitable good quality
    living environment for residential occupiers.
15. For these reasons, I conclude that this would not be an acceptable location and
    would be harmful to the living conditions of future occupiers. The proposal would,
    therefore, conflict with Policies SP3 and DM5 of the Worthing Local Plan. These
    policies seek, amongst other matters, development to provide a high-quality built
    environment and be designed to achieve healthy, safe and secure places. This
    reflects the Framework’s objective of achieving well-designed places.
Other Matters
16. Planning conditions have been put forward by the appellant suggesting a tied
    occupancy condition that would link the residential accommodation to be occupied
    by employees of the B2 use and maximum occupancy of 6 persons could be
    imposed. However, I do not consider such conditions would ameliorate my above
    concerns sufficiently to allow permission to be granted. I accept that conditions
    relating to fire safety, cycle parking and refuse storage could be controlled by way
    of suitably worded planning conditions had all matters relating to the proposal been
    acceptable.
17. I note that a fire strategy report supports the proposal and that this is considered
    acceptable to the local planning authority and that the Council’s highway adviser
    has not raised objection to the scheme. Whilst other aspects of the proposal may
    be acceptable in their own right and/or to other authorities, these do not make an
    unacceptable development acceptable in planning terms, nor would they justify the
    proposal.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
 Appeal Decision 6012522


Conclusion
18. Having regard to the above findings, the appeal should be dismissed.



Nicola Davies
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     4
