Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by S Leonard BA (Hons) BTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22 September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6012915
Pavement Outside Old Town Market, 7 Dear Hay Lane, Poole BH15 1NZ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Safia Rana-Jaswal (BT Telecommunications PLC) against the decision of
     Bournemouth Christchurch and Poole Council.
•    The application Ref is P/26/01806/FUL.
•    The development proposed is the installation of 1no. BT Street Hub and removal of associated BT
     payphone.

Appeal B Ref: 6012919
Pavement Outside Old Town Market, 7 Dear Hay Lane, Poole BH15 1NZ
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent to display an advertisement.
•    The appeal is made by Safia Rana-Jaswal (BT Telecommunications PLC) against the decision of
     Bournemouth Christchurch and Poole Council.
•    The application Ref is P/26/01805/ADV.
•    The development proposed is the display of 2no. digital 75” LCD display screens, one on each side of
     the Street Hub unit.



Decisions
Appeal A Ref: 6012915
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal B Ref: 6012919
2.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
3.    There are two appeals relating to the same proposal on the same site. As set out
      above, they are considered under different complementary legislation. The first
      relates to a street hub structure (Appeal A) and the other relates to integral
      advertisements that would be displayed on each side of it (Appeal B).
4.    The street hub and advertisement are integral to each other, and they raise similar
      considerations and reasons for refusal. Accordingly, whilst I have dealt with each
      case on its individual merits, to avoid duplication, both appeals are considered
      together in this decision, except where otherwise indicated.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012915 & 6012919


5.    In respect of Appeal B, The Town and Country Planning (Control of
      Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (the Regulations) require that
      advertisement appeal decisions are made only in the interests of amenity and
      public safety, taking into account the provisions of the development plan, so far as
      they are material, and other relevant factors. The national Planning Practice
      Guidance (PPG) confirms this approach.
6.    Although the description of development in the application forms for the street hub
      refers to the removal of BT payphones, there is only one existing payphone within
      the red line of the “Proposed Site” Plan submitted with the appeal. The two other
      payphones which are proposed to be removed are located some distance away
      from the site within the High Street. Given the proposal before me, I cannot grant
      permission for their removal, and I have therefore altered the description of
      development to refer solely to the removal of the payphone which lies within the
      site which is the subject of these appeals.
7.    The application form for both appeals sets out the proposed development as “the
      installation of 1no. BT street hub”. In respect of Appeal B, I do not consider that
      this wording is sufficiently precise to comprise the description of development in
      the decision letter. Accordingly, I have amended it to reflect the advertisement
      details included in the application forms, as this more accurately describes the
      proposal for which advertisement consent is sought.
8.    During the course of these appeals, a revised version of the National Planning
      Policy Framework (the Framework), was published on 17 August 2026. This
      replaces the 2024 Framework.
9.    I am satisfied that the revised Framework does not differ significantly from the
      2024 Framework in respect of the substance of the matters before me. As such, I
      find that the main parties would not be prejudiced by my taking the new
      Framework into account in my decision.
10. The appeal site is in the Town Centre Heritage Conservation Area (the TCHCA)
    and therefore I have had regard to Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings
    and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 which requires that special attention be paid to
    the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of a
    Conservation Area. There is also a Listed Building nearby at No. 34 Hill Street.
    Therefore, I have had regard to the desirability of preserving a Listed Building or its
    setting or any features of special architectural or historic interest as required under
    Section 66(1) of the Act.
Main Issues
11. Having regard to the above, the main issue with respect to Appeal A is whether the
    proposal preserves or enhances the character or appearance of the TCHCA and
    the setting of the nearby Listed Building at No.34 Hill Street.
12. Regarding Appeal B, the reason for refusing express advertisement consent does
    not indicate that public safety would be harmed. I have no reason to reach a
    different conclusion, and I have dealt with the appeal accordingly. Therefore, the
    main issue with respect to Appeal B is the effect of the proposed advertisement on
    the visual amenity of the area.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012915 & 6012919


Reasons
Appeal A - Character and appearance and heritage assets
13. The appeal site comprises a stretch of the public footway pavement which aligns
    the west side of Chapel Lane. It occupies a visually prominent position close to the
    junction of Chapel Lane with Dear Hay Lane, which is used by vehicular traffic,
    and directly opposite the Chapel Lane public car park.
14. Chapel Lane is a short highway which provides a well-used pedestrian route into
    the High Street shopping area from Dear Hay Lane and the nearby public car park.
    At its northern end the townscape is wide and spacious, as the lane opens out to
    face a more open area opposite the site. When travelling northwards along Chapel
    Lane from the High Street, there are clear views along the lane and out towards
    mature trees which lie within the car park and adjacent to Dear Hay Lane. These
    trees provide a pleasant verdant backdrop to the High Street and a visual
    affirmation of the role of this greener area of space which lies within the surrounds
    of a generally denser built urban environment.
15. From the northern end of the lane there are views through to the historic fine grain
    character of the High Street which lies at its southern end. As such, the road
    provides a visual link between the built-up commercial and retail shopping centre
    of the High Street and a key area of spaciousness which relieves the built
    development.
16. I acknowledge that a large part of the east side of the lane is given over to rear
    servicing and parking in connection with several High Street businesses. However,
    in contrast, further south along its east side and all along its west side it is aligned
    with an active street-facing frontage, including with ground floor shopfronts and
    entrance doors and street-facing restaurants.
17. As such, the lane comprises an open and accessible town centre environment
    which supports retail footfall and community uses, including the Jobcentre Plus
    which abuts a large part of its western edge, including next to the appeal site, and
    a large café restaurant which has a curved frontage which directly faces onto the
    lane.
18. There is a limited amount of street furniture within the vicinity of the site. This
    includes several ornate lampposts, several low metal bollards sited in front of the
    job centre close to the appeal site as well as across the centre part of the lane,
    and cycle stands and street signs opposite the appeal site. The appeal site itself is
    occupied by a BT payphone kiosk, bins and a street sign.
19. The small amount of street furniture, together with its low height and/or slim and
    visually discrete nature, mean that it appears visually subordinate to the
    surrounding properties. It has enabled Chapel Lane to retain a notably spacious
    and open character.
20. The appeal scheme would introduce a large, 3m high rectangular structure next to
    the existing bins and close to the entrance to the Jobcentre. The street hub would
    be much larger and bulkier than the existing nearby street furniture, which is either
    much smaller and lower, or significantly narrower in the case of the taller
    streetlights.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6012915 & 6012919


21. The combined bulk, mass and solidity of the street hub, together with its proximity
    to the edge of the pavement, would result in a significant visual intrusion into the
    streetscape. As such, the hub would comprise an incongruous form of
    development which would detract from the character and appearance of the area.
22. It would draw attention and add undue clutter to the street. As such, it would erode
    the perceived spacious streetscape of the lane and adversely affect the aforesaid
    clear site lines through Chapel Lane which make a positive contribution to the
    townscape of this transitional part of the conservation area.
23. The Grade II Listed building at No.34 Hill Street occupies a prominent position at
    the southern end of the lane, on the corner with Hill Street. The 3-storey building
    dates back to the mid-19th century. Having been subsequently remodelled in the
    20th Century, it is notable for its rare surviving Art Deco shopfront. This comprises
    glass and vitrolite with crome detailing and a black plinth and fascia and
    incorporates 2 island display cases.
24. Accordingly, the Listed Building largely derives its significance from its relationship
    with the street. Moreover, the ground floor of this building is currently used as a
    café with frontages onto Chapel Lane and Hill Street, thereby adding to the retail
    vibrancy of this part of the conservation area. As such, this building makes a
    positive contribution to the townscape of this part of the conservation area.
25. When viewing the ground floor of this building from the busy pedestrianised part of
    the High Street south of Chapel Lane, the appeal scheme, also sited at ground
    level, albeit further northwards up the lane, would introduce an incongruous
    structure which would draw the eye and detract from the appreciation of the
    attractive shopfront of the listed building. As such, it would harm an aspect of the
    setting of the Listed Building which contributes to its significance.
26. For the above reasons I therefore conclude that the proposal would materially
    harm the character and appearance of the TCHCA and the setting of the listed
    building at No.34 Hill Street. As such, it would be contrary to Policies PP6, PP27
    and PP30 of the Poole Local Plan (2012) (the Local Plan), the Poole Town Centre
    SPD (2015) and the Our Streets and Spaces SPD (2012) in so much as these
    policies and supplementary planning guidance, amongst other things, seek to
    ensure that new development preserves or enhances Poole’s heritage assets,
    reflects or enhances local patterns of development in terms of visual impact, and
    provides an attractive public realm, including providing an enhanced townscape
    environment within the High Street area and avoiding unattractive and/or cluttered
    street furniture.
Appeal B – Visual amenity
27. Appeal B relates to the proposed illuminated advertisement panels which would
    comprise part of the street hub considered under Appeal A. They would take up
    the majority of the front and rear facing sides of the street hub.
28. Existing advertisements within Chapel Lane comprise fascia signs and a limited
    number of small projecting signs which are proportionate in size and scale to their
    commercial premises, have a limited degree of illuminance, and do not appear
    unduly visually prominent within the townscape. This is particularly true of the
    appeal site side of the road where the signage on the adjacent Jobcentre Plus


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6012915 & 6012919


      building is limited to single fascia and projecting signs notwithstanding the building
      having extensive frontages onto both Chapel Lane and Dear Hay Lane.
29. In contrast, the substantial size and height of the proposed advertisements within
    their associated structure would appear excessive and visually intrusive in this
    location. They would be prominently sited within the pavement and sited close to
    the shared pedestrian/vehicular surface adjacent to the site. Their positioning in a
    perpendicular arrangement in relation to the street means that they would be
    visually prominent and eye-catching in views from both ends of Chapel Lane.
30. Moreover, even if the brightness of the panels were to be controlled, their backlit
    illuminance and frequently changing images would be visually striking and
    distractive to passers-by, compounding the visual prominence of the digital
    advertisements within the street scene.
31. Accordingly, I conclude that the advertisements would have a materially harmful
    effect on the visual amenity of the area. The policies of the development plan have
    been considered in so far as they are relevant.
Heritage Balance
32. The Framework supports the expansion and upgrading of telecommunications
    infrastructure, in ways which limit an unnecessary proliferation of equipment and
    respect important environmental safeguards.
33. It also aims to conserve and enhance the historic environment, noting that heritage
    assets are an irreplaceable resource which should be conserved in a manner
    appropriate to their significance.
34. In the case of identified substantial harm to a heritage asset, there is a
    presumption that consent be refused unless it can be shown that substantial harm
    to or total loss of significance of a designated heritage asset is necessary to
    achieve substantial public benefits that outweigh that harm or loss. Having regard
    to the scale of the proposal, I do not find the harm to the TCHCA and the setting of
    the Listed Building to be substantial.
35. Nonetheless, the Framework states that any harm to a designated heritage asset
    will be a matter of considerable importance and weight, and that where a
    development proposal would harm the significance of a designated heritage asset
    the effect on the asset and its significance should be weighed against any public
    benefits resulting from the proposal.
36. The public benefits in the case of the appeal scheme include the provision of wi-fi
    connectivity, device charging, internet access and improved 4G and 5G coverage,
    noting that the appellant has certain obligations in this respect. The street hub
    would also facilitate access to the emergency services and provide other functions
    such as displaying community information and providing wayfinding assistance,
    utilising carbon-free technology, and being accessible to people with disabilities. It
    could also be used to collect information to assist future policy decisions by the
    Council. Improved digital services also support improved economic growth and
    productivity.
37. The Framework seeks to facilitate the provision of digital infrastructure in suitable
    locations. Accordingly, I give moderate weight to the aforesaid benefits of the
    provision of a single street hub.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6012915 & 6012919


38. However, when considering the impact of a proposal on the significance of a
    designated heritage asset, the new Framework requires substantial weight to be
    given to the asset’s conservation, with the more important the asset, the greater
    the weight should be. I am not persuaded that the moderate benefits of the
    proposal outweigh the harm that I have identified to the character and appearance
    and significance of the TCHCA and the setting of the Listed Building.
39. In coming to this view, I have taken account that there is insufficient substantive
    evidence before me to demonstrate that the aforesaid benefits of the proposal
    could not be achieved in a less harmful way by locating the proposal in a less
    sensitive location.
40. In addition to the removal of the existing telephone kiosk on the appeal site, the
    appellant also proposes to remove two other existing kiosks outside Nos. 78 and
    78A High Street. I acknowledge that the removal of these structures would result in
    visual improvements to the character and appearance of the streetscape in both
    cases and better reveal the significance of the TCHCA.
41. However, In the case of the appeal site, the existing kiosk would be replaced with
    a structure which would have a notably greater impact upon the character and
    appearance of the area than the existing telephone kiosk due to its combined
    height, width, more solid design and the inclusion of large elements of illuminated
    advertising.
42. The removal of the two kiosks from the High Street does not relate to the appeal
    site itself, and it does not overcome the harm that I have identified which would
    result from the proposed siting of the street hub, with its large double-sided
    advertisements, in this prominent location.
Conclusions
43. Appeal A: The proposed development would conflict with the development plan as
    a whole and there are no material considerations, including the Framework, which
    indicate that the decision should be made other than in accordance with it.
    Therefore, for the reasons given, I conclude that Appeal A should be dismissed.
44. Appeal B: For the reasons given, I conclude that Appeal B should be dismissed.

S Leonard
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
