Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 September 2026
by Mr R Walker BA HONS DIPTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012202
Happy Hounds Hotel, Weatheroak, Back Lane, Weeton, Preston PR4 3HS
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
       against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•      The appeal is made by Kerry McNickle against the decision of Fylde Borough Council.
•      The application Ref is 26/0063.
•      The development proposed is permission in principle for the demolition of existing buildings and
       erection of up to 2 no. dwellings.

Decision
1.       The appeal is allowed and permission in principle is granted for permission in
         principle for the demolition of existing buildings and erection of up to 2 no.
         dwellings at Happy Hounds Hotel, Weatheroak, Back Lane, Weeton, Preston
         PR4 3HS in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 26/0063.
Preliminary Matters
2.       The proposal is for permission in principle. Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
         advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
         housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has two
         stages: the first stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site
         is suitable in-principle and the second (‘technical details consent’) stage is when
         the detailed development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first
         of these two stages.
3.       The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
         land use and the amount of development permitted1. All other matters are
         considered as part of a subsequent technical details consent (TDC) application if
         permission in principle is granted. I have determined the appeal accordingly.
Main Issue
4.       The main issue is whether the site is suitable for residential development, having
         regard to its location, the proposed land use and the amount of development, with
         particular reference to the spatial strategy for the Borough and access to services
         and facilities.
Reasons
5.       The appeal site includes buildings associated with an existing dog day care and
         boarding kennels business along Back Lane (Lane), which lies outside of any
         settlement development limits as defined by the Council’s Local Plan. This means


1
    PPG Paragraph: 012 Reference ID: 58-012-20180615

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012202


       that the site is treated as countryside for the purposes of applying the relevant
       development plan policies.
6.     As the site is developed with the dog care business and there are houses
       sporadically along the Lane, and a gypsy and traveller site opposite, the term
       “countryside” is not a particularly apt description. Instead, it denotes that the site is
       not within a town or village identified as part of the settlement strategy in the Local
       Plan.
7.     New development in the countryside is permitted where it is related to specific
       forms of development as set down in Strategic Policy GD4 of the Local Plan.
       These include, amongst other things, minor infill development (criterion f)). The
       supporting text to the policy clarifies that minor infill development will be of a scale
       and use that does not have a material impact on the rural character of the area
       and does not conflict with the provisions of Policy ENV3.
8.     The appeal scheme would result in the redevelopment of the appeal site following
       the demolition of the existing buildings extending to the front of the site along the
       Lane. However, the spacious gaps between the houses along the Lane, and in
       particular, to the next building would still remain without being ‘filled’. In this regard,
       whilst I accept that the scale of development would be minor, it would not
       constitute infilling. Moreover, in so far as it relates to Strategic Policy GD4, the
       proposal would not accord with any of the other listed forms of development within
       it.
9.     The appeal site is not far from Weeton, which is defined as a Tier 2 Smaller Rural
       Settlement in Strategic Policy S1. The smaller rural settlements are said to have
       fewer essential services and employment opportunities and tend to have limited
       transport connections with the Key Service Centres, Local Service Centres and the
       Strategic Locations for Development that are identified in Policy DLF1.
10. There is no continuous lit footpath to Weeton or the nearest bus stop. Reference
    has been made to the use of a public right of way. However, this is unlit and its
    surface would not be favourable during inclement weather, dark hours or for
    occupiers using pushchairs and wheelchairs. Although suggestions were made to
    improve footpath connections, as a permission in principle such opportunities are
    not before me to consider. It would be possible to cycle along the road to Weeton.
    However, the distance, nature of the route, speed of traffic, and lack of street
    lighting, would discourage some future occupiers such as those with children.
11. Overall, given its location divorced from Weeton, and any other settlement, even
    accounting for some cycling and walking, future occupiers would have a heavy
    reliance on private vehicles to access services and facilities. This would result in
    negative impacts on carbon emissions and would not promote healthy travel
    options. However, I am also mindful that the existing business would generate a
    degree of vehicular movements already. Moreover, driving distances would be
    short to both Weeton and the larger settlement of Wesham, moderating the extent
    of harm. Nonetheless, future occupiers would still not have particularly good
    access to services and facilities, and the proposal would still not align with the
    spatial strategy for the Borough in this regard.
12. To conclude on this main issue, the appeal site is not suitable for residential
    development, having regard to its location, the proposed land use and the amount
    of development, with particular reference to the spatial strategy for the Borough

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012202


       and access to services and facilities. The proposal would therefore be contrary to
       the requirements of Policies S1, DLF1, GD4, and INF1 of the Local Plan, when
       taken together and in so far as they relate to this main issue. These say, amongst
       other things, that in order for Fylde to protect and create sustainable communities,
       proposals for development should where appropriate, demonstrate how access to
       services will be achieved by means other than the car, and where appropriate,
       demonstrate how the range of local social and community services and facilities
       available will be suitable and accessible for the intended occupiers or user(s) of
       the development.
13. Policies DLF1 and INF1 of the Local Plan are broadly in line with Policy TR3 of the
    National Planning Policy Framework 2026 (the Framework) in seeking to guide
    development towards sustainable locations and to limit the need to travel by
    private car. However, Policy GD4 of the Local Plan is more restrictive than the
    criteria in Policy S5 of the Framework and does not have similar provisions relating
    to the development of previously developed land (PDL) outside of settlements. As
    such, I give Policy GD4, and by connection Policy S1 in relation to this matter, very
    limited weight.
Planning Balance
14. Policy S3 of the Framework says that decisions on development proposals should
    apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. Outside of settlements
    this means by applying Policy S5. The Framework says at Policy S5 that outside of
    settlements certain forms of development should be approved, unless the benefits
    of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when
    assessed against the national-decision making policies in the Framework. Criterion
    d) of this list includes the redevelopment of PDL. The appeal proposal would result
    in the redevelopment of PDL and would therefore accord with this criterion.
15. Criterion d) of Policy S5 does not require that proposals for the redevelopment of
    PDL are physically well-related to a settlement, as that requirement only appears
    within criterions h) and j), with no indication that it is to be applied to the other
    forms of development listed. On that basis, the proposed development is
    consistent with one of the forms of development which Policy S5 states may in
    principle be approved outside settlements, subject to weighing up the benefits
    against any adverse effects.
16. The proposal would provide social and economic benefits by boosting the supply
    of housing within the Borough. In this regard, the proposal would support one of
    the objectives of the Framework of supporting the delivery of a substantial
    increase in the supply of homes at a time when the Council has a shortfall. Policy
    HO7 of the Framework makes clear that substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits of providing homes which will contribute towards meeting the evidenced
    accommodation needs of the community. The modest scale of the development
    does not diminish the weight I give these benefits. I have reached this conclusion
    accepting that a TDC application would still subsequently need to be determined
    within three years to create the permission that would ultimately deliver this
    housing.
17. The absence of harm in relation to other ‘in principle’ aspects weigh neither for nor
    against in the balance of considerations. The proposal would result in the loss of
    an operating business. That said, I have no reason to question the owners, who


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6012202


       live in the adjacent dwelling, intention to retire and there is no evidence that the
       business would remain on the site in the long-term limiting the weight I give this
       matter.
18. Policy TR3 of the Framework guides development towards sustainable locations,
    to limit the need to travel by private car. In this regard, and having regard to my
    findings of moderate harm in the main issue, and the associated conflict with
    development plan policies, the proposal would also be at odds with the principles
    laid out in Policy TR3 of the Framework.
19. As I have identified a moderate degree of harm in the main issue and as Policy S5
    of the Framework is supportive of the proposal in principle, despite its location
    outside a settlement, the adverse effects in terms of accessibility to services and
    facilities and in seeking to guide development towards sustainable locations carry
    no more than moderate weight. Moreover, I have given limited weight to the loss of
    the existing dog care business.
20. There are no relevant national decision-making policies which indicate that the
    proposal should be specifically refused. As such, when considered collectively, the
    benefits of the development would not be substantially outweighed by the adverse
    effects. In those circumstances, the presumption in favour of sustainable
    development as defined in national decision-making Policies S3 and S5 states that
    the proposed development should be approved.
Other Matters
21. Both parties have referred to various appeals, which considered matters including
    infilling, previously developed land, the spatial strategy and the supply of housing.
    However, they can all be distinguished from the appeal before me and the balance
    of considerations in this appeal as none were considered on the basis of the
    revised Framework.
Conditions
22. The PPG indicates that it is not possible to impose conditions as the terms of any
    permission in principle must only include the site location, type of development and
    amount. Without having to specify such by way of a condition, the default duration
    of permission in principle is 3 years, with any TDC application to be determined
    during this period. I note the Council’s position regarding matters it considers
    should be submitted at the second stage as an informative. However, such matters
    are not for me to assess as part of this appeal. These are matters that must form
    the basis of considerations at the TDC stage application. Accordingly, no
    conditions or informatives are necessary.
Conclusion
23. The proposed development would conflict with the development plan but material
    considerations, namely the provisions of the Framework, indicate that a decision
    should be made other than in accordance with it. For the reasons given above the
    appeal is allowed and permission in principle is granted.

Mr R Walker
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
