Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 September 2026
by R C Shrimplin MA(Cantab) DipArch RIBA FRTPI FCIArb MCIL
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026


Appeal Reference: 6012788
79 Rushdene Crescent, Northolt, London UB5 6NG
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr. Beso against the decision of Ealing Council.
•   The application reference is 254364FUL.
•   The development proposed is described in the application form as follows: “Installation of a new
    vehicular crossover and limited ECOGrid surfacing to provide access to the existing driveway of 79
    Rushdene Crescent, including tree protection measures and no-dig construction across the grass
    verge”.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary points
2. The ‘National Planning Policy Framework’ was revised in August 2026 but, in this
   instance, the issues most relevant to the appeal remain unaffected by the revisions
   that have been made to it. I am therefore satisfied that there is no requirement to
   seek further submissions on the revised Framework, and that no party would be
   disadvantaged by such a course of action. In this appeal, I have had regard to the
   most recent version, of course.
Main issues
3. The first main issue to be determined in this appeal is the effect of the proposed
   development on the character and appearance of the surroundings. The second is
   its effect on highway safety.
Reasons
4. The appeal site is located in a residential area that is characterised by semi-
   detached houses and houses in short terraces, in a suburban environment. The
   roads are defined by wide grass verges, planted with trees and bounded by
   hedges, in many cases. The road pattern is enhanced by intermittent open spaces.
5. Number 79 Rushdene Crescent is a two-storey house within a short terrace. It is
   set back from the road behind an open space that is laid to grass, but which is also
   occupied by a mature tree near the centre of the space. The grass was neatly
   trimmed at the time of the site visit, although it was very dry. The grass area is
   surrounded by paths that provide pedestrian access to the houses which are set
   back from the highway, but the houses nearest the road (numbers 73, 87 and 87A)
   are also provided with direct car access.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision: 6012788


6. It is now proposed to construct a new vehicular crossover to provide access to the
   existing “driveway” of number 79 Rushdene Crescent, across the open space.
7. The adopted Development Plan includes ‘The London Plan’ (dated 2021) and the
   ‘Ealing Development Management DPD' (dated 2013). Policies in The London
   Plan stress the importance of good design in the urban environment, notably
   Policies D3, D4 and, in respect of the public realm, Policy D8. Policies in the
   ‘Ealing Development Management DPD’, including Policies 7.4 and 7B underpin
   this design approach.
8. This approach also reflects provisions in the revised version of the ‘National
   Planning Policy Framework’ which, like its predecessor, aims at “achieving well-
   designed places”.
9. Other Policies in the Development Plan are aimed at achieving safe roads, for
   example Policy T4 of ‘The London Plan’ which states that development proposals
   should not increase road danger. Policy TR3 in the revised version of the ‘National
   Planning Policy Framework’ is also concerned with highway safety, among other
   things, carrying forward previous policy.
10. The Council’s ‘Dropped Kerb Application pack for residents’ (dated July 2021)
    reinforces the importance of open spaces in the streetscene but it does not have
    the same weight as the Development Plan.
11. The proposed new crossover and access would make use of ECOGrid surfacing, to
    reduce the visual impact of the development, and it has been explained that the
    existing mature tree in the open space would not be harmed. Nevertheless, the
    access would be in regular use, and the grassy nature of the space would be
    significantly eroded by the drive, which would scar the open grass. I accept that
    proposed development could be implemented without unacceptable impacts on the
    retained tree but I am nevertheless concerned at it impact on the “green” open
    space as a whole. The character of the open space would be changed for the
    worse and the attractiveness of the area would be significantly damaged.
12. Although the crossover could not be said to create a precedent, it might be difficult
    to resist further erosion in the future, in view of the need for consistency in planning
    decisions, which would exacerbate the harm to the townscape.
13. Turning to the issue of highway safety, I am aware that there would be good
    intervisibility for pedestrians and drivers using the access. The proposed crossover
    and access would not comply with the dimensions given in the ‘Dropped Kerb
    Application pack for residents’ but it would not be materially harmful to pedestrian
    or vehicular safety by comparison with a more typical crossover.
14. The proposed development would be convenient for the house at number 79
    Rushdene Crescent, especially as on-site parking would facilitate charging for an
    electric vehicle. Nevertheless, I am convinced that the harm that would be done to
    the character and appearance of the surroundings would very clearly outweigh the
    benefits of the project.
15. Hence, I have concluded that the scheme before me would conflict with both
    national and local planning policies (including the Development Plan) that are
    intended to encourage good urban design and that it ought not to be allowed.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
Appeal Decision: 6012788


     Although I have considered all the matters that have been raised in the
     representations, I have found nothing to cause me to alter my decision.



Roger C. Shrimplin
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
