 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 19 August 2026
 by K Winnard LL.B Hons Solicitor
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 28 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012664
 38 Salisbury Avenue, Burton-on-Trent DE15 0ET
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Ms Amanda Orchard against the decision of East Staffordshire Borough
      Council.
 •    The application Ref is P/2026/00186.
 •    The development proposed is a proposed single storey side extension at ground floor level.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a single storey side
   extension at ground level at 38 Salisbury Avenue, Burton-on-Trent DE15 0ET in
   accordance with the terms of the application, P/2026/00186 subject to the following
   conditions:
     (i)          The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from
                  the date of this decision.
     (ii)         The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance
                  with the following approved plans: Location Plan, Existing and Proposed
                  Block Plan No CC16, Proposed Front View Plan No CC7, Proposed
                  Ground Floor Plan No CC15, Proposed Left View Plan No CC11,
                  Proposed Rear View Plan No CC9, Proposed Right View Plan No CC13
                  and Proposed Roof Plan No CC5.
     (iii)        The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of
                  the development hereby permitted shall match those used in the existing
                  building.
Application for Costs
2. An application for costs was made by Ms Amanda Orchard against East
   Staffordshire Borough Council. This application is the subject of a separate
   decision.
Procedural Matter
3. There have been changes to the National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) since the determination of the planning application. Having reviewed
   them I am satisfied that as far as their substance relates to the main issue in this
   appeal, further consultation with the main parties would not be necessary since
   they have not materially affected or prejudiced the cases of the parties.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012664


Main Issue
4. The main issue in the appeal is the effect of the development on the residential
   amenities of the neighbouring occupiers at No 36 Salisbury Avenue with particular
   regard to overshadowing resulting in a loss of light.
Reasons
5    The appeal property is a two-storey semi- detached dwelling which features an
     existing single storey flat-roof side extension which extends close to the shared
     boundary with No 36, a similar two-storey semi-detached dwelling. There is a
     substantial difference in ground levels between Nos 38 and 36, with No 36 being
     sited at a significantly lower ground level than No 38.
6. The Council’s position is that whilst the proposed extension would comply with the
   45 degree guideline set out within the Council’s Separation Distances and Amenity
   Supplementary Planning Document (SPD), the guidelines provide that appropriate
   allowances can be made in the event of a ground level difference between
   properties. In this instance the Council has concluded that the ground level
   difference and additional built form are such that the proposed extension would be
   likely to cause overshadowing resulting in a loss of light to No 36.The SPD further
   indicates that appropriate allowances may also be made in the event of other
   features applicable in relation to site characteristics, including whether there is any
   solid intervening feature, such as a boundary fence, or if there is more than one
   source of light serving a neighbouring habitable room.
7. The side elevation of No 36, to the north of the appeal site, which faces the shared
    boundary has three windows. The outlook from the two ground floor windows is
    towards the high boundary fence between the two properties, and in the case of the
    first floor window which serves a bedroom, towards the existing side elevation of
    the appeal property. In respect of the two windows which serve habitable rooms,
    neither are the main source of light to these rooms both of which have a principal
    window on their respective other elevation. Due to the land levels, the respective
    orientation of both properties and the boundary fence treatment the amount of
    daylight and sunlight received by these windows is already restricted.
8.    I have not been provided with any scale drawings or assessments that show the
     impact of the site criteria noted above to the circumstances before me. Nor is any
     sun trajectory information provided to demonstrate the effect of the proposal in
     relation to sunlight or daylight. However, the absence of such information does not
     diminish my ability to determine whether any overshadowing would adversely affect
     this specific elevation. I have therefore made a decision based upon the information
     before me and observations made during the site visit.
9    The footprint of the proposed single storey extension would be relatively minor and
     lower in height than the existing built form of the dwelling. Whilst it would result in a
     side projection of a greater width being sited closer to No 36, it would not project
     further into the rear garden. The hipped roof would slope towards No 38 away from
     the boundary of No 36 and only a modest amount of the side wall of the proposed
     extension and roof would appear above the height of the existing fence.
10. It would be likely that there would be some additional overshadowing as a result of
    the proposed extension at certain times, most likely around midday. However, the
    modest scale, and siting of the proposal at the northern elevation of No 38 and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          2
 Appeal Decision 6012664


     designed to assimilate within the built form of the existing dwelling would not
     significantly alter the established pattern of shadowing currently experienced by No
     36 such that any additional overshadowing would not be sufficient to justify
     withholding planning permission.
11. Consequently, I conclude that the proposal would not cause unacceptable harm to
    the living conditions of the occupiers of No 36 with regard to daylight and sunlight.
    Thus, it would comply with the amenity requirements of Policies SP1 and DP3 of
    the East Staffordshire Local Plan and the SPD which together require development
    to protect the residential amenity of the occupiers of residential properties nearby.
Other Matter
12. A third party has raised concerns with regard to the impact on daylight and sunlight.
    For the reasons stated above, I am satisfied that there would not be an
    unacceptable impact on daylight and sunlight as a result of the proposed
    development.
Conditions
13. In addition to the standard time condition, I have imposed a condition specifying the
    approved plans for the avoidance of doubt and in the interests of certainty. A
    condition relation to external materials is also necessary in the interests of the
    character and appearance of the area.
Conclusion
14. For the reasons given I allow the appeal as set out in the formal decision notice
    above.


K Winnard
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
