Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by J Buxton BA(Hons) DipArch ARB RIBA
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012817
58 Stanley Road, Salford M7 4HN
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Spielman against the decision of Salford City Council.
•   The application reference is PA/2026/0446.
•   The development proposed is described as two-storey side extension and front porch extension.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for proposed two-storey
   side extension and front porch extension at 58 Stanley Road, Salford M7 4HN in
   accordance with the terms of the application, reference PA/2026/0446, and the plans
   submitted with it, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
              following approved plans:
                   •    GSS22053-502-2 – Site – Existing & Proposed
                   •    GSS22053-502-5 – Site – Proposed Plans and Elevations.
     3)       The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
              extension shall match those used in the existing building.
Background and Main Issue
2. During the course of the appeal a new National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) was published on the 17 August 2026. Whilst the format has altered, any
   considerations that are material to this decision have not fundamentally changed. I
   am satisfied that this has not prejudiced any party and I have had regard to the latest
   version in reaching my decision.
3. In both the banner heading and my formal decision, I have adopted the description of
   development from the Council's decision notice, as I consider it to provide a more
   accurate description of the development for which planning permission is sought than
   that contained on the application form. Nevertheless, I have had regard to the
   description on the application form in reaching my decision. I have also used the
   appellant's name as shown on the appeal form, as the application form does not
   contain complete appellant details.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012817


4. There is no dispute between the parties about the acceptability of the two-storey side
   extension. Therefore, the focus of this appeal is the proposed front porch.
5. In light of the above, the main issue is the effect of the proposed front porch
   extension on the character and appearance of the host property and the surrounding
   area.
Reasons
6. The appeal site comprises a two-storey semi-detached dwelling on Stanley Road
   within a predominantly residential area. The surrounding streetscene is characterised
   largely by semi-detached dwellings set behind modest front gardens. Whilst there are
   common features, including bay windows to many principal elevations, the area
   displays an eclectic mix of architectural styles and domestic alterations, including a
   number of front porch additions.
7. The Council's concerns relate principally to the front porch extension which would
   project beyond the existing bay window line. I note that the scheme was amended
   during the application process, including a significant reduction in the canopy
   projection. As a result, the porch would present as a relatively modest addition to the
   front elevation of the dwelling.
8. During my site visit I observed that front porches and other domestic alterations are a
   common feature of the surrounding streetscene. In that context, the modest
   projection beyond the bay window line would not appear unduly prominent, disrupt
   the visual rhythm of the street or appear as an incongruous feature.
9. The Council also raises concerns regarding the degree of separation between the
   appeal property and the adjoining dwelling. However, the porch would be inset from
   the boundary line and the side extension and would not infill the gap between the pair
   of semi-detached dwellings. Consequently, the visual separation between the
   properties would remain readily perceptible and I do not find that the proposal would
   materially erode the degree of separation within the street scene.
10. Furthermore, whilst the porch would increase the amount of built form on the principal
    elevation, it would remain a single-storey addition that is clearly subordinate in scale
    and massing to the host dwelling. The original two-storey form, roof structure and
    architectural composition of the dwelling would remain readily appreciable.
    Accordingly, the porch would not appear dominant and would respect the host
    property.
11. Taking these matters together, I find that the proposal would preserve the character
    and appearance of the host dwelling and the surrounding area. It would therefore
    accord with Policies D1, D2 and D8 of the Salford Local Plan: Development
    Management Policies and Designations, which seek, amongst other things, to secure
    high quality design, respond positively to local character and ensure that extensions
    remain proportionate, subordinate and sympathetic to their host dwellings.
Other Matters
12. The amended plans address the concerns raised by the Highway Authority and the
    Highway Authority concluded that the proposal would be unlikely to have a noticeable
    impact on the surrounding highway network. Consequently, this matter does not
    weigh against the proposal.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012817


Conditions
13. In addition to the statutory time limit, I have imposed conditions requiring the
    development to be carried out in accordance with the approved plans and requiring
    the use of matching external materials. These conditions are necessary in the
    interests of certainty and to safeguard the character and appearance of the host
    dwelling and surrounding area.
Conclusion
14. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.

J Buxton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
