Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 September 2026
by R Gravett BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012205
17 Dalegarth Avenue, Liverpool, West Derby L12 0AJ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr James Walsh against the decision of Liverpool City Council.
•    The application Ref is 26H/1234.
•    The development proposed is to erect two storey side extension, part two/part single storey front
     extension, fenestration changes to front and rear and convert the existing external garage.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The description of development in the banner heading above has been taken from
       the Council’s decision notice and I have seen confirmation that this was agreed by
       the appellant.
3.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published in
       August 2026. The changes to the Framework do not affect the merits of this case
       in a material way and it has not therefore been necessary for me to consult the
       parties on it. However, I have had regard to the Framework in my decision.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
       appearance of the area.
Reasons
5.     17 Dalegarth Avenue (No 17) is a two-storey detached dwelling located at one end
       of a row of dwellings on the northern side of Dalegarth Avenue. It has a simple
       architectural appearance with a pitched roof formation. As referred to by the
       appellant and observed during my site visit, although of a similar and cohesive
       style, dwellings within the surrounding residential area vary in size and design, and
       wide front elevations are a characteristic of some dwelling types.
6.     The proposed two-storey side extension would be around 5.4m wide which would
       result in a front elevation noticeably wider than other dwellings I observed in the
       area. However, it would be orientated perpendicular to 15 Dalegarth Avenue (No
       15), offset from the shared boundary and at a slightly lower ground level than its
       immediate neighbour at 19 Dalegarth Avenue. Given this relationship, the side
       extension would not result in a terracing effect or appear disproportionate in scale
       to its plot or host, despite its width and the continuation of the existing ridge height.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012205


       Moreover, it would not extend beyond the flank of the existing set-back detached
       garage of No 17 and accordingly, it would retain a generous visual break between
       No 15, and it would still afford views to trees in the rear garden of these dwellings.
7.     A two-storey front gabled extension is also proposed which would be over 5m in
       width and would project around 1.3m at first floor level from the front elevation of
       No 17. A ground floor porch would project a further 1.1m. Although replacing a
       small existing front projection, this would conflict with the guidance in the Council’s
       House Extensions Supplementary Planning Guidance Note 1 that front extensions
       should have a maximum projection of 1.25m from the main front wall and a pitched
       roof to avoid being unduly visually obtrusive. Despite being set back from the road,
       by reason of its projection, the front extension would be set forward of the front
       building line of No 19, and it would be a prominent and discordant feature in the
       streetscene, particularly when viewed from the west along Dalegarth Avenue.
8.     Further, because of its significant width and depth, it would dominate No 17’s front
       elevation. This would be exacerbated by the stone capped flat roof of the porch
       and the expansive first-floor glazing which would draw the eye and would appear
       at odds with the simple, modest architecture and fenestration of the host dwelling,
       and front extensions to other dwellings in the area.
9.     I observed that the use of a render or cladding as a secondary material to the
       prevailing red-brick is not uncommon in the surrounding area, and the proposed
       render finish would prevent problems of bonding old and new brickwork.
       Nevertheless, I find that the width, projection and design of the proposed front
       extension would be an incongruous addition which would be at odds with the
       streetscene, and it would fail to be subordinate in scale to the host dwelling.
10. I therefore conclude that the proposal would harm the character and appearance
    of the area. It would conflict with Policy H8 of the Liverpool Local Plan 2013-2033
    (LP) which requires proposals for extensions and alterations to dwellings to have a
    high-quality design that complements and is in keeping with the dwelling and
    surrounding area. It would further conflict with LP policies H7 and UD2 in so far as
    they require the design of proposals to adequately respond to the scale of existing
    structures and have no adverse impact on the character of the area. These
    development plan policies are not materially inconsistent with national decision-
    making policies in the Framework.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
11. The proposal would make efficient use of a generously sized residential plot and
    would provide improved living accommodation for the occupants. However, these
    benefits would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effect caused to the
    character and appearance of the area. The absence of harm to living conditions of
    neighbours is a neutral matter which weighs neither for nor against the proposal.
12. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and material considerations do
    not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

R Gravett
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
