Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by J Buxton BA(Hons) DipArch ARB RIBA
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6012908
70 Elizabeth Street, Manchester M8 8BQ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) against a
    refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Dev Dev against the decision of Manchester City Council.
•   The application reference is 144333/FH/2025.
•   The development proposed is described as extension of existing garage and conversion into summer
    house/home office.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. During the course of the appeal a new National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) was published on the 17 August 2026. Whilst the format has altered, any
   considerations that are material to this decision have not fundamentally changed. I am
   satisfied that this has not prejudiced any party and I have had regard to the latest version
   in reaching my decision.
3. At the time of my site visit, I saw that development had been undertaken. I have
   considered the appeal on the basis of the information shown on the plans and not what
   has been constructed on site. The appeal before me is not retrospective and the
   commencement of works does not influence my assessment. I have determined the
   appeal on its planning merits, based on the evidence provided.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the proposal on parking provision serving the host dwelling
   and its impact on local parking conditions.
Reasons
5. The appeal property is a detached dwelling on Elizabeth Street, a primary road into
   Manchester. It benefits from a garage located to the rear which is accessed via a garage
   court from Larch Gardens. The appeal development comprises the erection of a single-
   storey extension to that building and its conversion from a garage to a summer
   house/home office. As a result, the building would no longer function as a parking facility
   serving the dwelling.
6. The appeal garage forms part of a group of garages approved as part of the wider
   residential development. The appellant contends that the garage is not used for vehicle
   parking due to the restricted nature of the access route and limited manoeuvring space
   within the parking court. Photographs, aerial imagery and a parking layout plan have been
   submitted in support of that position along with a plan intended to demonstrate constrained
   manoeuvring arrangements. I accept that access to the parking court is restricted and that

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012908


     manoeuvring may be constrained. However, those limitations do not alter the fact that the
     garage can still be accessed for the parking of a vehicle. Regardless of how frequently it is
     used, it remains an existing off-street parking space associated with the dwelling.
7. The evidence indicates that parking demand already exists within the locality. This was
   readily apparent at the time of my site visit, when vehicles occupied much of the available
   space within the head of the cul-de-sac serving the garage court. Whilst the appellant
   relies on these parking conditions to demonstrate the practical difficulties associated with
   using the garage, they equally demonstrate that demand for parking within the locality is
   already high and that available parking opportunities are limited.
8. The proposal would remove the only off-street parking space associated with the dwelling.
   As a result, current or future occupiers would be more likely to rely on parking within the
   surrounding highway network. Although the displacement arising from a single dwelling
   may be modest in isolation, the parking conditions I observed indicate that available
   parking capacity is already limited. In these circumstances, the loss of even a single
   dedicated off-street parking space would place additional pressure on existing parking
   provision and further intensify competition for available spaces.
9. The appellant also explains that they do not own a car and therefore do not use the
   garage for parking purposes. However, planning permission runs with the land rather than
   an individual occupier. This assessment must therefore consider the reasonable
   requirements of future occupiers as well as those of the appellant. Future occupiers may
   have different transport choices and parking requirements. Consequently, I attach limited
   weight to the appellant's personal needs.
10. Drawing these matters together, I conclude that the proposal would fail to retain
    appropriate parking provision for the host dwelling, which would increase reliance on
    parking within the surrounding highway network in an area where parking demand is
    already high. Accordingly, the proposal conflicts with Policy T2 of the Manchester Core
    Strategy, which seeks to ensure that development provides appropriate parking provision.
    It would also fail to accord with Policy DM1 insofar as it seeks to ensure that development
    appropriately addresses parking requirements and does not give rise to unacceptable
    effects on the surrounding area. For similar reasons, the proposal would conflict with
    saved Policy DC1 of the Unitary Development Plan for the City of Manchester.
Other Matters
11. The appellant also refers to the availability of public transport in the area. Whilst I have had
    regard to this, the existence of alternative transport options does not alter my finding that
    the proposal would remove an existing off-street parking space associated with the
    dwelling.
12. In addition, the fact that another garage within the court has been converted to an
    alternative use does not justify the loss of further parking provision and does not alter my
    findings on the appeal proposal.
Conclusion
13. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

J Buxton
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
