 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 8 September 2026
 By Terrence Kemmann-Lane JP DipTP FRTPI MCMI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 18 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012437
 131/133 St Helens Street, Ipswich, IP4 2LS
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Darren Taylor of Hamilton Chase Investments Limited against the decision of
      Ipswich Borough Council.
 •    The application Ref is IP/26/00145/FUL.
 •    The development proposed is a change of use of No.131 and No.133 St Helens Street from shop
      (Use Class E) to 1no.16 bedroom 16 person house in multiple occupation, including demolition of
      rear extensions and erection of new rear extensions, demolition of existing outbuildings and re-use of
      other existing outbuildings for incidental uses, changes to fenestrations, raising roof height of no.133,
      installation of three new rooflights to front roof slopes and three pitched roof dormer windows to the
      rear roof slope, external alterations, new boundary treatments, and provision of refuse/recycling bin
      and bicycle stores; and including demolition of existing shelter building.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a change of use of
   Nos.131 and 133 St Helens Street from shop (Use Class E) to 1no.16 bedroom 16
   person house in multiple occupation, including demolition of rear extensions and
   erection of new rear extensions, demolition of existing outbuildings and re-use of
   other existing outbuildings for incidental uses, changes to fenestrations, raising roof
   height of no.133, installation of three new rooflights to front roof slopes and three
   pitched roof dormer windows to the rear roof slope, external alterations, new
   boundary treatments, and provision of refuse/recycling bin and bicycle stores,
   including demolition of existing shelter building at 131 St Helens Street, Ipswich,
   IP4 2LS in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref IP/26/00145/FUL,
   subject to the conditions set out in the schedule at the end of this decision.
Main Issue
2. The main issue in this case is whether there is a concentration of Houses in
   Multiple Occupation (HMOs) in the area such that the addition of the appeal
   proposal would adversely impact on the amenity of the local area through
   overconcentration.
Reasons
3. The premises are two vacant Use Class E (retail) buildings which have undergone
   various extensions and erection of outbuildings in the past. A shared yard space
   sits to the rear. An access footpath wraps around the neighbouring garage on
   Jefferies Road, providing access to the part of the rear yard leading to 131 St
   Helens Street.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012437



4. The site occupies a prominent corner position at St Helens Street junction with
   Jefferies Road. It lies within the St Helen's Conservation Area. It is close to local
   services, bus routes, Alexandra Park, St Helen's Street local centre and Duke
   Street district centre. The surrounding development is mixed, with commercial
   premises immediately to the north, a hairdresser to the west, residential properties
   opposite, and the walled garden of 145 to 149 St Helens Street opposite Jefferies
   Road. The site is on a main bus route, and it is a sustainable urban location.
5. I also note that the site is within an area subject to an Article 4 Direction removing
   permitted development rights in respect of changes from Class C3 dwellinghouses
   to Class C4 small HMO’s, which class the appeal proposal is not within.
   Nevertheless, this is indicative of a concern about the number of HMOs in the area.
6. Whilst the reason for the inclusion of this part of St Helen’s Street within the St
   Helen’s Conservation Area is clear, the physical condition of the site and some of
   the nearby properties suggests that an input of investment is desirable. The appeal
   buildings themselves are attractive, even under the cloak of disrepair and neglect.
   The proposed external works would enhance the street frontage and make a
   positive contribution, enhancing the streetscene and making a positive contribution
   to the character and appearance of the Conservation Area. I can understand why
   the appellant suggests that the proposed HMO use would be the only financially
   viable option to bring them back into use. Certainly, a considerable amount of
   investment would be needed.
7. Turning to planning policy, the introduction of additional residential accommodation
   in the plan area is supported by policy CS7 of the Core Strategy and Policies
   Development Plan Document Review 2022 (CS). HMOs constitute additional
   dwellings.
8. Policy DM20 (Houses in Multiple Occupation) seeks to avoid over-concentration of
   HMOs in the interests of limiting amenity impacts and retaining social cohesion
   along a given street, stating: “Proposals for HMOs will not be approved where they
   will result in an over-concentration of HMOs. An over-concentration is defined as:
   i. more than two HMOs side by side;
   ii. the sandwiching of a single self-contained house or flat between two HMOs;
   iii. more than two HMOs within a run of twenty properties on one side of the road;
   iv. or more than one HMO in a road of fewer than twenty properties on one side of
   the road.”
   Under this policy, paragraph 9.198 sets out an exception to the above guidelines
   “where it can be adequately demonstrated that the change of use to a HMO will not
   harm the amenity of the local area”.
9. I consider that the planning officer’s report correctly interprets Policy DM20 and
   sets out available evidence to-date on the concentration of HMOs in the area. I
   need not repeat that evidence here, other than to refer to the most relevant points.
   It states, “There is a concentration under Policy DM20(iii), “more than two HMOs
   within a run of twenty properties on one side of the road”, but not under DM20 i, ii,
   or iv”. My understanding is that this conclusion in respect of DM20 iii is reached
   because the length 131-133 St Helens Street to 5 Spring Road eastbound,
   constitutes 20 plots, comprised of 44 individual addresses, in which No.163 St
   Helens Street has a Certificate of Lawful Use confirming its established use as a



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
 Appeal Decision 6012437



     HMO, and 175 St Helens Street has an HMO licence. Thus, there are 2 HMOs in
     this length of street.
10. However, if addresses rather than plots are taken as ‘properties’ in the meaning of
    DM20(iii), then within the run of 20 ‘properties’ eastbound and westbound, there are
    no additional HMOs in either direction. Either way, this run of 20 properties is over
    an extensive length because there are considerable breaks in frontage
    development. I note that in the Committee debate a significant reference was made
    to HMOs on the other side of St Helens Street, but that is not an appropriate
    consideration in terms of the policy. As a result of these considerations, I am not
    persuaded that the appeal proposal would be in breach of Policy DM20.
11. Furthermore, my appraisal of the surroundings during my site visit, in both
    directions and both sides of the road, leads me to conclude that the appeal
    proposal would amount to a considerable improvement in the appearance of its
    immediate surroundings and would not adversely impact on the amenity of the local
    area. There is a representation that raises matters of concern over parking,
    pedestrian safety, waste, noise and the scale of the proposed HMO. However,
    there is no evidence provided that might underpin these concerns and demonstrate
    a justification for the refusal of permission.
12. Having noted all other matters raised, my overall conclusion is that the appeal
    proposal meets the terms of Policies DM 20 and that the concentration of Houses
    in Multiple Occupation in the immediate area is not such that the addition of the
    appeal proposal would adversely impact the amenity of the local area through
    overconcentration. For these reasons, the appeal will be allowed.
Conditions
13. The statutory condition that provides a time limit on the start of development must
    be imposed. In addition, the council has suggested conditions in the event that the
    appeal is upheld, and the appellant has commented on these. I have considered
    the suggestions and the comments in the light of Planning Practice Guidance. In
    addition to the standard time limit condition, I am imposing a condition requiring the
    development to be carried out in accordance with the approved plans as this
    provides certainty as to the development approved.
14. I am also including conditions relating to bat roost assessment, protection of water
    assets, sound insulation treatments, surface water drainage, means of ventilation, a
    construction management plan, landscape and boundary treatments, biodiversity
    enhancements, contamination, cycle stores, a management plan, fenestration,
    electric charging point, amenity space, use of bathrooms/shower rooms, crime
    prevention measures, restrictions on the numbers of residents, and non-subdivision
    of the development.
15. These (in the same order) are necessary for the protection of bats, to ensure water
    resources are not impacted, to provide adequate sound insulation, water drainage
    and ventilation, for highway safety and the protection of residential amenity, to
    ensure satisfactory appearance to boundaries in the streetscene, to enhance
    biodiversity, to protect against contamination, to provide personal sustainable
    modes, for the safety and comfort of residents and amenity of the surroundings, to
    ensure appropriate details in the conservation area, to encourage shift towards
    sustainable travel, to ensure adequate on-site amenity space, to provide adequate

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
 Appeal Decision 6012437



     bathroom/shower rooms for personal hygiene, for the security and safety of the
     occupants and their amenity, and retaining the development as one whole unit to
     ensure its satisfactory functioning as intended.
16. The conditions include requirements to have matters agreed with the local planning
    authority that need to be addressed at the very earliest stage of development, such
    as before demolition begins. In addition, in this case there is a need to safeguard
    bat roosts which must be provided for before any development occurs that might
    otherwise be disturbing. However, there is very little demolition involved in this
    scheme, but a good deal of early construction that would impact on sub-ground
    level activity, and the below ground Anglian Water assets need to be taken into
    account before subsurface works are undertaken. I have dealt with this by
    identifying an early part of the development that enables commencement by
    demolishing above ground structures. The above ground structures that will be
    demolished are unlikely to provide bat roosts, and no subsurface development will
    be involved at that stage.



Terrence Kemmann-Lane
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
 Appeal Decision 6012437




                                           Schedule of Conditions


1)      The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
        date of this decision.
2)      The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved plans:
        002A-GA -REV E – Proposed Floor Plans 1 of 2
        002B-GA – REV E – Proposed Floor Plans 2 of 2
        015-PS – Proposed Sections
        020B-EE – REV E – Proposed Elevations
        020C-EE – REV B – Bike Store and Amenity Space Existing and Proposed
        Elevations
        999-SP – REV E – Site Plan
3)      Save for the demolition outbuildings above soil level, no other part of the
        development permitted shall take place until a preliminary roost assessment
        (PRA) assessing presence and impact of the development upon any roosting
        bats within the existing buildings has been carried out and thereafter submitted
        to, and approved in writing by, the Local planning authority. The PRA report shall
        outline any roosting features, desk study of bat records, presence of and impacts
        to bats and requirement for further surveys or mitigation during the demolition
        and construction phase of the development. Should further surveys be required
        or recommended by the PRA or, upon review by the Local planning authority
        during the course of a condition discharge application further surveys be deemed
        necessary by the Local planning authority, subsequent investigations and reports
        shall be undertaken, and submitted and approved by the Local planning authority
        until such time surveys can conclude and the condition is able to be fully
        discharged. The demolition and development shall thereafter be carried out in
        strict accordance with the approved recommendations within the report(s).
4)      Save for the demolition of outbuildings above soil level, no other part of the
        development hereby approved shall commence until evidence has been
        submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority, that the
        owner has an asset protection agreement in place with Anglian Water.
5)      Save for the demolition outbuildings above soil level, no other part of the
        development permitted shall take place until details of a scheme of works for
        sound insulation treatments between walls (party and partition) and floors has
        been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local planning authority and
        the development shall thereafter be carried out and retained and maintained in
        accordance with those details.
6)      Save for the demolition outbuildings above soil level, no other part of the
        development permitted shall take place until a surface water drainage strategy
        has been submitted to, and approved in writing by, the local planning authority
        and the development thereafter shall be carried out, maintained and retained in
        accordance with that surface water drainage strategy.
7)      Save for the demolition outbuildings above soil level, no other part of the
        development permitted shall take place until details on the means of ventilation
        of the premises, such as, but not necessarily whole house mechanical ventilation

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             5
 Appeal Decision 6012437



        systems, shall have been submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
        planning authority, and the development shall thereafter be carried out, retained,
        and maintained in accordance with those approved details.
8)      Save for the demolition outbuildings above soil level, no other part of the
        development permitted shall take place until a Construction Environment
        Management Plan has been submitted to, and approved in writing by, the local
        planning authority. The plan shall include access and parking arrangements for
        contractors vehicles and delivery vehicles (locations and times); a methodology
        for avoiding waste from the site tracking onto the highway such as wheel
        washing facilities together with a strategy for remedy of this should it occur;
        hours of construction and deliveries; means of dust suppression; locations of
        skips; location of material lay down area; and ecological protections if and where
        surveys consider them necessary. The demolition and construction of the
        development shall thereafter be carried out in accordance with the approved
        Construction Environment Management Plan.
9)      Save for the demolition outbuildings above soil level, no other part of the
        development permitted shall take place until details of all landscaping, boundary
        treatments, and restoration of land following demolition shall be submitted to and
        approved in writing by the local planning authority and the development shall
        thereafter be carried out in accordance with those details.
10)     Prior to first occupation of the development and use hereby approved, details of
        biodiversity enhancements shall be submitted to, and approved in writing by, the
        local planning authority and the development thereafter carried out in
        accordance with those details.
11)     The development hereby approved shall be carried out under a contaminated
        land watching brief. Should any evidence of contamination be identified during
        the course of development, development shall cease until confirmed otherwise in
        writing by the local planning authority (LPA), and findings shall be reported
        immediately to the LPA. In the event the LPA considers it necessary, a site
        investigation shall be carried out in accordance with BS 10175:2011+A2:2017 -
        Investigation of Potentially Contaminated Sites: Code of Practice. Where
        remediation is required, a remediation scheme must be submitted to and
        approved in writing by the LPA and thereafter implemented and the development
        carried out in accordance with the approved details which shall include timing.
12)     Prior to first occupation of the premises for the use hereby approved, the cycle
        stores shown in drawing 999-SP – REV E – Site Plan and detailed in drawing
        020C-EE – REV B – Bike Store and Amenity Space Existing and Proposed
        Elevations shall be installed and thereafter retained and maintained for the life of
        the use.
13)     Prior to first occupation of the premises for the use hereby approved, a HMO
        Management Plan shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local
        planning authority. Such management plan shall include contact details for the
        owner, building and grounds maintenance schedules, arrangements for postal
        deliveries, arrangements for refuse management/rota’s, provision that the
        access gates facing Jefferies Road shall be closed and locked shut whenever
        not in use; and personal key fobs provided to occupants of rooms 1 and 16 for
        private access to their respective bathroom/shower rooms; arrangements for
        managing anti-social behaviour and complaints; CCTV provision and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      6
 Appeal Decision 6012437



        management, and fob activated audio/video door access/visitor entry system.
        The HMO shall thereafter be managed in accordance with the approved plan for
        the life of the use.
14)     Prior to occupation of the premises for the use hereby approved and prior to their
        installation, details of new fenestrations shall be submitted to and approved in
        writing by the local planning authority and the development thereafter carried out
        in accordance with those approved details.
15)     Prior to occupation of the premises for the use hereby approved, 1no. electric
        vehicle charge point shall be installed and made available in a position
        previously approved in writing by the local planning authority in the maintenance
        vehicle parking bay.
16)     The space labelled ‘Amenity Space’ in the outbuilding of the plan 999-SP Rev E
        – Site Plan shall be retained only as amenity space for the life of the use hereby
        approved.
17)     The independent bathroom/shower rooms on the ground floor and first floor of
        the building shall be for the sole use of the occupants of bedrooms 1 and 16
        respectively and detailed as such in any tenancy agreement, and occupants of
        bedrooms 1 and 16 provided with key fobs to enable them and solely them to
        access their bathroom/shower rooms for the life of the use.
18)     A ‘Statement of Crime Prevention’ (SoCP) shall be submitted and approved in
        writing by the local planning authority. Prior to first occupation for the use hereby
        approved the security provisions detailed within the approved SoCP shall be
        installed and thereafter retained and maintained for the life of the development.
19)     The premises shall be restricted to 1no. person per 1no. bedroom, totalling a
        maximum of 16 persons resident at the HMO in total at any one time.
20)     The premises shall be occupied and operated as one single, undivided house in
        multiple occupation and shall not be subdivided into separate units of
        accommodation without the prior written approval of the local planning authority.
                                           End of conditions




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          7
 Appeal Decision 6012437



Suggested conditions

    20. The appellant notes the Council’s without-prejudice suggested conditions and
        confirms that it is content in principle for conditions to be imposed should the
        appeal be allowed, provided that they meet the established tests of necessity,
        relevance, enforceability, precision and reasonableness.
    21. The appellant supports, in principle, conditions securing:
            • Approved plans and development parameters.
            • Ecological and biodiversity measures.
            • Drainage and contamination safeguards where necessary.
            • Appropriate sound insulation and ventilation details.
            • A construction management plan.
            • Cycle storage and amenity-space retention.
            • A proportionate HMO Management Plan.
            • Security, access-control and CCTV arrangements.
            • A maximum occupation of 16 persons, limited to one person per
               bedroom.
            • Operation of the premises as a single undivided HMO.
    22. The appellant asks that the detailed condition wording be refined if permission is
        granted, particularly as follows:

• Any pre-commencement requirements should be limited to matters genuinely
requiring approval before the relevant works begin. Conditions relating to sound
insulation, ventilation, construction management and landscaping should use a
proportionate trigger linked to the relevant stage of development.



    •   The HMO Management Plan condition should contain a clear and closed list of
        requirements, rather than the open-ended formulation “including but not
        necessarily limited to”. It should secure a management contact, maintenance
        arrangements, refuse arrangements, gate operation, complaints procedure, anti-
        social behaviour protocol, CCTV management and access-control details.
    •   Any EV charging condition should identify the precise location by reference to an
        approved plan, particularly if it is tied to the maintenance-vehicle bay.
    •   The non-subdivision condition should be recast for clarity as follows:

        The premises shall be occupied and operated as one single, undivided house in
        multiple occupation and shall not be subdivided into separate units of
        accommodation without the prior written approval of the local planning authority.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    8
 Appeal Decision 6012437



Introduction

    1. These Final Comments are submitted on behalf of Hamilton Chase Investments
       Limited in response to Ipswich Borough Council’s Statement of Case and its
       without-prejudice suggested conditions.
    2. They are deliberately confined to points arising from the Council’s submissions.
       The appellant relies on and maintains the case set out in its Full Statement of
       Case and accompanying appendices.
    3. The appeal concerns the change of use of Nos. 131–133 St Helens Street from
       vacant Use Class E premises to a single 16-bedroom, 16-person house in
       multiple occupation (“HMO”), with associated alterations and operational works.
    4. The Council’s Statement acknowledges that the interpretation and application of
       policy DM20’s overconcentration criteria is “not without question”. It nevertheless
       maintains that the proposal should be refused because the appeal site lies within
       the Article 4 Direction area and, in the Council’s view, the existing accumulation
       of HMOs and associated amenity pressures mean that the proposal cannot
       satisfy paragraph 9.198 of the Ipswich Local Plan.

Article 4 Direction and DM20

5. The appellant agrees that the Article 4 Direction is a material consideration and
provides relevant strategic context. However, the appellant respectfully disagrees with
the Council’s suggestion that the Article 4 Direction places the appeal premises into a
“state of presumption of concentration irrespective of the DM20 overconcentration
metric”.

    6. The legal effect of the Article 4 Direction is to remove specified permitted-
       development rights for changes from Class C3 dwellinghouses to Class C4 small
       HMOs in the designated area. It does not create a freestanding presumption that
       all HMO proposals in the area are unacceptable. Nor does it displace the
       development plan’s actual policy framework, including policy DM20 and the
       specific exception provided by paragraph 9.198.
    7. This proposal is for a 16-person sui generis HMO. It requires express planning
       permission irrespective of the Article 4 Direction. The existence of the Direction
       therefore cannot determine the appeal or substitute for a proper assessment of
       the proposal under policy DM20, including the question expressly posed by
       paragraph 9.198: whether it can be adequately demonstrated that the change of
       use would not harm the amenity of the local area.
    8. The Council’s position risks converting an Article 4 Direction, which controls a
       defined category of permitted development, into a blanket policy objection to a
       materially different form of development that must in all cases be assessed
       through the ordinary planning process. That would go beyond both the purpose
       of the Direction and the wording of policy DM20.

HMO concentration and local context

    9. The Council accepts that the DM20 exercise involves questions of interpretation
       and application. The appellant maintains its case that the outcome under policy
       DM20(iii) is method-dependent, including whether “properties” means addresses
       or footprint plots. The Council’s own earlier officer material recorded the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    9
 Appeal Decision 6012437



        alternative addresses-based approach. It confirmed that the proposal did not
        trigger criteria (i), (ii) or (iv).
    10. The Council’s Statement also relies on HMOs on the opposite side of St Helens
        Street, particularly between Nos. 154 and 194, and on a broader network of
        streets behind the site. Those matters may form part of the wider local context.
        However, they cannot replace the defined test in policy DM20(iii), which
        concerns a run of 20 properties on one side of the road.
    11. Nor does a wider concentration narrative, without more, demonstrate that this
        particular proposal would cause unacceptable harm to the amenity of the local
        area. The Council has not identified site-specific evidence demonstrating a
        causal connection between the proposed 16-person HMO and any unacceptable
        worsening of parking conditions, waste management, noise, disturbance,
        community cohesion or other asserted effects.
    12. +6336`+



4

    12. The Council relies substantially on general concerns expressed at committee
        about parking availability and waste accumulation. Those matters were relevant
        considerations for members. However, the comments recorded in the minutes
        are not a parking survey, waste audit, operational assessment or other technical
        evidence showing that the appeal proposal would produce unacceptable effects.
    13. The appellant’s Full Statement of Case already explains why the proposal must
        be assessed by reference to its specific circumstances: a vacant and degraded
        corner site; a mixed surrounding context; enclosed external amenity space;
        dedicated refuse arrangements; secure cycle storage; a maintenance bay;
        proposed sound insulation; security measures; and a controlled single- HMO
        occupation with a maximum of 16 residents.
    14. In addition, the appellant’s review of available police.uk mapping did not identify
        a pattern of materially elevated anti-social behaviour in the immediate vicinity of
        the site during the relevant 12-month period. The appellant recognises the limits
        of that anonymised and approximate mapping evidence. However, it provides
        objective context and does not support an assumption that the proposal should
        be treated as inherently harmful by association with HMO occupation.

Paragraph 9.198

    15. The Council correctly identifies paragraph 9.198 as the material exception where
        an overconcentration guideline is engaged. The appellant’s position remains that
        the paragraph requires an assessment of whether the proposed HMO would
        harm local amenity; it does not establish an automatic prohibition.
    16. Paragraph 9.198 does not require an applicant to show that a residential use
        could have no conceivable effect on the locality. Such a test would be
        unworkable and would deprive the exception of practical effect. The relevant
        question is whether unacceptable harm to local amenity would arise, having
        regard to the scheme’s design, location, operation, mitigation and enforceable
        controls.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     10
 Appeal Decision 6012437



    17. The Council’s own suggested conditions are important in this respect. They
        provide for controls over drainage, biodiversity, contamination, sound insulation,
        ventilation, construction effects, cycle storage, HMO management, gate
        operation, refuse arrangements, CCTV and access arrangements, amenity
        space, security measures, occupation levels and the continued operation of the
        building as one undivided HMO.



    18. Those conditions substantially reinforce the conclusion reached in the officer
        recommendation for approval of the application: that the detailed operation of the
        development could be satisfactorily regulated. They are inconsistent with any
        contention that the proposal’s impacts are inherently incapable of mitigation or
        control.
    19. The appellant therefore maintains that the appeal proposal satisfies paragraph
        9.198, whether or not the Inspector concludes that the numerical guideline in
        policy DM20(iii) is technically engaged.

Interested-party representation

    24. The appellant has reviewed the interested-party representation. The appellant
        recognises the concerns expressed regarding parking, pedestrian safety, waste,
        noise and the scale of the proposed HMO. Those matters are relevant to the
        planning judgment. However, the representation is not accompanied by a
        parking survey, traffic survey, highway-safety evidence, photographs, or other
        technical material demonstrating that the proposal would result in an
        unacceptable effect on highway safety or local amenity.
    25. The representation suggests that the proposed HMO would “predictably”
        generate four to five vehicles. No source, methodology or site-specific
        assessment is provided for that estimate. In particular, the representation does
        not assess the site’s sustainable location, proximity to local services and public
        transport, or the proposed secure cycle provision. Nor does it demonstrate that
        any additional on-street parking demand would result in an unacceptable
        highway-safety effect. The Local Highway Authority did not maintain an objection
        in principle, and the Council’s Statement of Case does not rely on a technical
        highways objection.



26. The appellant does not contend that the vacant condition of the buildings alone
justifies the development, or that an HMO is inherently beneficial. The proposal falls to
be assessed on its individual merits. Those include the existing vacant and degraded
condition of the site, its mixed and sustainable location, the detailed layout, enclosed
amenity space, refuse and cycle arrangements, security and management measures,
maximum occupancy restriction, and the scope for enforceable planning conditions.
The appellant maintains that, taken together, these matters demonstrate that the
proposal would not result in unacceptable harm to local amenity.

Conclusion



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     11
 Appeal Decision 6012437



    27. Neither the Council’s Statement of Case nor the interested-party representation
        demonstrates that the proposal would result in unacceptable, site-specific harm
        to highway safety or local amenity. The Article 4 Direction does not create a
        presumption that this sui generis HMO must be refused, and it does not displace
        the policy DM20 assessment or the express paragraph 9.198 exception.
    28. The Council has not demonstrated that the proposal would result in
        unacceptable, site-specific harm to local amenity. In contrast, the proposal would
        bring two long-vacant and degraded buildings back into use, provide 16 units of
        residential accommodation in a sustainable location, deliver recognised heritage
        and townscape benefits, and be subject to a robust and enforceable suite of
        conditions.
    29. The appellant respectfully requests that the appeal should therefore be allowed,
        subject to appropriately worded planning conditions.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    12
