Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 16 September 2026
by P Barton BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 02 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012036
Romaldor, St Johns Road, Wroxall, Isel of Wight PO38 3EL
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Thomas Morgan against the decision of Isle of Wight Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01703/FUL.
•    The development proposed is lattice mast with HF beam antenna.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     I have used the description of development given in the appeal form in the banner
       heading above as it is concise and removes superfluous text from that set out in
       the application form.
3.     A new version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published on 17 August 2026. The policy emphasis of the parts of the Framework
       most relevant to this appeal have not changed. As a result, I have not sought
       comments on the new version of the Framework, and I am satisfied that no party’s
       interests have been prejudiced by taking this approach.
4.     The Island Plan Core Strategy March 2012 (CS) referred to in the decision notice
       has been superseded by the Island Planning Strategy September 2026 (PS),
       which was adopted on the 16 September 2026. The main parties have had the
       opportunity to comment on the PS in the context of the appeal.
5.     Appeal decisions must be based on the policies from the development plan
       prevailing at the time of determination. Policies referred to in the reason for refusal
       from the CS are no longer relevant and are disregarded. The Council has identified
       the policies from the PS relevant to this appeal.
Main Issues
6.     The main issues are the effect of the proposed development on:
           •    the character and appearance of the area, including the effect on the setting
                of the Isle of Wight National Landscape; and
           •    the living conditions of occupiers of neighbouring properties, with particular
                reference to outlook.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012036


Reasons
Character and appearance
7.     Romaldor is a detached bungalow set amongst similar properties sitting in an
       elevated position to the eastern side of St Johns Road. Houses to the opposite
       side of the road are set down, resulting in far reaching views of its valley setting.
       This affords the ribbon development along this stretch of St Johns Road an
       attractive semi-rural character and appearance.
8.     The back garden to Romaldor includes a steep incline that rises to the level of a
       former railway line located to the rear and now forms part of the Red Squirrel Trail.
       Beyond the trail is open countryside within the Isle of Wight National Landscape
       (NL). Forming part of the settlement of Wroxall, St Johns Road, including the
       appeal site, offer views of the NL. Therefore, the appeal site and the surrounding
       area form part of the setting of the NL.
9.     In determining this appeal, I am required to seek to further the purpose of
       conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of the National Landscape and give
       great weight to conserving and enhancing landscape and scenic beauty.
10. At an approximate height of 13m, the installation would be located broadly central
    within the rear garden of Romadlor, at a point where it is at a similar level to the
    bungalow. At the top of the lattice mast, an antenna having an approximate turning
    circle of 5.5m would be mounted. The proposal would be used in association with
    amateur radio operations undertaken pursuant to an Ofcom licence.
11. Projecting to a height markedly greater than the bungalow and the former railway
    line, along with a wide span to the antenna, the installation, with its utilitarian
    appearance, would be particularly prominent in the street scene, as well as from
    neighbouring properties and from the Red Squirrel Trail where it passes the site.
    Although the nature of the open-frame lattice tower and slender profile to the
    antenna allows some transparency, due to the noticeable absence of any tall
    structures or trees nearby, forming a meaningful backdrop, it would still create a
    very distinctive break in the skyline, forming an incongruous feature. Moreover, it
    would be seen within the setting of the NL and appear far more conspicuous than
    the telegraph poles that line St Johns Road as well as domestic outbuildings and
    fencing within the curtilages of houses.
12. I noted the presence of telecommunication installations that are a considerable
    distance to the west of the appeal site. I do not know the circumstances under
    which they were erected and cannot draw any direct comparison with the proposal
    that would weigh in its favour. The presence of these does not overcome the harm
    that I have otherwise found.
13. Consequently, the harm to the character and appearance of the area would be
    significant. Although the harm to the setting of the NL would be at a more
    moderate level, I still attribute great weight to this harm and the proposal would
    neither conserve nor enhance landscape and scenic beauty.
14. For the above reasons, the proposal would have an unacceptable effect on the
    character and appearance of the area, including the setting of the NL. The
    development would, therefore, not further the purpose of the NL and would be
    contrary to PS Policies C1 and EV9. Together these policies require, amongst


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012036


       other things, new development to be of a high-quality design that respects and
       enhances the character of the area, including proposals that conserve, enhance
       and promote landscapes. For the same reasons, the proposal would also conflict
       with objectives 01 and 06 of the Isle of Wight Landscape: Area of Outstanding
       Natural Beauty Management Plan 2025-2030, which collectively seek to ensure
       the conservation and enhancement of the NL.
Living conditions
15. Due to the height of the mast, span of the antenna, and nondomestic appearance
    within the context of modest gardens within the locality, the installation would
    create a very close, dominant and overbearing feature, particularly to the
    immediate neighbouring bungalows. There would be a detrimental impact on the
    outlook from the rear windows of these neighbouring properties and the enjoyment
    of the outdoor amenity spaces. This is materially different to a change of a private
    view and relates to an impact that is of such an extent that it harms the residential
    amenities enjoyed by the property. Whilst the presence of vegetation would reduce
    the impact in relation to Petraen, Farthing’s garden has an open nature that would
    make the property particularly susceptible to the effects of the installation.
16. In conclusion, the proposal would have an unacceptable effect on the living
    conditions of occupiers of neighbouring properties, with particular reference to
    outlook. This would not accord with PS Policy C1, where, inter alia, development
    proposals need to protect the living conditions of existing residents, including
    maintaining an appropriate outlook.
Other Matters
17. It is noted that: the proposal’s appearance is different to commonplace vertical
    structures, including, but not limited to, telegraph poles; it is located within a
    residential garden rather than the open countryside; and claims that other amateur
    radio installations exist elsewhere on the Island. Moreover, the visual impact of the
    proposal diminishes when viewed from a greater distance, as illustrated by the
    photos taken from near to Appuldercombe House in support of the development.
    However, this has not swayed me away from the findings on the appeal scheme
    before me, which is based on its individual planning merits.
18. Amateur radio is a long established technical and communications activity with
    recognised education, scientific and community resilience benefits, and the
    proposal has received support from The Radio Society of Great Britain and the Isle
    of Wight Radio Society. Furthermore, amateur radio systems can continue to
    operate when conventional telecommunications systems fail. However, the impact
    the proposal would have on such a scenario, in conjunction with other existing
    communications capability, has not been substantiated. Therefore, the evidence
    before me does not demonstrate that the proposal would facilitate significant public
    benefits in terms of its contribution towards community resilience, including
    emergency communications capability, and I afford this moderate weight in its
    favour.
19. Use of a permanent installation, rather than an alternative option such as a
    demountable pole, is not a determinative factor in my consideration of this appeal.
20. A lack of harm or policy compliance with regards to ecological matters, noise and
    disturbance, traffic generation, public safety, overlooking, privacy, overshadowing,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6012036


       daylight, heritage assets and health are neutral matters that weigh neither for nor
       against the proposal.
Planning Balance
21. There is consistency between PS policies C1 and EV9, and national decision-
    making policies DP3, N4 and L2. These seek proposals that; respond to their
    context, so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings; are sensitively
    located and designed to avoid or minimise adverse impacts on a Protected
    Landscape; and provide acceptable living standards for neighbours respectively.
    Accordingly, I give great weight to this conflict as a result of the level of harm
    identified.
22. Moreover, the proposal would fail to comply with one of the national decision-
    making policies which state that development proposals should be refused in
    specific circumstances, as set out in policy S4(2)(c) of the Framework.
23. In this instance, when balancing all considerations, I have found that the benefits
    of approving the appeal scheme would be substantially outweighed by adverse
    effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the
    Framework. Consequently, the presumption in favour of sustainable development
    set out in policy S4 of the Framework does not apply.
Conclusion
24. The proposal conflicts with the development plan as a whole and the material
    considerations, including the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal should be
    decided other than in accordance with it. Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.

P Barton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
