 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 19 August 2026
 by K Winnard LL.B Hons Solicitor
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 28 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012634
 32 Brookside Road, Chapel-en-le-Frith, Derbyshire SK23 0NE
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Ryan against the decision of High Peak Borough Council.
 •    The application Ref is HPK/2026/0112.
 •    The development proposed is a first floor side extension and garage conversion.



Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a first floor side
   extension and garage conversion at 32 Brookside Road, Chapel-en-le-Frith,
   Derbyshire SK23 0NE in accordance with the terms of the application,
   HPK/2026/0112, and the plans submitted with it subject to the following conditions:
     (i)     The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
             date of this decision.
     (ii)    The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
             the following approved plans: First Floor Side Extension and Garage
             Conversion Drawing No. 32BR/PL/01/B and First Floor Side Extension and
             Garage Conversion Drawing No.32BR/PL/02/A.
     (iii)   The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
             development hereby permitted shall match those used in the existing
             building.
Procedural Matter
2. In August 2006 the Government published a revised National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework). Having reviewed the changes, I am satisfied that as
   far as their substance relates to the main issue in this appeal, further consultation
   with the main parties would not be necessary since they have not materially
   affected or prejudiced the cases of the parties.
Main Issue
3. The main issue in the appeal is the effect of the development on the residential
   amenities of the occupiers of the neighbouring property, No 34 Brookside Road (No
   34) by way of loss of light and outlook.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012634


Reasons
4. The appeal property, No 32 Brookside Road (No 32) is a detached dwelling located
   in a residential area characterised by detached dwellings of a similar type and style
   with an attached garage to the side. The row of detached dwellings, on this side of
   the road, are staggered to the south west with each dwelling set forward of the
   neighbouring property such that the front almost aligns with the rear of the
   neighbouring one. The side garage of No 32 is separated by a high boundary fence
   and a side footpath from No 34. As a result of this layout, the existing relationship
   between the two properties is such that a 45 degree line used to assess whether a
   proposal would result in a significant reduction of light enjoyed by occupiers of
   neighbouring dwellings, is already breached.
5. The proposed development would see the conversion of the garage into living
   accommodation and a first floor side extension built over it. No 34 is to the south
   west of the appeal site and set away from the shared side boundary. In terms of the
   present outlook, there are oblique views from the rear patio doors and a bedroom
   window towards the flank wall of No 32, the adjacent garage and shared boundary
   fence. The proposed extension would result in the built form at first floor level of No
   32 being closer with a height and mass slightly less than the two storey scale of the
   existing dwelling.
6. I am not persuaded that this extended form of No 32 would appear so unacceptably
   close in the outlook or appear overbearing from the rear of No 34. There is a
   reasonable gap between the flank wall of the existing garage which is set away
   from the common boundary. Although the appeal scheme would be visible from the
   windows of habitable rooms found at the rear of No 34, given the staggered layout
   of the properties, I am satisfied that the impact would be largely confined to the
   periphery of the outlook from these areas. No 34 enjoys a good-sized garden and
   the principal outlook from the amenity area would remain down that property’s own
   garden and uninterrupted views over this garden would remain, maintaining
   adequate outlook and light.
7. Having regard to the impact that the neighbouring garage and dwelling already
   have, I am satisfied that the windows of No 34 would still receive sufficient light.
   Given the proposed extension would be sited on the north eastern side of No 34 it
   would be likely that the increase in built form would result only in a slight increase in
   shadowing of the rear garden at No 34 and this would only be apparent at certain
   times in the morning. Accordingly, I find that the proposal would not lead to a
   harmful loss of daylight or sunlight to the rear doors, window or the amenity area at
   No 34.
8. The Council does not raise any objection to the design and appearance of the
   proposed development, nor are any highway issues raised. I would agree with
   these assessments.
9. For the reasons above, the proposed development would not have an
   unacceptable effect on the living conditions of the neighbouring occupiers having
   regard to light and outlook. It would therefore not conflict with Policy EQ6 of the
   High Peak Local Plan (2016) which seeks to prevent development that causes
   unacceptable effects by amongst other things, overshadowing and an overbearing
   effect, on the residential amenity of neighbouring occupiers. Nor would it conflict
   with the aims of the High Peak Borough Council Residential Design Supplementary


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision 6012634


    Planning Document in seeking to avoid undue harm to the amenity of the occupiers
    of neighbouring properties.
Conditions
10. In addition to the standard time condition, a condition requiring the development to
    be carried out in accordance with the approved plans is necessary for the
    avoidance of doubt and in the interests of proper planning. A further condition is
    also necessary to ensure that the development is carried out in materials to match
    the existing building in order to safeguard the character and appearance of the
    area.
Conclusion
11. For the reasons given and having regard to all other matters raised I conclude that
    the appeal should be allowed.


K Winnard
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
