 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 21 August 2026
 by Victor Callister BA(Hons) PGC(Oxon) DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 25 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012819
 17 Percy Road, Bexley, Bexleyheath DA7 4DZ
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Ms Nadia Michel against the decision of the London Borough of Bexley
      Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00325/FUL.
 •    The development is the erection of a single storey rear extension.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. As the description of development varies between documents submitted, I have
   used that from the Council’s decision notice. This is a concise and accurate
   description, and the appellant confirms acceptance of this description in their
   statement.
3. The appeal relates to development that has already been carried out. As the
   application is retrospective, I have considered the submission accordingly.
4. Subsequent to the decision made by the Council on the application to which this
   appeal relates, the Government published a revised National Planning Policy
   Framework (August 2026) (the Framework). I have sought comments from the
   main parties on the revised Framework in relation to the appeal. It will therefore not
   prejudice any party by making my decision with regard to the revised Framework.
Main Issue
5. The main issue is the effect on living conditions of neighbouring residential
   occupiers.
Reasons
6. The appeal dwelling is a mid-terrace two storey house, located in a street of
   similarly scaled terraced and semi-detached dwellings. The development is a single
   storey flat roofed extension that is almost the full width of the rear wall of the main
   house and projects into the rear garden by approximately 6.2 Metres. This replaces
   an early single storey pitched roof outshoot, with a later flat roofed extension to its
   rear. These sat adjacent to the boundary with the attached house at 15 Percey
   Road (No.15) and collectively projected rearwards to approximately the same
   extent as the appeal extension.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
    Appeal Decision 6012819


7. Planning permission1 was previously granted for a full width single storey extension
   of similar design to the appeal extension. This would have projected approximately
   3.85 Metres rearward from the main rear wall of the house. The appellant has
   stated that the rearward projection of the appeal extension is a result of extending
   the previously approved proposal during implementation, so as to avoid a sewer.
   The application that is the subject of this appeal was submitted with the intension of
   regularising the planning status of the appeal extension.
8. The rear projection of the previously approved proposal at approximately 3.85
   metres is slightly greater than the recommended maximum of 3.5 metres for such
   extensions set out in the Bexley Building Alterations and Extensions
   Supplementary Planning Document (the SPD). The SPD states that full width rear
   extensions with a maximum rearward projection of 3.5 are acceptable if it can be
   demonstrated that this will not negatively impact neighbours. However, the appeal
   extension with a rearward projection of approximately 6.2 metres is significantly in
   excess of this advised maximum for a full width rear extension and the previously
   approved 3.85 metres rear projection.
9. The appellant has argued that the appeal extension should be considered in line
   with the advice given in the SPD for infill extensions to semidetached properties
   with existing outshoots, given the previously existing rear outshoot to the appeal
   dwelling. However, the appeal dwelling is a mid-terrace house and not semi-
   detached, and the flank of the appeal extension is not set away from the boundary
   as would be the case for semi-detached property in the SPD example. Therefore, I
   find, the advice given in the SPD for rear infill extensions to semi-detached
   properties is not directly applicable in this instance.
10. There is an existing rear outshoot at No.15 that is the same depth as that
    previously to the rear of the appeal dwelling. The appeal extension reflects the
    rearward extend of the pair of extensions it replaces, and I am content that it has no
    significant effect on the living conditions of the occupiers of No.15.
11. However, the appeal extension sits adjacent to the boundary with the attached
    house at 19 Percy Road (No.19), resulting in a 6.2 metre flank wall along this
    boundary. In combination with the existing outshoot at No.19 and the flank of a
    longer outshoot at 21 Percy Road, which sits adjacent to its boundary with No.19,
    this results in a significant sense enclosure of the rear ground floor rooms and rear
    garden area closest to the house at No.19. This represents a significant loss of
    outlook that is oppressive. Whilst I acknowledge that enclosure can also result in
    greater privacy from overlooking, in this instance I find that this is outweighed by
    the damaging effect of the appeal proposal on outlook. Consequently, the proposal
    is detrimental to the living conditions of neighbouring residential occupiers through
    an unacceptable increase in enclosure and loss of outlook
12. The appellant has drawn attention to an approved single storey extension to a two
    storey terraced houses at 168 Church Road2 (No.168) within the Council area. This
    is not a full width extension but does have with a rearward projection of 6 Metres
    along the shared boundary. Although I have been provided with the decision
    notice, plans and photographs of this other extension, I have not been provided


1
    Planning Ref: 22/02278/FUL
2
    Planning Ref: 21/00685/GPDE


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
 Appeal Decision 6012819


     with any material related to the Council’s reasoning for their decision that prior
     approval was not need in that instance.
13. The design guidance in the SPD should be applied in the light of individual context
    and circumstances. No.168 is an end of terrace and not a mid-terrace property like
    the appeal dwelling and there are no significant extensions the adjoining houses or
    the house adjoining that, which would add unacceptably to a sense of enclosure. At
    the time it was approved, this extension would have been considered on its own
    individual merits. This is a main tenet of the planning system, and I have done
    likewise in my consideration of the appeal development. I find, therefore, that this
    other extension does not provide an exemplar for the appeal extension, and I have
    only afforded it limited weight in my considerations.
14. For the reasons given above, the appeal development results in substantial harm to
    the living conditions of the occupiers of a neighbouring dwelling. This is contrary to
    Policies SP5 and DP11 of the Bexley Local Plan (2023) and Policy DP3 of the
    Framework. Collectively these seek developments that reflect the principle of
    liveability, enhance social cohesion, consider the impact on neighbouring amenity
    and provide appropriate outlook.
15. Whilst the appeal development increases the living space for its occupiers, this is
    primarily a private benefit, and no substantial public benefits have been identified.
    As such, I do not find that the benefits of the development outweigh the harm to the
    living conditions of neighbouring residential occupiers that I have identified above.
Conclusion
16. The appeal is dismissed



Victor Callister
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
