Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 22 September 2026
by N Bowden BA(Hons) Dip TP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012539
Ailsa Craig, Abberton Field, Hurstpierpoint, West Sussex BN6 9QD
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Matthew Head against the decision of Mid Sussex District Council.
•    The application Ref is DM/26/1213.
•    The development proposed is retrospective planning permission for external cladding.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for external cladding at
       Ailsa Craig, Abberton Field, Hurstpierpoint, West Sussex BN6 9QD in accordance
       with the terms of the application, Ref DM/26/1213, and the plans submitted with it.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The description of development given on the application form was extensive and
       provided commentary on the nature of the proposal and included reference to
       matters which are not acts of development. The description given by the Council
       also made reference to the development being retrospective. Whilst this is correct
       as a matter of fact, it is also not an act of development.
3.     In allowing the appeal I have therefore adjusted the description of development to
       be “external cladding” only. I am satisfied that this can be done without prejudice to
       any party as it does not fundamentally alter the scheme.
4.     A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
       17 August 2026. Given the nature and scale of the proposal, I am satisfied that the
       changes to the Framework would not alter the outcome of this appeal. I have
       therefore not consulted the parties in relation to the changes.
Main Issue
5.     The main issue is whether the development would preserve or enhance the
       character or appearance of the Hurstpierpoint Conservation Area (HCA).
Reasons
6.     The appeal site is within the HCA which is centred around the fairly linear High
       Street and Holy Trinity church together with surrounding areas. Building types,
       street layouts and patterns and the architectural vernacular of buildings vary
       substantially owing to the long history and gradual growth of the settlement. These
       range from medieval timber framed houses to more modern infill development.
       Materials used in the construction and facing materials of buildings varies and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012539


       includes red brick, brick and flint, sandstone and render with some limited
       examples of tile hanging and weatherboarding.
7.     Abberton Field forms one of the more modern parts of the HCA with homes along
       this cul-de-sac being detached, typically brick-built, mid-twentieth century
       structures under tiled roofs. The road contributes to the HCA primarily due to its
       verdant setting with the trees along the street and on individual properties making
       a strong contribution to the more historic elements of the area along Hassocks
       Road. This includes a number of listed buildings that address Hassocks Road,
       which are finished, primarily, in white render.
8.     Overall, the HCA is significant due to its extensive and storied history and the
       multitude of building types and patterns of development which contribute to its
       character and appearance.
9.     S72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
       requires that special attention shall be paid to the desirability of preserving or
       enhancing the character or appearance of that area. Paragraph 1 of policy HE6 of
       the Framework further sets out that when considering the potential effect of a
       development proposal on the significance of a designated heritage asset,
       substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation.
10. The proposal seeks to retain white uPVC weatherboarding which has been
    installed on the outer walls of most of the existing dwelling. Formerly the dwelling
    was largely finished externally in brick. This use of materials including the colour
    and its use on the majority of all parts of the walls does result in the building being
    somewhat more prominent in the local street scene. This type of material is
    somewhat at odds with other buildings along Abberton Field where more muted
    brick is the predominant facing material.
11. However, this part of the HCA along Abberton Field is not defined by particularly
    historic buildings, nor are the materials used in the construction of buildings
    amongst the more traditional palate that is used elsewhere in the HCA. I recognise
    that the change in colour and texture does render the dwelling somewhat more
    strident and that this colour choice is similar to that of the nearby listed buildings.
    However, the existing dwelling is clearly a modern addition to the HCA, it is well
    screened and highly unlikely to be viewed in the same context as the nearby listed
    buildings, particularly given the screening on and around the appeal site. In this
    regard, it would not affect their setting or special historic interest.
12. Paragraph 2 of policy HE9 of the Framework notes that not all elements of a
    conservation area will necessarily contribute to its significance. Where a
    development proposal would result in the loss of a building or other element which
    contributes to the character or appearance of a conservation area that is desirable
    to conserve, the assessment of impact should take into account the relative
    significance of the element affected and its contribution to the significance of the
    conservation area as a whole.
13. I find that the use of materials on this dwelling does not contribute to the
    significance of the heritage asset overall and the change in materials has a neutral
    effect on both the character and appearance of the HCA. The proposal would
    therefore preserve the heritage asset and comply with policy DP26, DP34 and
    DP35 of the Mid Sussex District Plan, policy HurstC4 of the Hurstpierpoint and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012539


       Sayers Common Neighbourhood Plan, the Mid Sussex Design Guide, and
       provisions of the Framework.
Conditions
14. The development is substantially complete and does not raise any wider issues.
    No conditions are necessary.
Conclusion
15. The proposal would have a neutral effect on the HCA and therefore would
    preserve the significance of the heritage asset. The material considerations do not
    indicate a decision should be made other than in accordance with the development
    plan. Therefore, the appeal should be allowed.



N Bowden
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
