Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by Richard Snow BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012885
13 Main Street, Branston, Leicestershire NG32 1RU
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by David Bates against the decision of Melton Borough Council.
•   The application Ref is 24/00722/FUL.
•   The development proposed is the retention of a structure, namely a marquee, that is currently in situ.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2. An application for costs was made by Mr David Bates against Melton Borough
   Council. This application is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3. The description of development differs between the application form and the
   decision notice. As I have no evidence that the appellant agreed to the amended
   wording, I have used the description from the application form in the banner header
   above.
4. I observed at my site visit that the proposed marquee is already in situ and that 2
   other tented structures are positioned within the site although these do not form
   part of the appeal proposal.
5. On 17 August 2026 a new National Planning Policy Framework (‘the Framework’)
   was issued replacing the version of the Framework published in December 2024.
   The parties were invited to comment on the Framework in relation to the proposed
   development so that their views would be taken into account in the determination of
   the appeal.
Main Issues
6. The main issues for this appeal are the effect of the proposal on:
       •     the character and appearance of the area, including designated heritage
             assets;
       •     the living conditions of nearby occupiers with particular regard to noise and
             disturbance; and,
       •     highway safety.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012885


Reasons
Character and appearance
7. The appeal site is an area of grassland, described as a paddock, used as an
   extension to the beer garden associated with The Wheel Inn Public House and
   within the Branston Conservation Area (CA). On the evidence before me, including
   the undated Branston CA Appraisal, insofar as it relates to this appeal, the
   significance of the CA as a whole is derived from being a pleasant linear ironstone
   village within a rural agricultural setting. The CA Appraisal refers specially to The
   Wheel Inn, describing it as a focal point of village life. The public house is of a
   traditional appearance and constructed of materials common throughout the village.
   Its associated land to the rear provides a generally open and verdant character on
   the western edge of the CA. Accordingly, the building, and its associated land to
   the rear make a positive contribution to the character and appearance of the CA
   and thus its significance.
8. In determining this appeal, I have had regard to my statutory duty under Section
   72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act)
   to pay special attention to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character
   or appearance of conservation areas.
9. The proposal seeks retain the marquee until July 2029 for use as an additional
   function space for events. The grassed area within which the marquee stands is
   surrounded by mature trees and vegetation. The marquee itself is of a substantial
   size and is constructed from a framework wrapped in white PVC sheeting. It has a
   utilitarian and temporary appearance.
10. Extending further west than the majority of the buildings in the CA, the marquee’s
    siting within the otherwise open surroundings of the village harms the linear
    character of the CA described in the CA Appraisal. The marquee is visible from
    within the grounds of the Church of St. Guthlac to the north, from the Public Right
    of Way extending west of the appeal site, and across open fields from Branston
    Road to the south. The trees surrounding the appeal site provide only partial
    screening from these vantage points.
11. The size, height, siting and external materials of the marquee appear incongruous
    to its setting and fail to reflect the predominant use of ironstone commonplace in
    the CA, or the rich vernacular of the surrounding buildings.
12. For the above reasons, the structure appears as a discordant feature adversely
    affecting its pleasant and attractive surroundings and would do so even if retained
    on a temporary basis as proposed. Accordingly, the marquee results in harm to the
    character and appearance of the appeal site and its wider surroundings and fails to
    preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the CA, resulting in harm to its
    significance. The proposal accordingly conflicts with Policies D1, EN1, EN6 and
    EN13 of the Melton Local Plan which collectively require development to protect
    their landscape setting, local vernacular, settlement character, heritage assets and
    advance high-quality design.
13. Policy HE6 of the Framework advises that when considering the effect of a
    proposal on the significance of a designated heritage asset, substantial weight
    should be given to the asset’s conservation and that any harm to a designated
    heritage asset will be a matter of considerable importance and weight. Taking

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012885


     account of the temporary nature of the proposal, the harm to the CA would be at a
     low level, but for the reasons outlined above, harm caused to a CA and its
     significance should be afforded substantial weight.
14. Where harm to the significance of a designated heritage asset is identified, the
    effect on the asset and its significance should be weighed against any public
    benefits resulting from the proposal. The appellant advances that the use of the
    marquee for events is important in contributing to the viability of the public house
    business which, like many, was affected by the Covid-19 pandemic. The ability to
    offer a large function space for events such as weddings and community or family
    celebrations is advanced as necessary in allowing the business to respond flexibly
    to emerging market demands. It is further suggested that the proposal would
    contribute to the economy of the local area through employment and tourism
    benefits.
15. The benefits arising from the continued operation of the public house are
    acknowledged. However, there is no substantive evidence before me, such as
    viability or financial information, demonstrating that the business would face
    significant financial difficulty or closure without the marquee. Consequently, I afford
    only limited weight to this benefit. I recognise that the proposal would provide some
    support to the local economy and tourism, and these considerations weigh in favour
    of the appeal. However, I attribute only low to moderate weight to these benefits.
    Taken together, they are insufficient to outweigh the harm identified. I therefore
    conclude that the public benefits do not outweigh the identified harm to the CA.
Noise and disturbance
16. It is proposed to use the marquee for a maximum of 20 events in each calendar
    year, with a maximum of 12 of these events including live music. It is proposed that
    up to 12 of the events would run until midnight with the remainder finishing by
    23:00hrs. The marquee would not be used for events between midnight and
    midday on any day. It is suggested that the typical scale of an event would attract
    between 65 and 100 attendees, although the marquee can accommodate up to 125
    persons, including staff.
17. The public house is located centrally within the village with residential dwellings
    located in close proximity to the east of the appeal site. Events taking place within
    the marquee are likely to involve noisy activities including the playing of amplified
    and live music, and are likely to create further noise associated with the talking,
    shouting or the socialising of the attendees, which itself may be exacerbated
    through the consumption of alcohol.
18. No specific noise assessment is before me although the appellant suggests that
    noise levels on the dance floor within the marquee could be restricted to no more
    than 85db(A). The marquee is a relatively flimsy structure, and I am unaware of any
    in-built noise suppression qualities. It is not clear how noise levels could be
    restricted in the manner suggested, especially as many of the sources of noise
    described above would be beyond the control of the appellant. Additional noise
    associated with the arrival and departure of attendees would equally not be
    addressed by such a condition.
19. The appellant contends that the outdoor areas of the public house could generate
    noise until similar hours. However, while a beer garden would inevitably give rise to
    some disturbance, events within a marquee accommodating up to 125 people

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6012885


     would be likely to result in greater and more sustained noise levels, in all weather
     conditions and potentially later into the evening.
20. Given the close proximity of neighbouring dwellings and the scale and frequency of
    the proposed events, I find that the use would give rise to significant noise and
    disturbance, particularly during hours when residents would reasonably expect
    quiet enjoyment of their homes. This conclusion is reinforced by the
    representations received.
21. Accordingly, the proposal would harm the living conditions of nearby residents and
    would conflict with Policy D1 of the Melton Local Plan, which seeks to protect
    residential amenity.
Highway safety
22. In the absence of evidence regarding the availability and frequency of public
    transport, and having regard to the rural location of the appeal site, I find it likely
    that the majority of attendees would travel by private car. This is particularly so for
    marquee events, which would be expected to attract visitors from a wider area than
    patrons of the public house. While the appellant advises that parking is available for
    approximately 30 vehicles, the evidence before me indicates that this provision is
    unlikely to be sufficient to accommodate demand generated by such events.
23. The marquee is capable of accommodating up to 125 people and, together with
    staff and patrons of the public house operating concurrently, would generate a
    substantial parking demand, likely to exceed the parking provision available on the
    site. Although the appellant refers to an adjacent field for overspill parking, that land
    falls outside the appeal site and whilst the application submissions indicate that this
    land falls within the ownership of the appellant, evidence submitted for the appeal
    indicates that the land is leased from a third party. Accordingly, there is insufficient
    evidence to demonstrate that it would be available for such use, and I attach limited
    weight to this contention. In the absence of adequate alternative parking provision,
    the development would be likely to result in significant on-street parking. Given the
    restricted width of Main Street and surrounding roads, this would lead to obstruction
    and would be harmful to highway safety.
24. The Highway Authority was unable to provide a definitive view due to the absence
    of information regarding the nature of events and the types of vehicles likely to
    attend. However, given the flexible nature of the proposed use, such details would
    be difficult to predict and enforce. I have therefore assessed the likely parking
    demand on the basis of the available off-street parking provision, local road
    conditions, limited alternative transport options, and the stated capacity of the
    marquee.
25. Having regard to the above, the proposal is likely to result in unacceptable harm to
    highway safety caused by the overspill of attendee’s cars onto the public highway.
    Accordingly, the proposal is contrary to Policy IN2 of the Melton Local Plan which
    requires development to be located where sustainable modes of travel can be
    maximised and where it would not unacceptably impact on the safety and
    movement of traffic on the highway network.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6012885


Other Matters
26. The marquee is located in proximity to the Grade II* Listed Church of St. Guthlac.
    Section 66 of the Act requires that in considering whether to grant planning
    permission for development which affects the setting of a listed building, special
    regard should be had to the desirability of preserving that setting. The grounds of
    the church positively contribute to its setting. However, given the location of the
    marquee, and the intervening building, hedgerow and trees, I consider that the
    setting of the listed church is preserved. I note that the council raise no concerns in
    this respect either.
27. My attention is drawn to the permitted development rights granted by Schedule 2,
    Part 4, Class B of the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted
    Development) (England) Order 2015 which, it is suggested, constitute a reasonable
    fall-back position which weighs in favour of the appeal proposal. The Order allows
    for the temporary use of land for up to 28 days in any calendar year, subject to
    various exclusions and limitations. Whilst this is recognised, I have found that the
    proposal causes harm to the CA. This harm would be continuous for the period up
    to July 2029 and therefore differs materially to the impact associated with the
    sporadic and temporary use of land for 28 days per year.
28. I have considered the suggested planning conditions proposed by the parties.
    However, these would not overcome the harm I have identified to the CA, and for
    the reasons discussed above, I have uncertainty that measures to limit noise could
    be reasonably enforced.
29. The appellant raises concerns over procedural delays in the determination of the
    application which it is suggested have affected the business financially and
    operationally. Such matters fall outside the scope of this appeal.
Planning balance and conclusion
30. I have found that the proposal conflicts with Policies D1, IN2, EN1, EN6 and EN13
    of the Melton Local Plan. These policies are consistent with the Framework in so
    far as it seeks to conserve designated heritage assets, protect the living conditions
    of nearby residents from the effects of development and prevent unacceptable
    impacts on highway safety. Therefore, the conflict with these policies should be
    given significant weight in this appeal.
31. Policy S3 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. For development within settlements, this means that Policy S4 of the
    Framework should be applied. Policy S4 sets out that development proposals
    should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-
    making policies in the Framework.
32. In relation to the first main issue, having applied the public benefits balance in
    Policy HE6 of the Framework above, I have concluded that the benefits in this case
    are insufficient to overcome the significant harm to the designated heritage asset.
    The proposal accordingly conflicts with Policy HE6.
33. Turning to the second main issue, Policy P3 of the Framework advises that
    development proposals should be appropriate for their location, taking into account



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6012885


     their likely effects on living conditions. Within this context, Policy P3 confirms that
     development should not give rise to unacceptable levels of noise beyond the site.
34. Finally, with regard to the third main issue, Policy TR6 of the Framework confirms
    that development proposals should be refused if they would have an unacceptable
    impact on highway safety.
35. Taking all of the above into account, I find that the benefits of the proposal would
    be substantially outweighed by its adverse effects when assessed against the
    national decision making policies of the Framework. As such, Policy S4 of the
    Framework does not point to permission being granted in this instance.
36. In the final balance, the proposal conflicts with the development plan as a whole
    and there are no material considerations that outweigh this conflict. Accordingly the
    appeal should be dismissed.



Richard Snow
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
