Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by David Troy BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 October 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6012075
403 King's Road, London, SW10 0LR
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Patrick Thomas of JOLT Charge Limited against the decision of Royal
     Borough of Kensington and Chelsea.
•    The application Ref is PP/26/00146.
•    The development proposed is the installation of one JOLT Unit (Electric Vehicle Charge Point, with
     integral double-sided LCD screen) and associated electrical connection works.

Appeal B Ref: 6012078
403 King's Road, London, SW10 0LR
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Patrick Thomas of JOLT Charge Limited against the decision of Royal
     Borough of Kensington and Chelsea.
•    The application Ref is CA/26/00147.
     The advertisement proposed is the installation of one JOLT Unit (Electric Vehicle Charge Point, with
     integral double-sided LCD screen) and associated electrical connection works.

Decisions
1.     Appeals A and B are dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     Appeal A concerns the refusal of planning permission to erect a JOLT Unit (JOLT).
       Appeal B concerns the refusal of express consent to display advertisements on the
       JOLT. I have considered each on its individual merits, however, as they raise
       similar issues I have combined both decisions into a single decision letter.
3.     With respect to Appeal B, Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements)
       (England) Regulations 2007 (the Regulations) specify that decisions must be
       based solely on considerations of amenity and public safety. Therefore, while I
       have taken the development plan policies referred to by the Council into account,
       they have not been determinative in respect of Appeal B.
4.     Since the determination of the application an updated and revised National
       Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026.
       The main parties have been consulted and provided with an opportunity to provide
       comments on it in relation to these appeals. I have therefore considered the
       development against the relevant policies in the Framework.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6012075 and 6012078


Main Issues
5.     The main issues in relation to Appeal A are the effect of the proposed
       development on the character and appearance of the area, including the setting of
       the Sloane/Stanley Conservation Area (CA), and highway safety.
6.     The main issues in relation to Appeal B are the effect of the proposed
       advertisement on amenity and public safety.
Reasons
Appeals A and B - Character and Appearance/Amenity
7.     The appeal site comprises of a footpath outside No. 403 King's Road, a
       commercial premises with residential uses above situated on the busy King’s
       Road. It forms part of a three storey terrace with retail and commercial units at
       ground floor level located within the King’s Road District (West) Shopping Centre
       that provides a busy and vibrant commercial character to the area.
8.     The public realm in the vicinity of the appeal site is defined by the relatively wide
       and broad nature of the footway occupied by an array of street furniture and other
       features, including street trees, lamp posts and tables and seating outside the
       nearby restaurant at No. 397 King’s Road and the bakery at No. 401 King’s Road.
       As such, the footway is relatively cluttered in terms of these various structures and
       features.
9.     The new JOLT would be in a relatively open section of the footpath positioned
       close to the edge of the pavement broadly in line with the nearby street tree and
       would be clearly visible to passing pedestrians and motorists. Due to its height,
       width and overall solidity it would be the most prominent feature within its
       immediate setting. Thus, despite the commercial district centre location, due to its
       overall size and visibility, it would have an undue presence in its setting, appearing
       as an incongruous and uncharacteristic feature, which I consider would adversely
       harm rather than positively contribute to the character and appearance of the area.
10. The predominant form of advertisement are modestly sized fascia signage and
    projecting signs that are proportionate to the scale of the shops and other
    commercial premises. While this is a district centre location, the double-sided
    illuminated advertisement display screens integrated with the JOLT would draw
    particular attention to the juxtaposition of the free standing JOLT with the existing
    street furniture and as such would detract from the public realm and the character
    and appearance in this location. The fact that the illumination levels would be
    limited and the frequency of image changes could be controlled by planning
    conditions would not be sufficient measures to overcome the harm I have found to
    the visual amenity of the area.
11. The CA boundary lies on the opposite side of King’s Road. Given the location of
    the appeal site within the setting of the CA, special attention must be paid to
    considering the impact of the development on the significance of the designated
    heritage asset and to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or
    appearance of the CA. The historic and architectural significance of the CA with its
    older more traditional buildings running along King’s Road and the uniform elegant
    Victorian terraced townhouses and streetscapes along the nearby streets, can be
    readily appreciated within the immediate vicinity of the site. I consider that the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6012075 and 6012078


       proposed JOLT and advertisement, by virtue of their siting and design, would have
       a negative material impact on how the CA is viewed and appreciated and as such
       would fail to preserve or enhance the CA.
12. Whilst the degree of harm resulting from the proposed JOLT and advertisement on
    the significance of the CA would be at the lower level, in accordance with Policy
    HE6 (4) of the Framework, that harm should be weighed against any public
    benefits of the proposals.
13. I have considered the appellant’s comments regarding the benefits of improving
    electric vehicle charging infrastructure in line with the policies in the Framework
    and the various public benefits put forward by the appellant. These benefits
    include the inclusive design to ensure usability by all drivers, including those with
    mobility impairments; delivery of publicly accessible and affordable competitively
    priced on-street charging facility powered by renewable energy, including a free
    daily 7kWh allowance for all users funded through advertising revenue and serving
    the high proportion of residents lacking off-street parking in the Borough.
14. The appellant has also highlighted the potential wider benefits associated with the
    increased footfall and expenditure in local businesses whilst vehicles are being
    charged as well as supporting the national and local policy objectives for
    decarbonisation, air quality improvements and transition to zero and low emission
    vehicles. However, I find insufficient public benefits arising from the proposals to
    offset the identified harm to which I attach substantial weight.
15. Accordingly, for these reasons, I conclude for Appeal A that the proposed
    development would have an unacceptably harmful effect on the character and
    appearance of the area, including the setting of the CA. It would therefore be
    contrary to Policies CD1, CD2, CD3, CD4, CD15 and TR4 of the Kensington and
    Chelsea Local Plan 2024 (KCLP), which, amongst other things, seek to ensure
    that developments are designed and sited so as to respect the local character and
    protect views that contribute to the character and quality of the area, preserve or
    enhance the character and appearance and the significance of designated
    heritage assets, including conservation areas and their settings.
16. With regard to Appeal B, I conclude the proposed advertisements would have an
    unacceptable harmful effect on visual amenity. Though not determinative, I have
    taken account of Policies CD1, CD2, CD3, CD4, CD15 and TR4 of the KCLP,
    which in addition to above, seeks to resist advertising that harms amenity and
    contributes to street clutter in the streetscape.
Appeals A and B - Highway Safety/Public Safety
17. The proposed JOLT would be positioned close to the edge of the wide pavement
    broadly in line with the existing street trees and lamp posts. King’s Road is a busy
    and wide commercial street, and it was apparent from my site visit on a weekday
    that pedestrian footfall on the footpath was relatively busy.
18. Whilst I acknowledge the potential for higher footfalls in this location at certain
    times, particularly at peak times and weekends, given the position of the proposed
    JOLT close to the edge of the footpath, it would leave a gap of around 2m of clear
    space in front of the adjacent commercial premises. Whilst the residual footway
    width would fall below the 3m minimum clear width set out in the Council’s
    Transport and Streets Supplementary Planning Document 2016, it would be in line

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6012075 and 6012078


         with the minimum effective unobstructed footway width of least 2000mm sought by
         the Transport for London Streetscape Guidance 2022 on pedestrian flow.
19. In any event, I observed the proposed JOLT would not significantly interrupt any
    obvious desire line for pedestrians along the footpath and the nearby mature tree
    immediately adjacent to the appeal site is an equally significant constraint on the
    width of the footway at this location. I am therefore satisfied that the proposed
    JOLT would not have any additional significant impact in this respect and would, in
    my view, leave ample room for the free and safe movement of pedestrians.
20. Therefore, for the reasons given, I conclude with regard to Appeal A that the
    proposed JOLT would not have a harmful effect on highway safety with particular
    regard to the free and safe movement of pedestrians. Consequently, the proposal
    would accord with Policy TR6 of the KCLP and Policy T4 of the London Plan 2021
    (LP) insofar as they relate to ensuring development protects the safety and free
    flow of the transport network; does not reduce access to, or the attractiveness of
    existing footways and maintains a high quality, safe and accessible pedestrian
    environment where the transport impacts are appropriately mitigated.
21. For Appeal B, I conclude that the proposed advertisements would not cause harm
    to public safety. Though not determinative, I have taken into account Policy TR6 (f)
    of the KCLP and Policy T4 of the LP as outlined above.
Other Matters
22. I have noted the other development in the area drawn to my attention by the
    appellant. However, the illuminated display consented on the nearby Bus Shelter
    outside No. 466 King’s Road1 has different development characteristics to the
    appeal scheme and involves the replacement of an existing advertisement at the
    Bus Shelter. The telephone kiosk by the World’s End Pub at No. 459 King’s Road
    and other bus shelter nearby are of different scale and form to the appeal
    proposals. As a consequence, whilst I have taken this into account, it does not
    materially alter my conclusions on the appeal proposals.
23. In support of the appeals, the appellant has included references to similar JOLT
    structures installed across London. However, I have not been provided the full
    details of these to know how directly comparable they are to the current proposals,
    which in turn limits their relevance. In any event I have determined the appeals
    before me on their own merits.
24. The appellant states that the proposals would contribute towards improving
    publicly available on-street electric vehicle infrastructure in line with the Framework
    and the Government’s EV Infrastructure Strategy. I have considered the various
    other public benefits put forward by the appellant in the main issues above,
    including the higher utilisation rates of the JOLT as compared to other public
    charging facilities. Nonetheless, given the limited scale of the proposals, these
    benefits would be modest and there is no indication that they could not be
    achieved in a less harmful manner than proposed. Therefore, the above combined
    benefits would not be sufficient to outweigh the harm I have identified in this case.




1
    Ref. CA/25/01657


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decisions 6012075 and 6012078


Conclusion
25. With regard to Appeal A, having regard to all other matters raised, I conclude that
    the proposed development is not in accordance with the development plan when
    read as a whole and Appeal A should be dismissed.
26. For the reasons given above, I conclude Appeal B should be dismissed.

David Troy
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
