 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 5 August 2026
 by N McGurk BSc (Hons) MCD MBA MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 28 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012320
 128 Lancaster Drive, Padiham, Lancashire, BB12 7DU
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr Antony Phillips against the decision of Burnley Borough Council.
 •   The application Ref is PA/2026/0106.
 •   The development proposed is a bedroom/ wet room extension to rear of property (principal
     elevation).

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issues
2. The main issues in this case are the effect of the proposed development on the
   character and appearance of the area; and its effect on the living conditions of
   neighbouring occupiers, with regard to outlook and daylight.
Reasons
Character and appearance
3. The appeal property is a two storey mid-terrace dwelling within a residential estate,
   part of which was developed in a Radburn-style layout, separating car movement
   from walking paths. As a consequence of this, the appeal dwelling “fronts” a
   footpath and its rear faces towards Lancaster Drive.
4. This arrangement results in the presence of an eclectic mix of rear gardens, rear
   extensions, entrances, porches and parking areas facing directly onto Lancaster
   Drive. Hence, rather than the more uniform frontages that would typically
   characterise a residential street, within the same short terrace as the appeal
   dwelling, there are dwellings which appear to front Lancaster Drive and dwellings
   which appear to back on to it.
5. To the rear, the appeal dwelling has a porch, which lends the rear elevation the
   appearance of a “frontage.” However, this opens onto a garden area, which
   appears very much as a rear garden. To one side of the rear of the appeal dwelling,
   Number 130 Lancaster Drive has a conservatory, which extends across the
   majority of the ground floor of the rear of that dwelling and affords this neighbouring
   dwelling the appearance of backing onto Lancaster Drive. To the other side,
   Number 126 Lancaster Drive has a gated parking area and a porch, and this results
   in the rear of the dwelling appearing to front Lancaster Drive.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
    Appeal Decision 6012320


6. The proposed extension would be finished in render to match the existing dwelling.
   It would have a tiled roof and would appear modest in scale relative to the host
   dwelling. It would have a neat, solid appearance that would not look out of place
   when seen against either adjoining neighbouring dwelling.
7. Given this and the varied character of the elevations facing Lancaster Drive, I find
       that the proposal would appear in keeping with the appearance of the host dwelling
       and the character of its surroundings. Rather than appear out of place, the
       proposed development would complement its surroundings. I therefore find that the
       proposal would not harm the character and appearance of the area and would not
       be contrary to the National Planning Policy Framework; to Policies SP5, HS4 and
       HS5 of the Burnley Local Plan1; or to the Council’s Residential Extensions
       Supplementary Planning Document (2022), which together amongst other things,
       seek to protect local character.
8. However, whilst no harm would arise in respect of local character, as set out below,
       I do find that significant harm would arise in respect of living conditions.
Living conditions
9. As noted above, the appeal property adjoins No 130 Lancaster Drive to one side,
   and No 126 Lancaster Drive to the other.
10. The proposed development would stretch across the whole of the width of the
    appeal dwelling such that it would abut the shared boundary with its neighbours to
    either side. This would bring the proposal very close to No 130’s conservatory. This
    would reduce the amount of daylight received by this neighbouring conservatory,
    albeit, the conservatory’s large rear-facing windows, together with its rearwards
    projection and the presence of a small gap between the side of the conservatory
    and the shared boundary would mean that the loss of daylight would not be so
    significant in this regard as to justify dismissing the appeal.
11. However, No 126’s ground floor window closest to the proposed development
    serves a habitable room and sits flush with the rear elevation. As a consequence,
    the proposed development would project significantly forward of this important
    ground floor window. I consider that the combination of the height, close proximity
    and considerable projection of the proposal would result in it unduly dominating the
    outlook from this window.
12. Further, I find that the harm arising from this would be exacerbated as a result of
    the scale and close proximity of the proposal leading to a noticeable reduction in
    the amount of daylight received by this neighbouring window and there is no
    substantive evidence before me to demonstrate that this would not be the case.
13. Taken together and noting that some, albeit lesser harm would arise in respect of
       the effect of the proposal on No 130, I find that the proposed development would
       harm the living conditions of the occupiers of neighbouring properties, with regard
       to outlook and daylight. This would be contrary to the National Planning Policy
       Framework; to Local Plan Policy HS4; and to the Council’s Residential Extensions
       Supplementary Planning Document (2022), which together amongst other things,
       seek to protect residential amenity.


1
    Burnley Local Plan (2018).


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            2
 Appeal Decision 6012320


Other Matters
14. I empathise with the appellant’s personal circumstances and the reasons for the
    proposed development in respect of the provision of accessible bedroom and wet
    room facilities for a family member with a disability, allowing them to continue living
    within the family home. This is a matter which weighs in favour of the proposal.
15. The appellant explains that alternative options, including the installation of a stairlift
    and an extension to a different elevation of the dwelling, have been investigated
    and are not considered feasible. However, there remains no substantive evidence
    before me to demonstrate that the proposal, in its current form, is the only possible
    way to add space to the dwelling. Notwithstanding this and in any case, I find that
    the harm identified in respect of the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers
    would be so significant as not to be outweighed by the benefits arising and hence
    the decision below.
Conclusion
16. For the reasons given above, the appeal does not succeed.

N McGurk
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          3
