Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 September 2026
by K Lancaster BA (hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 601209
18 Myrtle Avenue, Thornton Cleveleys, Lancashire FY5 2ZD
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Arron Darwen of Aspirer Care against the decision of Wyre Borough
     Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00199/FUL.
•    The development proposed is the change of use of a two-storey detached dwelling located at 18
     Myrtle Avenue, Thornton-Cleveleys (Use Class C3), into a children’s residential care home (Use
     Class C2). The facility would accommodate up to two children or young people, two carers sleeping
     overnight and working on a rota basis.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the change of use of
       dwelling (C3) to a children's care home (C2) to accommodate up to two children or
       young people at one time, with up to two carers on shift and management present
       as and when required at 18 Myrtle Avenue, Thornton Cleveleys, Lancashire FY5
       2ZD in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 26/00199/FUL, subject to
       the conditions in the attached schedule.
Applications for costs
2.     An application for costs was made by Mr Arron Darwen of Aspirer Care against
       Wyre Borough Council and is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
       August 2026. As this could affect the issues and matters in this case, the Council
       and the appellant were invited to make further comments. My decision reflects the
       latest version of the Framework, and the responses received on it.
4.     The description of the development in my banner heading above is taken from the
       planning application form. However, the wording of that description includes
       elements which are not acts of development or which are superfluous. Therefore,
       in my decision, I have used the description of development on the Council’s
       decision notice which I consider concisely describes the development proposed.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues are the effect of the proposed development on:
           •    the living conditions of occupiers of nearby residential properties, with
                particular regard to noise and disturbance; and


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012092


           •    highway safety with particular regard to the provision of off-street car
                parking.
Reasons
6.     The appeal site 18 Myrtle Avenue, comprises a detached dwelling, set back from
       the road with a small front garden and driveway. The surrounding area is primarily
       residential in character and comprising of mostly detached and semi-detached
       dwellings, as well as a mix of two-storey and single storey dwellings.
Living Conditions
7.     Policy CDMP3 of the Wyre Local Plan 2011-2031 (incorporating partial update of
       2022), adopted January 2023 (the WLP) states that development must not have
       an unacceptably adverse impact on the amenity of occupants and users of
       surrounding or nearby properties.
8.     The Council’s concerns relate primarily to the currently quiet nature of the
       residential neighbourhood, the high proportion of retired occupants and absence of
       any school aged children living in the area. However, whilst I have not been
       presented with any evidence to dispute these findings, the appeal site is
       nevertheless a residential property which could be occupied by a family with
       children, or indeed with a greater number of occupants than are proposed. The
       proposal represents another type of residential use, albeit with a care element for
       the looked after children.
9.     Further concerns have been raised about the potential for disruption to occur at
       changeover times, as well as creating significant traffic problems with so many
       cars manoeuvring at once. Based on the evidence before me, there would be a
       maximum of four cars present at the property, but that this would only occur briefly
       when staff change over takes place, which is indicated to be between 08:00 and
       08:30 hours. Such activity would not be materially different to the activity of a multi-
       car household leaving for school and work. The proposed use would not generate
       a significant number of comings and goings and those which do occur would be
       broadly comparable to its existing use as a dwelling.
10. Therefore, whilst I have had regard to the existing character of the area, the
    proposal would also be a residential type of use, which given its small-scale, would
    not materially affect the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers with regard to
    increased noise and disturbance.
11. Consequently, I therefore find that subject to a planning condition restricting
    occupancy to a maximum of two children, the proposed development would not
    have an unacceptable impact on the living conditions of neighbouring residents
    with particular regard to noise and disturbance. Thus, it would comply with Policy
    CDMP3 of WLP, and the associated polices of the Framework, which require
    amongst other things, that development must not have an unacceptably adverse
    impact on the amenity of occupants and users of surrounding or nearby properties.
Highway Safety and Parking Provision
12. Policy CDMP6 of the WLP requires that appropriate provision is made for vehicular
    access, off-street servicing and parking in accordance with the Council’s standards
    set out in Appendix B, unless it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Local


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6012092


       Planning Authority in consultation with the Local Highways Authority that different
       provision is justified taking into account local circumstances.
13. The appeal site is located in a quiet residential area, with most properties having
    off-street parking in the form of driveways and/or garages. Nonetheless, I
    observed that some of these driveways are small, and on-street parking was
    observed within the area. There is clearly a demand for parking in the area, as
    most properties have multiple cars and additional vehicles such as caravans and
    motorhomes were also present.
14. The submitted plans show that off-street parking is capable of being provided for
    four vehicles. This would be created by extending the existing both the driveway
    and existing dropped kerb. Based on the evidence before me, this would be
    sufficient to accommodate the parking demand generated by the proposed
    development, without needing to rely on on-street parking. Additionally, given the
    nature of the use, the vehicle movements, such as visits, deliveries and other
    activity can be managed in such a way that they do not cause harm to highway
    safety within the local area, for example, by avoiding visits and deliveries during
    staff changeover times. Based on the evidence before me, the number of cars is
    not likely to exceed 2-3 cars for the majority of the time.
15. Furthermore, as a large, detached property, which could be occupied by a family
    with 2-3 cars, there is no substantive evidence to demonstrate that the parking
    requirements of the proposed development would be materially different from its
    occupation as a family dwelling.
16. Therefore, based on the proposed level of use, there is also no substantive
    evidence that the parking arrangements proposed would be likely to contribute to
    existing on-street parking demand, or to any difficulties experienced by refuse
    collections or emergency vehicles. It is not within the scope of this appeal to
    address existing parking issues within the wider area.
17. Consequently, subject to the imposition of a planning condition to require off-street
    parking to be provided in accordance with details provided and prior to the
    development being brought into use, I am satisfied that the proposed development
    would not be harmful to highway safety with particular regard to the provision of
    off-street car parking. Thus, it would comply with Policy CDMP6, and the
    associated polices of the Framework which require, amongst other things, that
    appropriate provision is made for vehicular access, off-street servicing and
    parking.
Other Matters
18. Third-party representations raise concerns regarding the nature of the proposed
    use and its potential effects on the surrounding residential area, including
    concerns relating to safety and security, the effect on community cohesion, the
    suitability of the occupants having regard to their age, background and
    compatibility with the existing neighbourhood, and whether there is a need for such
    accommodation given existing provision elsewhere in the county. Concerns have
    also been expressed regarding a perceived lack of community engagement, the
    commercial nature of the proposal, and the suggestion that the proposal would
    operate as a youth rehabilitation facility or a house in multiple occupation.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6012092


19. Other matters raised include the potential effect on property values, impacts
    arising from increased vehicle movements, and possible effects on local wildlife,
    including species which regularly move between adjacent woodland and nearby
    residential areas. I note that concerns have been raised regarding the effect of the
    proposal on property values. However, the impact of a development on the value
    of private property is not a material planning consideration and therefore carries no
    weight in my assessment. Similarly, reference has been made to private
    covenants affecting the land, including restrictions on business use. Such matters
    are civil matters between the relevant parties and do not constitute material
    planning considerations. Consequently, they carry no weight in the determination
    of the application.
20. In respect of the remaining concerns, these matters were before the Council when
    it determined the application. The Council found that the proposal would not give
    rise to unacceptable harm in respect of these matters. Based on the evidence
    before me, I have identified no substantive reason to reach a different conclusion,
    and I therefore have no reason to disagree with the Council's assessment.
Conditions
21. I have had regard to the Council’s suggested conditions and considered them
    against the statutory tests outlined in the Framework and the advice in the
    Planning Practice Guidance. I have made minor amendments, where necessary,
    to ensure the conditions comply with these documents.
22. Section 100ZA(5) of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990, sets out that if an
    Inspector is minded to grant planning permission subject to pre-commencement
    conditions, they may only do so with the written agreement of the appellant.
    Therefore, I sought the appellant’s written agreement to these conditions.
23. I have imposed standard conditions concerning commencement (1) and
    compliance (2) with the submitted plans. It is necessary that the development be
    carried out in accordance with the approved plans for the avoidance of doubt and
    in the interests of certainty.
24. Conditions relating to the provision and retention of parking (3), and the
    implementation of a dropped kerb to facilitate access to the site (4), are necessary
    in the interests of highway safety. These conditions need to be pre-
    commencement conditions, to ensure that access and parking arrangements are
    in place before the use begins.
25. A further condition requiring the development to be carried out in accordance with
    the approved Flood Risk Assessment (5) is necessary to ensure that the
    development is safe from flooding and does not increase flood risk to future
    occupants. This is also necessary to be a pre-commencement condition to ensure
    that these measures are in place prior to the development being brought into use.
26. A condition (6) is necessary in the interests of certainty to restrict the use of the
    appeal site to a children’s residential home (Use Class C2) and in the interests of
    the amenity of neighbouring residents. I have also imposed a condition (7)
    restricting the maximum number of children who can occupy the property at any
    one time.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6012092


Planning Balance and Conclusion
27. Policy S3 of the Framework establishes a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. Policy S3(3)(c) sets out that in all locations, development proposals
    that accord with both an up-to-date development plan and the decision-making
    policies in this Framework should be approved without delay.
28. As I have found no harm in respect of either of the main issues, I conclude that the
    proposal would accord with the development plan taken as a whole. It would also
    be consistent with the relevant national decision-making policies of the
    Framework. Therefore, there are no material considerations that indicate a
    decision should be taken other than in accordance with the development plan and,
    therefore, the appeal should be allowed

K Lancaster
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6012092




Schedule of Conditions
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans:
                   •    Site Location Plan: plan reference 3423.100 Rev B
                   •    Proposed Site Plan: plan reference 33423.201 REV B
                   •    Proposed Floor Plans: plan reference 3423.202 REV A
                   •    Proposed Elevations: plan reference 3423.203 REV A
     3)       The development hereby approved shall not be first occupied or brought into
              use until the off-site highway works, namely the installation of a vehicular
              dropped crossing to facilitate vehicular access to the site, have been
              completed.
     4)       The development hereby approved shall not be brought into use until the
              vehicle parking area shown on drawing no. 3423.201 Rev B (received
              12.05.2026) has been laid out, surfaced and drained in accordance with the
              approved details. The parking area shall thereafter be retained for the
              parking and manoeuvring of vehicles and shall not be used for any other
              purpose.
     5)       The development hereby approved shall be carried out in accordance with
              the approved Flood Risk Assessment (received 11.03.2026). All flood risk
              mitigation measures contained within the approved assessment shall be
              implemented in full prior to the first occupation or use of the development, or
              in accordance with any timing or phasing provisions set out within the
              approved assessment and shall thereafter be retained and maintained for the
              lifetime of the development.
     6)       The premises shall be used for a children's residential care home (C2 use)
              and shall be used for no other purpose at any time (including any other
              purpose in Class C2 of the Schedule to the Town and Country Planning (Use
              Classes) Order 1987, (or in any provision equivalent to that Class in any
              statutory instrument revoking and re-enacting that Order with or without
              modification) without prior express planning permission from the local
              planning authority.
     7)       The number of children to be cared for at the premises shall be limited to a
              maximum of 2 at any one time.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    6
