 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 15 September 2026
 by N McGurk BSc (Hons) MCD MBA MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 25 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012204
 42 Cranwich Road, Hackney, London, N16 5JN
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr Ausch against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
     Hackney.
 •   The application Ref is 2026/0521.
 •   The development proposed is a single storey first floor rear extension (retrospective) and
     replacement of the existing brick finish of the extension with zinc cladding.



Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issue
2. The main issue in this case is the effect of the development on the living conditions
   of the occupiers of Number 40 Cranwich Road, with regard to outlook.
Reasons
3. The appeal property is a terraced dwelling comprising lower ground, ground, first
   and second floors, with accommodation at roof level. To the rear is an existing
   single storey ground floor extension. The first floor rear extension the subject of this
   appeal, which has already been constructed, sits above part of this ground floor
   extension.
4. The appeal dwelling is located in a residential area, characterised by the presence
   of tall, terraced dwellings set back from the road behind short front garden areas
   and with larger gardens to the rear.
5. During my site visit, I observed that the first floor extension is sited very close to the
   shared boundary with No 40 and that it projects a considerable distance to the rear.
   As a consequence of its height, depth and immediate proximity to this boundary, it
   looms above the rear of No 40, such that it results in an overbearing presence.
6. In addition to the above, the scale and close proximity of the extension result in it
   unduly dominating the outlook from No 40’s first floor rear-facing windows. I find
   that the scale and proximity of the development result in a structure that unduly
   dominates the outlook from these windows, particularly that window closest to the
   extension. This is to the detriment of the living conditions of the occupiers of No 40.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012204


7. From ground level, greenery along the shared boundary does serve to soften the
   appearance of the extension to a degree. However, in this regard, I am also mindful
   of the Council’s comment that existing soft landscaping cannot be relied upon to
   remain in situ, and I attach limited weight to the presence of this greenery.
8. Taking all of the above into account, I find that the development harms the living
   conditions of the occupiers of No 40 Cranwich Road, with regard to outlook,
   contrary to the National Planning Policy Framework; to Policy LP2 of the Hackney
   Local Plan 2033 (2020); and to the Council’s Residential Extensions and
   Alterations Supplementary Planning Document (2025), which together amongst
   other things, seek to protect residential amenity.
Other Matters
9. The appellant has submitted daylight and sunlight evidence and refers to the
   affected room at No 40 being served by two windows. Whilst I note this, the main
   issue in this case relates to outlook and the evidence provided does not alter my
   findings in respect of the overbearing effect of the development.
10. The appellant proposes to replace the existing brick finish of the extension with zinc
    cladding. This would not alter the height, depth or proximity of the extension
    to No 40 and would not overcome the harm identified above.
11. I empathise with the appellant’s personal circumstances and the reasons for the
    development, including the provision of bathroom facilities for an elderly member of
    the household. This is a matter which weighs in favour of the development.
    However, I find that it does not outweigh the harm identified above.
12. I note that there have not been any objections to the development. However, this
    could be for any number of reasons, and the absence of objection does not in itself
    equate to support for a proposal.
Conclusion
13. For the reasons given above, the appeal does not succeed.

N McGurk
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
