 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 11 August 2026
 by P D Sedgwick BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 25 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012100
 7 Ingleby Way, Bromley, Chislehurst BR7 6DD.
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Caulfield against the decision of the Council of the London
     Borough of Bromley.
 •   The application Ref is 26/00624/HPA.
 •   The development proposed is Erection of front dormer extension.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issue
2. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development upon the character and
   appearance of the host property and surrounding area.
Reasons
3. Ingleby Way is a small private road comprising 2 storey semi-detached houses.
   The appeal property shares a central 2 storey pitched roof gable at the front, with
   its adjoining neighbour, which have vertical timber boards to give a mock Tudor
   appearance. The roofs either side of the gabled feature extend down to the ground
   floor eaves, with a small hip roofed element at either end of the pair of houses. The
   pair are symmetrical at first floor and roof level but have some design differences
   on the ground floor, such as an attached garage to the side of the neighbouring
   house and differently positioned front doors. Three other pairs of houses within
   Ingleby Way share a similar design. Other house designs vary.
4. Policy 6 of the Bromley Local Plan (2019) (LP) states, among other things, that
   residential extensions should be compatible with development in the surrounding
   area and that dormer windows should be sited away from prominent roof pitches,
   unless they are a feature of the area. The proposed dormer would have a pitched
   roof matching the slope of the central gable, at the same eave’s height, and with
   vertical timber boarding to match that of the central gable. Nonetheless, it would be
   on the front, and thus most prominent, roof slope and would upset the first-floor
   symmetry with its adjoining neighbour.
5. The examples provided by the appellant, at Nos 1 and 3 and 2 and 4 Ingleby Way
   relate to front dormers on four adjoining semi-detached houses which consequently
   retain an element of symmetry and balance which would not be the case with the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision: 6012100


     appeal proposal. Most other houses within the road do not have front dormers and
     thus they are not, in my view, a feature of the area.
6. Overall, I conclude that the proposed development would appear prominent and out
   of character. The proposal would thus conflict with Policy D3 of the London Plan
   (2021), Policies 6 and 37 of the LP and the Urban Design Guide Supplementary
   Planning Document (2023) which require proposals to be compatible with
   development within the surrounding area and contribute positively to the street
   scene.
Other Matters
7. I have been provided with other examples of extensions that have affected the
   symmetry of pairs of houses nearby. However, I am not aware of the circumstances
   in each of those cases, and in any event, I must consider the appeal scheme on its
   own merits. The existence of these other planning permission does not justify the
   harm I have identified.
Conclusion
8. For the reasons given above, and having regard to all matters raised, I conclude
   that the appeal should be dismissed.

P D Sedgwick
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      2
