 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 6 August 2026
 by Chris Couper BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 17 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012422
 108 Franciscan Road, Wandsworth, London SW17 8HR
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr C Kershaw against the decision of Wandsworth Council.
 •    The application Ref is 2026/1207.
 •    The proposed development is a garden building in the rear garden with a glazed link to the existing
      house.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issue
2. The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the
   host property and the area, including whether it would preserve or enhance the
   character or appearance of the Totterdown Fields Conservation Area (‘the TFCA’).
Reasons
     Character and appearance
3. Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
   (‘the Act’) requires that special attention shall be paid to the desirability of
   preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of conservation areas. Policy
   LP3 of the Wandsworth Local Plan 2023-2038 (2023) (‘WLP’) sets out, amongst
   other things, that consideration shall be given to the conservation of features and
   elements that contribute to a heritage asset’s significance and character, and to the
   space in between and around buildings.
4. Section 16 of the National Planning Policy Framework (‘the Framework’) states that
   great weight shall be given to the conservation of designated heritage assets, and
   that harm to their significance requires clear and convincing justification.
5. Having regard to the Totterdown Fields Conservation Area Appraisal and
   Management Strategy, the TFCA broadly comprises terraced houses, whose
   design and layout is influenced by the Garden City and Arts and Crafts movements.
   The buildings display features and detailing typical of their era, and were built by
   London County Council in the early twentieth century for working class people.
6. They are laid out in a fairly dense regular pattern, close to the tree-lined roads, with
   short rear gardens, which are sometimes visible in gaps between the buildings
   particularly on corner plots. The buildings’ style, detailing, proportions, form and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
    Appeal Decision 6012422


       siting, along with the grain and landscaped setting of the development, all
       contribute to the TFCA’s significance.
7. The host comprises an end of terrace property, whose appearance is typical of the
   area. It sits on a prominent corner plot at the junction of Franciscan Road and
   Derinton Road. It has a single storey rear extension1, and extant planning
   permission for a single storey outbuilding in its rear garden, along with a new
   boundary wall to replace the rear boundary fence (‘the PP’)2. The scheme before
   me differs from the PP in respect of a link which would be provided centrally within
   the rear garden to connect the proposed outbuilding to the existing rear extension.
8. That link would be slightly lower in height compared to the outbuilding, but taller
   than the timber fence which abuts the pavement on Derinton Road. Although the
   glazed sliding doors on its side elevations would give it a fairly lightweight quality,
   considered cumulatively with the existing rear extension and the proposed
   outbuilding, a significant proportion of the host’s original rear garden would be
   covered by structures.
9. Trees within the host’s rear garden along part of its boundary with Derinton Road
   would partially obscure the proposed link from the streetscene but, notwithstanding
   the statutory controls over works to trees in conservation areas, I cannot be certain
   that they will be retained, and their screening effect may be less at certain times of
   the year.
10. Thus, the proposed development would be visible from Derinton Road above the
    boundary fence, from where the link’s relatively narrow width would not be readily
    apparent. In those views and having regard to cumulative impacts, most of the
    formerly open space between the original building and its neighbour to the rear
    would appear to have been developed, to the detriment of the spatial qualities and
    layout of the host property and the area.
11. Consequently, the scheme would harm the character and appearance of the host
    property, and it would fail to preserve or enhance the character and appearance of
    the TFCA. It would thereby conflict with WLP Policy LP3, and with the requirement
    in WLP Policies LP1 and LP5 that the layout and arrangement of buildings should
    ensure a high level of physical integration with the surroundings; that the scale,
    massing and appearance of development shall relate positively to the prevailing
    local character; and that a substantial depth of the original rear garden remains free
    of buildings and structures.
12. It would also fail to comply with the advice at Policy DMS 2 of the Wandsworth
    Housing Supplementary Planning Document (2016) that applications should
    sustain, conserve and, where appropriate enhance, the significance of heritage
    assets, having regard to matters including the space around buildings; and with its
    stance in Policy DMH 5 that a substantial depth of a property’s original rear garden
    should remain free of buildings and structures.
13. In accordance with the Framework, the harm to the significance of this designated
    heritage asset is a matter to which I attribute great weight. However, given the
    limited scale of the proposal and the link’s translucent materials, the harm caused


1
    Ref: 2014/1041
2
    Ref: 2025/4538


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          2
 Appeal Decision 6012422


     to it would be less than substantial. In accordance with Framework paragraph 215,
     I will therefore weigh it against the scheme’s public benefits.
14. In its favour, compared to the PP, the scheme would slightly improve living
    conditions within the host. However, that benefit would be largely private, and it
    would not be sufficient to outweigh the harm that I have found.
15. The proposal would fail to satisfy the requirements of the Act. It would conflict with
    the development plan, and material considerations, including the Framework, do
    not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    Consequently, having regard to all other matters raised, the appeal is dismissed.

Chris Couper
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
