Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 9 September 2026
by K Dryden BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22nd September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012542
132 Chiswick High Road, Chiswick, London W4 1PU
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Pol Gallagher of D Grande against the decision of the Council of the
    London Borough of Hounslow.
•   The application reference is P/2025/3419.
•   The development proposed is creation of an outdoor enclosure with alterations to two of the six front
    door panels.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. Subsequent to the Council’s decision on the application to which this appeal
   relates, the Government published a new National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) on 17 August 2026, which replaces the previous Framework published
   in December 2024, and all earlier iterations. Both the appellant and the Council
   were given the opportunity to comment on any changes relevant to the main issues
   in this appeal. No further comments were received.
3. The above description of development is taken from the application form. However,
   I have omitted wording that provides additional narrative detail and does not form
   part of the operative description of the proposed development.
4. The appeal site lies within the Chiswick High Road Conservation Area (CA). I am
   therefore vigilant of my duty imposed under Section 72 of the Planning (Listed
   Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 to pay special attention to the
   desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of the CA.
Main Issues
5. The main issues are:
     •    the effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of the
          surrounding area, with particular regard to whether it would preserve or
          enhance the character or appearance of the CA.
     •    the effect of the proposal on pedestrian safety.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012542


Reasons
Character and appearance
6. The appeal site is situated towards the eastern part of the CA. The significance of
   the CA derives from the historic interest and architectural quality of its buildings.
   The Chiswick High Road Conservation Area Appraisal (2021) (CHRCA) identifies
   that the focus of the designation is the commercial and shopping buildings
   developed during the late 19th and early 20th centuries and describes the area as
   a successful town centre. The site lies within the Chiswick High Road character
   area, where the CHRCA notes that the large, mature trees lining much of the road,
   together with the wide pavements, are important features of the CA.
7. The appeal site comprises an unlisted mid-terrace period property situated within a
   parade of commercial premises with largely residential uses over upper storeys.
   The parade exhibits a strong consistency of building line, which contributes
   positively to the character and appearance of the area. The appeal property’s
   principal elevation prominently fronts Chiswick High Road, where the generous
   footway and mature street tree to the front of the property makes an important
   contribution to the character and visual quality of the street scene.
8. The proposal seeks to provide a permanent enclosure to an outdoor seating area at
   the front of the Use Class E1 premises. The structure would comprise timber
   balustrade screening to the front and side elevations, attached by timber posts to
   an awning shown on the submitted plans. A separate entrance area would also be
   provided behind an additional enclosed section on the eastern side of the frontage.
   The Council has raised no concerns regarding the proposed alterations to the
   shopfront, including changes to the door panels, and based on the evidence before
   me, I have no reason to disagree.
9. Whilst the proposed structure would be visually permeable, with no glazing to the
   front and side elevations, it would nevertheless appear as a permanent and largely
   solid addition to the front of the building. The development would incorporate
   substantial fixed timber balustrade screening and timber posts supporting the
   awning, creating a visually prominent feature within the street scene. Furthermore,
   adjoining properties do not display comparable projecting structures, which would
   further reinforce the visual prominence of the proposal within the parade.
10. The excessive size and scale of the structure would result in an incongruous and
    visually dominant addition to the front of the building that would fail to appear as a
    sympathetic alteration to the period host property. The proposal would draw the eye
    to its resultant bulk and massing, thereby detracting from the appreciation of the
    building’s original front elevation and the uniform appearance of the terraced
    parade. Furthermore, by projecting intrusively into the street scene, it would
    interrupt the prevailing sense of openness and detract from the character and
    appearance of the surrounding area and the significance of the CA.
11. Whilst the appellant draws my attention to examples of outdoor seating areas and
    enclosed structures along Chiswick High Road, I have not been provided with full
    details of those schemes, including the relevant officer reports, submitted plans or
    decision notices. I also note that the Council has commented that it is unclear
    whether the existing enclosure at Highroad House, 162 to 170 Chiswick High Road

1
    The Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended).


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               2
Appeal Decision 6012542


     benefits from planning permission, and that a planning application submitted in
     2008 predates the current adopted development plan. As such, I am unable to
     conclude that this development was authorised or that it comprises a recent
     decision determined under the current adopted development plan policy framework.
     Furthermore, the Council comment that the enclosure at 150 Chiswick High Road is
     temporary and was permitted under the terms of a pavement licence or street
     trading licence. Consequently, neither example is directly comparable to the
     proposal before me. In any event, whilst I noted the presence of other outdoor
     seating areas in the wider locality, including along Chiswick High Road, during my
     site visit, their presence does not diminish the harm I have identified, nor does it
     alter my findings on the appeal proposal.
12. Furthermore, the appellant has suggested that the precise specification of materials
    and technical details could be addressed by planning condition. However, for the
    reasons given above, such matters would not overcome the harm that I have
    identified arising from the bulk, scale and siting of the development in this sensitive
    location.
13. Policy HE5 of the Framework requires proposals affecting heritage assets to be
    accompanied by an assessment of the significance of the assets affected and the
    likely effect of the development upon that significance. In this regard, it is the
    impact on significance, rather than the scale of development itself, that is of primary
    importance. Whilst Policy HE9 of the Framework recognises that not all elements of
    a conservation area necessarily contribute to its significance, the proposed
    structure would detract from the character and appearance of the area and erode
    the contribution made by the generous footway and mature street trees to the
    significance of the CA, which the CHRCA identifies as important features of the CA.
14. Whilst the proposal is relatively modest in scale, the proposed development would,
    under the terms of the Framework, result in a low level of harm to the significance
    of the heritage asset. It is noteworthy that even a low level of harm to the
    significance of a designated heritage asset carries considerable importance and
    weight. Policy HE6 of the Framework establishes that when considering the
    potential effect of a development proposal on the significance of a designated
    heritage asset, substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation.
    Where a development proposal would harm the significance of a designated
    heritage asset, the effect on the asset and its significance should be weighed
    against any public benefits resulting from the proposal.
15. I have had regard to the benefits identified by the appellant, including the public
    realm benefits arising from the creation of an external dining enclosure that would
    provide shelter for diners, alongside the provision of an active ground floor
    frontage. I have also considered the appellant’s claims that the proposal would
    enhance the commercial vitality and viability of the business, that outdoor seating
    would contribute to the active and vibrant character of the commercial area, and
    that no objections have been received from interested parties. I have also had
    regard to the appellant’s view that the enclosure has been designed to be
    sympathetic to the character and materials of the building and the CA. In this
    respect, I am mindful that Policy E2 of the Framework states that substantial weight
    should be given to the economic benefits of commercial development that enables
    a business to expand and/ or adapt, and Policy TC2 of the Framework requires
    substantial weight to be given to the benefits of supporting the vitality and viability
    of the town centre.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6012542


16. Whilst I have given careful consideration to the public benefits advanced by the
    appellant, the economic benefits of the development have not been quantified. In
    any event, it is my judgment that the identified benefits would not outweigh the low
    level of harm that I have identified to the significance of the heritage asset. The
    proposal therefore conflicts with the Framework’s policies relating to the
    conservation and enhancement of the historic environment.
17. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude that the proposed development would
    have a harmful effect on the character and appearance of the surrounding area,
    and would fail to preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the CA. This
    is contrary to Policies CC1, CC2 and CC4 of the London Borough of Hounslow
    Local Plan 2015-2030, Volume One (2015) (HLP), which collectively seek high-
    quality development which conserves and takes opportunities to enhance the
    significance of heritage assets. The proposal is also contrary to Policy HC1 of The
    London Plan (2021) (LP) which requires development proposals affecting heritage
    assets and their settings to conserve their significance. I further find conflict with LP
    Policy D4 in so far as it seeks high-quality design in development.
Pedestrian safety
18. The appeal site is located within an area of footway which I found to be busy with
    pedestrian activity during my site visit. Bus stops serving several local routes are
    located to the east of the site and to the south, on the opposite side of Chiswick
    High Road. The proposal would project a significant distance into the footway
    which, although wide at this location, would nevertheless impede pedestrian flow
    due to the presence of a substantial mature tree immediately to the front of the
    premises.
19. The appellant has drawn my attention to relevant pedestrian accessibility guidance
    which generally seeks to maintain a clear and unobstructed footway width of
    around 2 metres to allow convenient and inclusive pedestrian movement. A
    submitted plan indicates that a width of 2 metres would be retained between the
    trunk of the tree and the edge of the balustrade enclosure, with a greater width of
    approximately 2.8 metres available beyond the tree.
20. Whilst I acknowledge these findings, I have had regard to Active Travel England's
    Planning for Active Places guidance as a material consideration. Whilst it does not
    form part of the development plan and does not supersede the Framework or
    Planning Practice Guidance, it provides relevant guidance on the design of
    pedestrian environments. The guidance for pedestrian routes indicates that
    footways should be at least 2m wide and wider in areas of greater pedestrian
    activity, such as shopping streets and in the vicinity of public transport stops. I
    observed during my site visit that outdoor tables and chairs associated with an
    adjoining premises created an obstacle within the footway that pedestrians were
    required to navigate around. In these circumstances, notwithstanding the footway
    width identified by the appellant, the proposal would not provide sufficient space to
    maintain convenient and inclusive pedestrian movement. In this regard, the
    proposal would fail to provide a street arrangement that is safe, inclusive and
    attractive for all users as required by Policy TR4 of the Framework.
21. I therefore find that the scale and siting of the enclosure would create an unsafe
    obstruction to pedestrian movement at this location, endangering the safety of
    disabled and visually impaired pedestrians using the footway where the sight line


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6012542


     would be disrupted. Consequently, the guidance sited by the appellant does not
     overcome my concerns regarding the effect of the development on pedestrian flow
     and public safety in this location.
22. The appellant has referred me to a temporary street trading licence permitting the
    placement of tables and chairs outside the premises. However, the considerations
    relevant to the licensing regime are different from those that apply under planning
    legislation and the assessment of a permanent arrangement at the site.
    Consequently, the existence of the licence attracts limited weight in my assessment
    and does not alter my findings that the proposal would result in harm.
23. Additionally, I have had regard to the public benefits identified by the appellant,
    including the provision of an external dining enclosure and the contribution that this
    would make to the vitality and vibrancy of the high street. However, these benefits
    do not outweigh the harm that I have identified in my reasoning.
24. I therefore conclude that the proposed development would have a harmful effect on
    pedestrian safety. Consequently, the proposal would conflict with Policy EC2 of the
    HLP which seeks opportunities for sustainable travel modes and improve the public
    realm. The proposal is also contrary to LP Policy T2 which supports healthy streets
    and opportunities to improve the balance of space for sustainable travel modes.
Other Matters
25. The submitted proposed plans indicate a number of alterations to the rear of the
    premises, including a new roof with a skylight, the creation of a new doorway
    opening, the relocation of air conditioning units to a higher level, and the
    repositioning of an exhaust pipe. Whilst these works are not included within the
    description of development, they nevertheless form part of the proposal, as shown
    on the plans validated as part of the planning application. I note that no noise report
    has been submitted in relation to the relocation of the plant equipment.
    Consequently, I have insufficient information before me to conclude that the
    proposal would not adversely affect the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers.
    Nevertheless, as I am dismissing the appeal for other reasons, this matter is not
    determinative of my decision and would be a matter to be addressed between the
    parties in the event of any future planning application.
26. I note the appellant’s submissions regarding the Council’s handling of the
    application, including alleged delays in its determination. However, these are
    matters to be resolved between the parties. My determination of this appeal is
    based on the planning merits of the case.
27. Furthermore, whether a stopping up order would be required or granted is a
    separate matter that falls outside the scope of this appeal and is not a material
    planning consideration in its determination.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
28. The proposed development would provide an external dining enclosure which the
    appellant states would enhance the commercial vitality and viability of the business
    and contribute to the vibrancy of the locality. However, for the reasons given above,
    I have found that the proposal would harm the character and appearance of the
    surrounding area, fail to preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6012542


     CA, and be harmful to pedestrian safety. Consequently, the proposal conflicts with
     the development plan, when taken as a whole.
29. The proposal would constitute development within a settlement and therefore
    Policy S4 of the Framework is engaged. The policy states that development
    proposals within settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so
    would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against
    the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
30. Whilst Policy E2 of the Framework states that substantial weight should be given to
    the economic benefits of commercial development that enables a business to
    expand and/or adapt, and Policy TC2 of the Framework requires substantial weight
    to be given to the benefits of supporting the vitality and viability of town centres, the
    proposal must also be assessed against the Framework's policies relating to
    design, the historic environment and pedestrian safety. For the reasons given
    above, I have found that the proposal would harm the character and appearance of
    the CA. Furthermore, the public benefits advanced by the appellant would not
    outweigh the low level of harm identified to the significance of the heritage asset. I
    have also found that the proposal would be harmful to pedestrian safety.
31. Taking these matters together, I find that the benefits of the proposal would be
    substantially outweighed by its adverse effects when assessed against the national
    decision-making policies of the Framework. As such, Policy S4 of the Framework
    does not indicate that planning permission should be granted in this instance.
32. In the final balance, the material considerations in favour of the proposal are not of
    sufficient weight to justify a decision other than in accordance with the development
    plan. Therefore, for the reasons given, and having regard to all other matters
    raised, the appeal should be dismissed.



K Dryden
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
