Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 September 2026 by Elizabeth Davies BSc (Hons) MISEP, CEnv
Decision by M Russell BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012462
20 Codicote Row, Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire HP2 7JE
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Adrian Magdalena against the decision of Dacorum Borough Council.
•   The application Ref is 26/00994/FHA.
•   The development proposed is a single storey front infill extension.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. On 17 August 2026 the Government published a new National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework). Having reviewed the changes to the Framework, I am
   satisfied that they do not affect the substance of the main issues in the appeal.
   Since they would not therefore be prejudiced, I have proceeded without further
   consultation with the main parties.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
   appearance of the host dwelling and the wider area, with particular regard to
   16 – 24 Codicote Row.
Reasons for the Recommendation
5. 20-24 Codicote Row (No 20-24) comprises a short terrace of seven two-storey
   dwellings situated within an established residential estate. The appeal property is
   located mid-terrace. No 20-24 is accessed by a footpath that links the dwellings in
   this part of the estate to the surrounding roads. Each property in the terrace has a
   small front garden and path. The open plan layout results in the front of the
   terraced row being open to view from the footpath, the small areas of green space
   and other dwellings in the vicinity.
6. The dwellings in the terrace are generally consistent in their design featuring a
   porch with a pitched roof and ground floor front window. The porches serving the
   respective dwellings are interspersed between neighbouring porches by
   characteristic gaps. A similar short terrace of dwellings (16-19 Codicote Row) sits

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012462


     perpendicular to the appeal terrace. It largely mirrors the appearance of No 20-24
     and fronts the same area of open space. Their coherent design and the regular
     pattern of porches provide a notable sense of rhythm and an overriding, unified
     appearance to these terraces. The appeal dwelling appears largely unaltered at the
     front and given its visual cohesion with the wider terrace makes a positive
     contribution to the character and appearance of the area.
7. Despite the matching materials and retention of the front building line, the infill
   extension would merge the front projection on the host dwelling with the porch at
   20A Codicote Row also introducing two uncharacteristic roof lights to the ground
   floor level of the terrace. Given its prominent position on the front elevation, it would
   be highly visible and would unacceptably disrupt the characteristic rhythm of gaps
   between porches and the uniformity of the terrace. Moreover, from the open space
   and footpaths to the site frontage it would also detract from the consistency in
   appearance with the nearby terrace,16-19 Codicote Row.
8. Reference has been made by the appellant to a similar extension to another
   dwelling near to the appeal dwelling. However, specific details have not been
   provided. Whilst I did observe some examples of front infill extensions in the wider
   area, this more often related to semi-detached or shorter terraces of dwellings, and
   I am not aware of the planning background in each case. In any event, those
   examples would not assimilate the proposed development within the host terrace or
   the more immediate surrounds of 16-24 Codicote Row.
9. For these reasons, the proposed development would have a harmful effect on the
   character and appearance of the host dwelling and 16-24 Codicote Row. In that
   regard, the proposal would be contrary to Policy CS11 and CS12 of the Dacorum
   Borough Council Core Strategy 2006-2031 (2013) which seek amongst other things
   that development should preserve attractive streetscapes, integrate with the
   streetscape character and respect adjoining properties.
10. For the same reasons, the proposed development would also conflict with the
    approach to maintain, improve and develop defined character in Policy HCA33 of
    the Area Based Policies Supplementary Planning Document (May 2004) and
    Saved Appendix 7 ‘Small-Scale Extensions’ of the Dacorum Borough Local Plan
    Written Statement 1991-2011 (2004) which identifies that extensions should
    maintain the common design characteristics of the row within which the house is
    located, should not disrupt a consistent roof line and that in a row of houses of
    uniform design, extensions should not detract from this group effect.
Conclusion and Recommendation
11. Whilst in the settlement, there is nothing to suggest that there would be more than
    a modest private benefit in this instance, and so this would be substantially
    outweighed by the adverse effects identified. The adverse effects of the proposal
    would conflict with the development plan and there are no other material
    considerations to indicate that a decision should be made other than in accordance
    with it. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters
    raised, I therefore recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

Elizabeth Davies
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012462


Inspector’s Decision
12. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

M Russell
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
