 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 8 September 2026
 by Lynne Evans BA MA MRTPI MRICS
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 15 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012452
 Jordans, Cakeham Road, West Wittering PO20 8AA
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Leo Hammett against the decision of Chichester District Council.
 •    The application Ref is WW/26/00355/DOM.
 •    The development proposed is construction of a single storey timber framed garage and store
      including PV array to the roof, driveway and boundary treatment improvements.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. A new National Planning Policy Framework (Framework) was issued on 17 August
   2026, which replaces the previous Framework published in December 2024 and all
   other iterations. I have therefore written to seek the views of the Appellant and the
   Council on the revised Framework as pertinent to this appeal. I have taken the
   further representations into account.
Main Issue
3. The main issue in this appeal is the effect of the proposed development on the
   street scene and on the character and appearance of the West Wittering
   Conservation Area.
Reasons
4. The appeal property is a detached dwelling on a generous corner plot on the north-
   east side of Cakeham Road (B2179). It has a number of Arts and Crafts design
   features with a mix of white painted and red brick elevations under a clay tiled roof.
   There are a wide range of mainly detached residential properties on both sides of
   Cakeham Road in the vicinity of the site. With a few exceptions, the houses,
   including the appeal property, are generally set back from the street frontage and
   together with the contribution of frontage hedges, deep grass verges and open
   fields in between the dwellings on the south side of Cakeham Road, there is an
   attractive open and verdant appearance to the street scene. The appeal property is
   within the West Wittering Conservation Area and is identified as a building which
   makes a positive contribution to the character and appearance of the Conservation
   Area.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012452


5. The proposal is for an outbuilding comprising a double garage and store to the
   south of the house, in the south-eastern corner of the site. On the basis of the
   Council’s measurements, it would have a footprint of 10.4m by 7m and a hipped
   roof with a ridge height of 4.2m. It would sit on a brick plinth with an oak frame and
   timber cladding with a slate roof with PV array to the east and west elevations.
   There would also be a number of landscaping changes and improvements.
6. Section 72 (1) of The Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
   sets out in respect of development within Conservation Areas, special attention
   shall be paid to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or
   appearance of that area. The significance of the West Wittering Conservation Area
   relates to the historical development of the settlement of West Wittering. The
   Council’s West Wittering Conservation Area Character Appraisal & Management
   Proposals 2006 and updated in 2012 (Appraisal) divides the Conservation Area into
   four character areas including Cakeham Road, where the key characteristics
   include, amongst others, the open character to the south with grass verges; high
   walls, hedging and mature trees; use of brick, flint, clay tiles and white painted
   render and openness of road at southern corner with views towards the sea.
7. Although smaller in size than the main dwelling, the outbuilding would be a very
   sizeable building in terms of both its footprint and its height. As a result of its
   massing and scale as well as its siting, it would be an overly prominent and
   discordant addition within the street scene and would reduce the openness at this
   location.
8. The proposed materials for the roof of the outbuilding are indicated to be slate.
   Given the large extent of the proposed roof and its proximity to the main dwelling, I
   consider that the use of slate would appear visually discordant compared with the
   clay tiled roof to the main building. Although there are a few examples of slate roofs
   in the local area and within the Conservation Area, the main roof materials in the
   vicinity are clay tiles. The proposed selection of roof materials would further add to
   the harm to the street scene.
9. There is a tall and dense hedge along the eastern boundary, which contributes to
   the verdant character and appearance of the local area. There is no information
   before me regarding how the proposed siting and construction of the outbuilding
   would affect the hedge, but from my site visit, and noting the base of the former
   timber shed which is shown on the plans, I am not satisfied that the hedge could be
   retained in the vicinity of the proposed outbuilding. The removal of part of the
   hedge would further detract from the verdant character and appearance of the local
   area. I have taken account of the proposed additional planting but on the limited
   information before me I am not persuaded that it would soften and screen the
   proposed outbuilding, given the proposed size and height of the proposed
   outbuilding.
10. Taking all these matters together, I conclude that the proposed outbuilding would
    harm the street scene and the significance of the Conservation Area; it would not
    preserve the character or appearance of the West Wittering Conservation Area. It
    would conflict with Policies P1, P2, P8, P9 and P11 of the Chichester Local Plan
    2021-2039 (adopted 2025) (Local Plan) and Policies DP3 and Policies HE4, HE5,
    HE6 and HE9 of the Framework, all of which amongst other matters seek a high
    quality of design which respects the local context and the significance of
    designated heritage assets.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
 Appeal Decision 6012452


11. Although not referenced in the decision notice, both the Appellant and the Council
    have referenced the West Wittering Neighbourhood Plan (2023). For the reasons
    set out above I do not consider that the proposal would accord with Policy WW1 of
    the Neighbourhood Plan in respect of Design.
Other Considerations
12. The owners of the neighbouring property have made reference to a covenant which
    protects the boundary hedge, between the two properties. Matters relating to a
    covenant would need to be addressed separately and my assessment has been
    made on the planning merits of the proposal.
13. I have taken into account that an earlier permission for a single garage in another
    part of the site under the Council’s Ref: 24/02039/DOM would not proceed if
    planning permission were granted for this current proposal. However, that proposal
    would be in a much less prominent part of the site and of a much smaller scale and
    therefore a commitment not to proceed with that earlier permission would not
    outweigh the harm I have concluded from the proposal before me.
Planning Balance
14. Policy HE6: 1 of the Framework states that when considering the potential effect of
    a development proposal on the significance of a designated heritage asset,
    substantial weight should be given to the asset’s conservation. This is irrespective
    of whether any potential effect amounts to a positive effect, harm, substantial harm
    or total loss of its significance. Consistent with that approach, Policy HE6: 3 states
    that any harm to a designated heritage asset will be a matter of considerable
    importance and weight.
15. I have identified harm to the significance of the Conservation Area, which is a
    designated heritage asset. Given the scale of the proposal, I consider that the level
    of harm would be less than substantial. Under this circumstance, Policy HE6:4
    states that the harm should be weighed against the any public benefits of the
    resulting from the proposal. Policy HE6:4 sets out that important public benefits can
    include enabling energy efficiency and low carbon heating measures to be
    employed.
16. No specific public benefits have been promoted and I consider that the benefits
    which may arise from the development would be primarily for the private benefit of
    the Appellant rather than for the benefit of the public at large. Although the proposal
    would include PV arrays on the east and west roof slopes, for which there is
    national and local policy support including, under Policies CC1 and CC2 of the
    Local Plan, there is no further information to set out the benefits arising and
    whether it would be possible to secure such benefits in an alternative manner that
    would result in less harm to the significance of the designated heritage asset.
    Therefore, any public benefits that there may be, are insufficient to outweigh the
    harm, which although less than substantial still attracts great weight.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
 Appeal Decision 6012452


Conclusion
17. For the reasons given above and having regard to all other matters raised,
    including in representations, I conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.



L J Evans
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
