Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 September 2026
by J Heppell BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012368
35 Cumberland Drive, Bexleyheath, Bexley DA7 5LA
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a failure to give notice within the prescribed period of a decision on an application for
     planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Ade Bakare against the Council of the London Borough of Bexley.
•    The application Ref is 25/02100/FUL.
•    The development proposed is change of use from C3 to C2.

Decision
1.       The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for change of use from
         C3 to C2 at 35 Cumberland Drive, Bexleyheath, Bexley DA7 5LA in accordance
         with the terms of the application, Ref 25/02100/FUL, subject to the conditions in
         the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.       The appeal relates to a planning application that was not determined by the
         Council within the prescribed period. The Council subsequently confirmed that had
         it been in a position to determine the application, it would have been
         recommended for approval by officers, and referred to Planning Committee for
         decision because of the objections received.
3.       Interested parties raised a number of concerns, including whether the need for a
         children’s home justifies the loss of a dwelling, the proposal’s impact on the
         character of the area, whether the accommodation would be suited to children, the
         effect of the proposal on living conditions, and parking and highway safety. I
         address these concerns below.
4.       I have taken the appellant’s full name from the appeal form since the application
         form only stated their surname.
Main Issues
5.       In light of the above, the main issues in this appeal are:

     •     whether the development would meet a need for children’s residential care
           accommodation;

     •     whether the development would provide suitable accommodation for children;

     •     the effect of the proposal on the character of the area;


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012368


     •     the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of neighbouring properties; and

     •     the effect of the proposal on highway safety.
Reasons
Need for children’s residential care accommodation
6.       The proposal is to change the use of a dwellinghouse (use class C3) to a
         children’s home (use class C2). The home could accommodate up to four children
         aged from 11 to 17. The care provided would take the form of support and
         safeguarding tailored to individual needs.
7.       The policy context for the provision of residential care accommodation is set out at
         both national and local level. Policy HO1 of the Framework requires development
         plans to take into account an assessment of the size, type and tenure of
         accommodation needed for different groups, including looked after children,
         utilising evidence found in local authorities’ Children’s Social Care Sufficiency
         Strategies. Policy H12 of the London Plan March 2021 (LP) supports the delivery
         of supported and specialised accommodation which meets an identified need,
         including young people with support needs. Policy SP2 of the Bexley Local Plan
         date of adoption 26 April 2023 (BLP) sets out how the Council will meet its housing
         requirements as part of its commitment to mixed and balanced communities, which
         includes meeting the specific needs of particular groups of residents.
8.       The appellant referred to the statutory duty placed on Councils to provide
         adequate care facilities for vulnerable children, and provided statistical evidence of
         the difficulties encountered nationally in placing children close to home. Interested
         parties however queried the lack of evidence of local need. Although Policy SP2 of
         the BLP identified an annual need for 26 units of residential care accommodation
         (use class C2), the Council confirmed that this figure is based on projections for
         older persons’ accommodation contained in the Council’s Strategic Housing
         Market Assessment 2021 (SMHA) and excluded children’s accommodation.
         Separately, the SHMA projected that two to four children per year group would
         need housing at the age of 18, but it is unclear whether this projection is relevant
         since the proposal seeks to accommodate children aged 11-17.
9.       Commenting specifically on the proposal, the Council’s Children’s Services team
         confirmed that the need for children’s accommodation varied from week to week,
         depending on referrals. It identified that, contrary to good practice, nearly all the
         children who were referred to the Council were placed in accommodation over
         twenty miles away, which risked children feeling lonely and isolated. It considered
         that there was therefore a need for children’s accommodation and welcomed the
         proposal, albeit caveated with a concern about the quality of some providers,
         which I address below.
10. In light of the above, it would be expected that the BLP, as required by the
    Framework and the LP, would provide evidence of the projected need for
    children’s residential care accommodation over the plan period, but it does not.
    The absence of such projections is not necessarily an indication that there is no
    need for such accommodation, and could alternatively suggest that the need has
    simply not been measured. Whilst the commentary from the Children’s Services
    Team is anecdotal and has not been set in the context of the Bexley’s Children’s
    Social Care Sufficiency Strategy, it nonetheless highlights that the Council is

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6012368


       struggling to meet its responsibilities in respect of vulnerable children, resulting in
       children being placed in accommodation outside the Borough. I am therefore
       satisfied that there is a significant ongoing need for children’s residential care
       accommodation in Bexley.
11. Turning to Policy DP6 of the BLP, the loss of existing housing will generally be
    resisted except where, amongst other things, the loss would allow for the provision
    of a community facility that is suitable for residential areas, provided there are no
    significant adverse impacts on neighbouring properties. Given that the proposal is
    for a community facility which provides residential accommodation, and is
    consequently is suited in principle to a residential area, the proposal satisfies
    Policy DP6. I deal with the potential impact of the proposal on neighbouring
    properties below.
12. I therefore conclude that the development would meet a need for children’s
    residential care accommodation in accordance with Policy H12 of the LP and
    policies SP2 and DP6 of the BLP. Together these policies support the provision of
    specialist residential care accommodation which meets an identified need,
    including situations where housing would be lost as a result.
Providing suitable accommodation for children
13. The Council indicated that it only makes referrals to providers rated as good or
    above by Ofsted. The appellant confirmed that the facility would be regulated by
    Ofsted to ensure compliance with national standards, and that staff would be
    appropriately trained. There is thus a mechanism in place to ensure that the home
    would be operated by a provider with appropriate levels of expertise and care. A
    condition requiring the submission and approval of, and subsequent adherence to,
    a management plan would ensure that the operating protocols proposed by the
    appellant are adhered to.
14. Whilst three of the bedrooms within the property meet the minimum size of 7.5sqm
    for a one bedspace single bedroom, as set down in the technical housing
    standards – nationally described space standard, one bedroom falls below it.
    Whilst these standards deal with internal space within new dwellings and are not
    directly applicable to children’s care homes, they provide a useful rule-of-thumb for
    minimum bedroom sizes. In response to this concern, the appellant expressed a
    willingness for the occupancy of the home to be limited to a maximum of three
    children. As this matter could be controlled by condition, it satisfactorily addresses
    the issue of the substandard bedroom.
15. I conclude that the proposal would provide suitable accommodation for children in
    accordance with Policy H12 of the LP, which requires supported and specialised
    accommodation to be designed to satisfy the requirements of the group it is
    intended for.
Character of the area
16. The site lies within a residential area characterised by semi-detached houses and
    bungalows with well-sized gardens and off street parking. Interested parties
    described the area as quiet and comprising family homes, many of which are
    occupied by older people including the adjoining semi-detached house. They
    considered that the introduction of a facility like a children’s home would be out of
    keeping and erode the cohesiveness of the area, setting a negative precedent for

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6012368


       other such uses in an area where currently there are no care homes. My attention
       was drawn to the impact which the previous use of the dwelling as an Airbnb had.
17. The proposed use is residential in character and therefore suited in principle to the
    area. Whilst the proposal would affect the way in which the property is used and so
    alter the area’s character to a degree, the children’s home would be small and its
    impact on the character of the area correspondingly small. The changes resulting
    from the proposal would not be so significant as to harm the overall character of
    the area. Any subsequent proposals for care homes in the area would be judged
    on their own merits.
18. I find therefore that the proposal would not harmfully affect the character of the
    area and would accord with Policy D3 of the LP and policies SP5 and DP11 of the
    BLP, which together require proposals to respect the existing character and
    context without being constrained by what already exists, including in primarily
    residential areas.
Living conditions of neighbouring properties
19. There would be two staff members on site at all times, working shifts from 8am to
    8pm and 8pm to 8am respectively, with a manager present during office hours.
    Two rooms on the ground floor would be used as staff offices. External activity
    would occur at the staff changeovers and when the manager arrives and departs,
    and during school runs, excursions and visits to the property. The rear garden
    would be shared by the residents and would be used in a similar way to other
    gardens.
20. The appellant has characterised the likely activity associated with the care home
    as similar to a large household. In my view it would go beyond a normal household
    because of the shift patterns of staff and visits from other professionals. However,
    the 8am changeover would occur when activity levels would be high during the
    week, and the evening changeover would take place well before night time. The
    cumulative effect of vehicle movements at these times, whether parked on site or
    on the road, together with other comings and goings, would be unlikely to give rise
    to harmful levels of disturbance, even at weekends.
21. Interested parties have expressed concerns about the background of future
    residents, fearing a rise in anti-social behaviour, visits at unsocial hours, people
    hanging around, and in the worst case the presence of drug dealers, predators
    and grooming gangs, which could result in police visits. However, the home would
    have a minimum of two staff present at all times, providing a healthy ratio of staff
    to residents, thus allowing children to be appropriately supervised. Provided a
    management plan was in place covering risk assessments, care plans, staff
    training, a commitment to 24-hour staffing, and processes for managing visits and
    school liaison, I consider that the home could be managed in a way that would
    protect neighbours from undue disturbance.
22. I conclude that the proposal would not have a harmful effect on the living
    conditions of neighbouring properties and would satisfy the requirements of Policy
    D3 of the LP and policies SP5 and DP11 of the BLP. Together these policies
    require high quality design which ensures that existing properties’ amenity is
    appropriately protected, and existing residents are not unacceptably affected by
    noise or other disturbance.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6012368


Highway safety
23. Although the site has a low public transport accessibility level (PTAL) of 2, there
    are four bus routes within walking distance, meaning that public transport is
    capable of offering an alternative to the private car. I have not been supplied with
    local parking standards relating to children’s homes. The property possesses off
    street parking, although from my inspection of the site and the plans, four cars
    could not be accommodated on site and two is a realistic number. As such, a
    condition would be needed requiring space for two cars to be laid out and made
    available at all times. In the event that all staff arrived by car, there would be
    temporary overflow parking at changeover times, and during the day when the
    manager is on site and other professionals are visiting.
24. Interested parties feared that increased traffic and on street parking would give
    rise to highway danger, and supplied photographic evidence of vehicles parked on
    the road outside the appeal site. The traffic generated by the proposal would have
    only a marginal impact on existing traffic levels. As there are no waiting restrictions
    locally, visitors could park on the street should there be no parking spaces
    available on site. Whilst I recognise that additional on street parking may not be
    considered desirable by existing residents, there is insufficient evidence that the
    proposal would give rise to indiscriminate parking which would result in a danger to
    highway users.
25. Interested parties highlighted that the local road network lacks crossing points,
    such as zebra crossings or pedestrian islands, which presents a potential risk to
    children who may not necessarily be road-aware. However, it is a family area,
    meaning that children are likely to cross nearby roads regularly already, and there
    is no reason to suppose that children residing at the home would be in any more
    danger from doing so.
26. I find therefore that the proposal would not have an adverse effect on highway
    safety and would accord with policies DP23 and DP24 of the BLP, which together
    require proposals not to have a significant negative effect on the safety of any
    users, including vulnerable users such as pedestrians and cyclists, and to provide
    adequate car parking facilities.
Other Matters
27. The potential impact of the proposal on house prices or the desirability of
    properties in the area does not have a bearing on the outcome of the appeal.
28. The appellant highlighted that use class C3 (dwellinghouses) of the Town and
    Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended) contains three
    categories which properties can move freely between: single households, up to six
    residents living together as a single household where care is provided, and up to
    six residents living together as a single household where no care is provided.
    Whilst I have had regard to the fact that the property could be put to different
    residential uses without the need for planning permission, this has not been
    determinative in my reasoning. The appellant referred to appeals and case law on
    the matter, but the lack of detail did not allow me to confirm if they were directly
    comparable to the appeal.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6012368


Conditions
29. The Framework sets out that conditions should only be imposed where they are
    necessary, relevant, precise and reasonable in all other respects. I have assessed
    the suggested list of conditions on this basis. In assessing the need for the
    conditions, I have had regard to the policy requirements contained in the
    development plan.
30. In the interests of certainty, I have imposed a time limit condition and a condition
    listing the approved plans.
31. A condition requiring the approval of a management plan, to be based on the
    operational protocols set out by the appellant, is necessary to ensure appropriate
    management of the children’s home and to minimise disruption to nearby
    residents.
32. To ensure adequate car and cycle parking, such provision needs to be approved
    and implemented prior to occupation.
33. To ensure a suitable level of occupancy based on the number of bedrooms of
    appropriate size, the maximum occupancy of the home should be limited to three
    children.
34. To ensure that only uses suited to a residential area are undertaken, a condition is
    needed limiting the use to a children’s home and no other potential uses with use
    class C2.
Conclusion
35. For the above reasons, the proposal accords with the development plan, when
    read as a whole. Material considerations do not indicate that a decision should be
    taken other than in accordance with the development plan. I therefore conclude
    that the appeal should be allowed.

J Heppell
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6012368


Schedule of Conditions

    1. The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
       the date of this permission.
    2. The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
       following approved plans: A1.1, A1.2, A1.3, A1.4, A1.5 and A1.6.
    3. Before any part of the development is first occupied, a management plan
       covering the following matters shall be submitted to and approved in writing by
       the Local Planning Authority. The approved plan shall be implemented in
       perpetuity once the children’s home comes into operation.
       ● policies and procedures covering all aspects of care;
       ● the procedure for undertaking risk assessments for all residents;
       ● the procedure for preparing individual care plans tailored to each child's needs;
       ● a plan for regular staff training and supervision;
       ● a commitment to 24-hour staffing ensuring constant professional oversight,
       including provision to cover staff absences;
       ● processes for managing all external appointments and visits;
       ● processes for liaison with schools, social services, and other professionals;
       ● a parking and staff travel management plan.
    4. Before any part of the development is first occupied, details of parking for two
       cars and secure, covered and conveniently located parking facilities for a
       minimum of two bicycles shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the
       Local Planning Authority. The approved facilities shall be installed before the
       development is first occupied and shall be permanently maintained as such
       thereafter.
    5. The occupancy of the children’s home shall be limited to a maximum of three
       children.
    6. The premises shall be used as a children’s home and for no other purpose,
       including any other purposes in class C2 of the Town and Country Planning (Use
       Classes) Order 1987 (as amended) or in any provision equivalent to that Class
       in any statutory instrument revoking and re-enacting that Order with or without
       modification.
End of schedule




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
