 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 25 August 2026
 by Philip Willmer BSc Dip Arch RIBA
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 21 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012398
 Plot 1 (2 Meadow Gardens), Land to the South of Cross Keys, Bearsted, Kent, ME14 4FP.
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Ramac Group Ltd against the decision of Maidstone Borough Council.
 •   The application Ref is 26/500516/FULL.
 •   The development proposed is for the formation of a new vehicular access and driveway to serve Plot
     1, including permeable block paving, adjustment of kerbs, post and rail fencing, hedge and tree
     relocation to accommodate the new access.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the formation of a
   new vehicular access and driveway to serve Plot 1 (2 Meadow Gardens), including
   permeable block paving, adjustment of kerbs, post and rail fencing, hedge and tree
   relocation to accommodate the new access at Plot 1 (2 Meadow Gardens), Land to
   the South of Cross Keys, Bearsted, Kent, ME14 4FP in accordance with the terms
   of the application, Ref 26/500516/FULL, subject to the conditions set out at the end
   of the decision letter:
Procedural Matters
2. Meadows Gardens is a new residential development currently under construction.
     The appeal site formally Plot 1 is now known as Number 2 Meadow Gardens (No2)
     with the neighbouring property to the south identified as Number 4 Meadow
     Gardens (No4). For the purposes of this appeal, I will refer to the current
     addresses rather than the previous plot numbers.
3. As I saw on the occasion of my site visit the access to No’s 2 and 4 has not been
     built in accordance with the approved design and differs from the proposal the
     subject of this appeal. I have, nevertheless, considered this appeal based solely on
     the previously approved design and that the subject of the planning application Ref:
     26/500516/FULL.
Main Issue
4. I consider the main issue to be the effect of the proposal on the character and
   appearance of the street scene.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012398


Reasons
5. This residential development is currently still under construction. However, the
   detached houses, No’s 2 and No 4 are substantially complete, including driveways,
   boundary treatments and soft landscaping.
6. As originally approved No’s 2 and 4 would share a single crossover access from
   the estate road, the driveway would then branch off to serve that No 2.
7. The appellant proposes that No’s 2 and 4 would have separate crossovers with No
   2 having an enlarged hardstanding in front of its garage. It is further proposed that
   the tree currently shown to be located to the north of the existing single crossover
   would be repositioned on a small island of land between the two new driveways.
8. The Council considers that the revised layout would diminish the quality and overall
   planned design of the wider development, resulting in a harsher, more urban
   appearance of the site, being a prominent key feature in public views that acts as
   part of a visual gateway into the southern part of the development. Consequently,
   it asserts that the proposal would cause harm to the character and appearance of
   the street scene.
9. No 2 is a substantial dwelling located on a prominent corner plot and is particularly
   prominent when approaching the development along Lilk Meadow Way, as well as
   from Meadow Gardens itself.
10. From my observations on site, given the number of crossovers currently serving the
    development I am not persuaded that an additional separate crossover here would,
    in itself result in a hasher more urban appearance. The enlarged parking/turning
    area in front of the garage to No 2 would add to the total area of hardstanding and
    thereby diminish to a small extent the overall area of soft landscaping. However, it
    would mean that visitors/trades peoples vehicles would be parked closer to the
    house rather than on the proposed narrow driveway, and therefore less prominent
    in the landscape.
11. On balance I do not consider that the formation of a second crossover or the
    alterations to the driveway would in themselves result in harm to the character and
    appearance of the street scene.
12. However, I do believe that due to the narrowness of the area of land between the
    two driveways, given the surrounding area of hardstanding it may be difficult for the
    tree to flourish in the proposed location. I also consider that, if it does grow here
    there may well be pressures in time from the residents to have the tree removed as
    it may impact on the access, parking, etc. I therefore judge that this would not be
    an appropriate location for the tree. Nevertheless, there would, with a well-
    considered planting scheme be the opportunity to soft landscape this area to
    minimise any urbanising effect of two driveways. Accordingly, if I were minded to
    allow the appeal it would be necessary to condition a scheme of landscaping.
13. I conclude therefore that subject to an appropriately worded landscaping condition
    the proposed alteration to the access drives to No’s 2 and 4 would not cause harm
    to the character and appearance of the street scene.
14. The proposal would therefore accord with the objectives of Policies LPRSP15 and
    LPRHOU2 of Maidstone Borough Council’s Local Plan Review 2021-2038
    (Adopted March 2024), the Council’s Residential Extensions Supplementary

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
 Appeal Decision 6012398


     Planning Document (Adopted May 2009), in particular Pars. 4.68 and 6.22 and
     page 34, as well as the National Planning Policy Framework as they relate to,
     amongst other things, the need for development to respond to the location of the
     site and sensitively incorporate natural features thereby creating a high-quality
     public realm.
Conditions
15. I have considered the conditions suggested by the Council in light of the advice in
    the Framework and the Planning Practice Guidance. In the interests of precision
    and enforceability, I have amended the Council’s suggested wording where
    appropriate.
16. To ensure a satisfactory appearance I shall include a landscaping condition.
    Further, I will require the submission of details of proposed ecological
    enhancements.
17. I will also impose a condition requiring the development to be undertaken in
    accordance with the approved plans.
Conclusions
18. For the reasons given above and having regard to all other matters raised, I
    conclude that the appeal should be allowed.



Philip Willmer
INSPECTOR


Conditions:
     1)     The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
            date of this decision.
     2)     The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
            the following approved plans, drawings: PL01-C and PL02-B
     3)     No development shall take place until full details of the ecological
            enhancements proposed to mitigate against the increased area of hard
            surfacing and loss of potential habitat for wildlife have been submitted to and
            approved in writing by the local planning authority and these works shall be
            carried out as approved.
     4)     No development shall take place until full details of both hard and soft
            landscape works have been submitted to and approved in writing by the local
            planning authority and these works shall be carried out as approved. These
            details shall include hard surfacing materials; alterations to boundary
            treatment; planting plans; tree planting; and, schedules of plants noting
            species.
            All planting, seeding or turfing comprised in the approved details of
            landscaping shall be carried out in the first planting and seeding seasons
            following the occupation of the buildings or the completion of the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
 Appeal Decision 6012398


            development, whichever is the sooner; and any trees or plants which within a
            period of 5 years from the completion of the development die, are removed or
            become seriously damaged or diseased shall be replaced in the next planting
            season with others of similar size and species unless otherwise agreed in
            writing with the local planning authority.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       4
