 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 11 September 2026
 by Jonathan Price BA(Hons) DipTP DMS MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 16 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012906
 43 Main Road, St Lawrence, Essex CM0 7LY
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Ben Bridges against the decision of Maldon District Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00069/HOUSE.
 •    The development proposed is domestic outbuilding for personal storage.

Decision
The appeal is allowed and planning permission granted for the domestic outbuilding for
personal storage at 43 Main Road, St Lawrence, Essex CM0 7LY in accordance with
the terms of the application 26/00069/HOUSE and subject to the following condition:
     1) The development hereby permitted shall accord with the following drawings
        2092 01 Rev A, 2092 02 Rev A, 2092 03 Rev A, 2092 04 Rev A, 2092 05 Rev
        A, 2092 06 Rev A.
Preliminary Matters
1. The development is already in place and appears to reflect the plans submitted, for
   which retrospective approval is sought.
1. On 17 August 2026 the Government published the revised National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework). This does not alter the requirement in planning law
   that appeals be determined in accordance with the development plan, unless
   material considerations indicate otherwise. Because the relevant development plan
   policies in this case are not materially inconsistent with those of the new
   Framework, I have not deemed it necessary to seek the further views of the parties.
Main Issue
2. The effects of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area.
Reasons
3. The semi-detached house at No 43, along with its immediate neighbours, is set well
   back from the street behind a relatively long drive and front garden. The
   surroundings are that of a built-up residential street scene of a quite varied and
   informal character. The outbuilding sits to one side of the plot at the top of the drive,
   quite near the main road. It is of an intrinsically satisfactory design, with the
   weatherboarded walls and pitched tiled roof rather typical of a small workshop
   building in a rural settlement. Although in a quite prominent position, this
   unremarkable building does not appear out of place in a built context which itself

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012906


     does not impose a rigid building line or design requirements. This rather innocuous
     building appears quite fitting here and certainly causes no appreciable harm to the
     character and appearance of the village. As a consequence, this proposal satisfies
     the requirements of policies D1 and H4 of the Maldon District Local Development
     Plan and those of the Framework for achieving well-designed places.
Conclusion
4. For certainty a condition is necessary which specifies the plans approved. The
   proposal is described as a domestic outbuilding and so there is no necessity for a
   further condition specifying use as such and not as a separate residential dwelling.
   Because the proposal is satisfactory in respect of its effects on the character and
   appearance of the area, in accordance with the development plan as a whole,
   I conclude the appeal succeeds.

Jonathan Price
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
