Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 12 August 2026 by I Ingledew BSc (Hons)
Decision by T Law BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012457
146 Main Road, Romford, Havering RM2 5HS
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1 Class A of the
    Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•   The appeal is made by Ms Amyrah Aslam against the decision of the Council of the London Borough
    of Havering.
•   The application Ref is Y0104.26.
•   The development proposed is the addition of 8m single storey rear extension from original wall of
    dwelling.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. Under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the Town and Country
   Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended)
   (the GPDO), planning permission is granted for the enlargement of a dwellinghouse
   subject to limitations and conditions.
4. Where an application is made for prior approval for development which exceeds the
   limits in paragraph A.1(f) but is allowed by paragraph A.1(g) to Part 1, paragraph
   A.4(3) provides that the local planning authority may refuse the application where it
   considers that the proposed development does not comply – or that the developer
   has provided insufficient information to enable the authority to establish whether the
   proposed development complies with the conditions, limitations or restrictions that
   are applicable to such permitted development.
5. There is no dispute between the parties that the proposed development would
   comply with the limitations and conditions in Part 1, Class A of the GPDO. From the
   evidence before me, I see no reason to disagree.
6. Paragraph A.4(7) to Part 1 requires the local planning authority to assess the
   impact of the proposed development on the amenity of all adjoining premises,
   taking into account any representations received. Following the Council’s
   notification, objections were received from the occupiers of 144 Main Road and 148
   Main Road. No other representations were received, and the Council did not raise

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012457


     concerns regarding the effect of amenity on the occupiers of the other adjoining
     premises. From what I saw on site, and the distance of the proposed extension
     from the other adjoining premises, I have no reason to disagree with this
     conclusion.
7. The Council has referred to the design guidance set out in the Council’s Residential
   Extensions and Alterations Supplementary Planning Document (2011). There is no
   provision within Class A for consideration of policy or supplementary planning
   guidance, therefore while I have had regard to this document, it has not been
   determinative in this appeal.
Main Issue
8. The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the amenity of the occupiers of 144
   and 148 Main Road, with particular regard to outlook.
Reasons for the Recommendation
Amenity
9. The appeal property is a detached two storey dwelling with an existing rear
   extension that spans approximately half the width of the rear elevation. This would
   be replaced by the proposed development. The adjoining properties of No 144 and
   No 146 Main Road are located either side of the appeal property with rear habitable
   windows that face onto rear gardens. There is a staggered relationship between the
   three properties, with the original rear elevation of the appeal property set forward
   of No 144 and set back from No 148. Boundary treatment of fences and vegetation
   are present along the shared boundaries providing a degree of screening, although
   the existing rear extension remains visible above. At No 144, the existing rear
   extension is set back from the side elevation and, as a result, the occupiers of No
   144 currently experience a degree of openness from the rear garden and habitable
   windows despite their property’s set back.
10. The proposal would extend to a greater depth and width than the existing rear
    extension. Despite remaining single storey with a pitched roof, the proposal would
    nevertheless introduce a substantial increase in built form that would be readily
    visible from the rear windows and garden of No 144 over the existing boundary
    treatment. Owing to the staggered relationship between the properties, and the
    proposal situated substantially closer to the boundary, a much greater extent of
    built form would be experienced from the rear windows and garden of No 144.
    Consequently, the proposal would appear as a dominant and overbearing feature,
    eroding the openness along this boundary and creating a greater sense of
    enclosure, resulting in harm to the outlook from No 144.
11. The proposal would similarly result in a substantial increase in the extent of built
    form visible from No 148. Although more mature vegetation is present along this
    boundary, it would not fully screen the depth of the extension which, despite the
    staggered relationship, would project a considerable depth beyond the rear
    elevation of No 148. As a result, the proposal would noticeably increase the extent
    of development perceived from the rear windows and garden of No 148, appearing
    as a prominent and overbearing feature, contributing to a greater sense of
    enclosure and harming the outlook from No 148.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012457


12. For the reasons above, I therefore conclude that the proposal would harm the
    amenity of the neighbouring occupiers of No 144 and No 148, with particular regard
    to outlook. Therefore, I recommend that prior approval should not be granted.
Conclusion and Recommendation
13. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I
    recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

I Ingledew
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
14. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

T Law
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
