 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 01 September 2026
 by Nicola Davies BA DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 16 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012356
 65 Deepdene Vale, Dorking, SURREY RH4 1NJ
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by William Rickman against the decision of Mole Valley District Council.
 •   The application Ref is MO/2026/00145.
 •   The development proposed is for a loft conversion and extension.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Application for costs
2. An application for costs was made by William Rickman against Mole Valley District
   Council and this is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3. A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) has
   been published since the planning application was determined by the Council. I
   have had regard to the revised Framework in reaching my decision.
4. I have taken the description of the proposed development from the planning
   application form and have limited it to solely reflect the act of development.
   However, I note that the description is expressed differently on other documents.
Main Issue
5. The main issue raised by this appeal is the effect of the proposed development on
   the character and appearance of the dwelling and the street scene.
Reasons
6. The proposal involves the remodelling of the existing pitched hipped roof by
   increasing the height of the roof to create a crown style roof with gable ends and a
   rear flat roof dormer that would encompass the majority of the rear roof slope.
   Replacing the modest pitched hipped roof with a much larger roof form of a flat–top
   crown design would create a dwelling of top-heavy appearance. Its design would
   visually overwhelm the dwelling. It would have a disproportionately large impact
   upon this modestly sized dwelling. Consequently, its design would be out of
   keeping with the host dwelling and it would appear as an inconsistent feature upon
   the dwelling.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012356


7. Further to the above, the proposed rear dormer would span the majority of the rear
   roof slope, leaving little uninterrupted roof slope. As such, it would appear as a
   large, dominant addition which would not be subservient to the host dwelling. The
   size and design of the roof dormer would not respect the character of the existing
   dwelling.
8. There is varied character to the dwellings within Deepdene Vale that includes a
   variety of roof forms, which can be seen from the street scene photographs
   provided by the appellant. Nos 12 and 16 Deepdene Vale, said to be of similar
   architectural character to the appeal property are however some distance from the
   site. An aerial photograph has been provided that annotates the locations where
   crown and flat roofs are located in the wider area. However, I have not been
   directed to any specific examples of crown roof forms within the cul-de-sac
   termination stretch of Deepdene Vale. Whilst the dwellings in the area may be
   varied in both character and appearance, this does not justify a proposal that would
   be visually harmful to this dwelling.
9. I acknowledge that Deepdene Vale is a private road that terminates in a cul-de-sac.
   Nonetheless, despite this not being a public highway the visual harm arising from
   the proposed development would be clearly visible to the neighbouring residents
   and to those passing the property. Whilst there is a raised railway line at the rear of
   the property the roof and rear dormer would be apparent in wider views from the
   residential area beyond the railway line. The visual harm arising from the proposed
   development would also be clearly visible to the adjoining occupiers in outlook from
   their rear gardens.
10. I saw there is a rear flat roof dormer at the neighbouring property at No.63
    Deepdene Vale that is said to have been there for some time and, as such, would
    predate the current policy context. The presence of the neighbouring dormer does
    not automatically justify the granting of further such roof extensions where visual
    harm would result. I also acknowledge that dormers within roof slopes are a
    feature of the Deepdene Vale street scene. However, from the photographs
    provided, the example dormers are generally substantially smaller than that
    proposed here and are positioned within different contextual settings within roofs. I
    have also been provided with elevations that illustrate other roof dormers granted
    planning permission by the local planning authority. However, these relate to
    different locations. The proposal before me can and should be considered on its
    own merits.
11. Furthermore, I have been referred to appeals at Dale Road, Surrey
    (APP/K3605/D/23/3331928) and Vernalls Close, Dorset
    (APP/V1260/D/22/3304635) that were allowed. With regard to Dale Road it is
    commented that that appeal involved a hip-to-gable extension with crown roof to a
    detached dwelling within a cul-de-sac, incorporating a rear dormer. The Inspector
    noted that there was an existing crown style roof in the locality. As such, this would
    not have been a discordant feature within that area. In respect of Vernalls Close
    that proposal related to a different location. However, I have not been provided the
    full details of these cases. I have also been provided with references and
    comments taken from other appeal decisions. However, these again appear to
    relate to different locations.
12. The Council has previously approved roof alterations at No.42 Deepdene Vale that
     increased the ridge height and included a rear pitched-roof dormer (Ref:

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
 Appeal Decision 6012356


     MO/2009/0333). However, that permission is of some age and would have been
     considered against a different policy context. I have also been referred to other
     examples of dormer roof extensions however, those relate to different locations and
     pre-date the adoption of the current local plan.
13. For those reasons set out further above, I conclude that the proposed development
    would be harmful to the character and appearance of the dwelling and the street
    scene. The proposal would, therefore, conflict with Policy EN4 of the Mole Valley
    Local Plan, the Dorking Design Code, the Design Guidance for House Extensions
    and Outbuildings Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) and the provisions of
    the revised Framework. That policy seeks, amongst other matters, development to
    be of high quality architecture and urban design, respecting existing local character
    and to introduce new styles sensitively and where appropriate. This reflects the
    objectives of the revised Framework to achieve well-designed places.
14. The Design Guidance for House Extensions and Outbuildings SPD provides
    guidance on crown roofs and states that crown flat roofs are not generally
    encouraged. In addition, the rear dormer roof addition is resisted by the SPD
    Design Guide. As such, the design guidance discourages the form of the proposed
    development.
Other Matters
15. The appellant contends that the officer’s report applies the SPDs as an absolute
    policy prohibition, contrary to its proper status as non-statutory guidance and
    contrary to the requirements of the Framework. Whilst SPDs should not be applied
    prescriptively SPDs can assist such assessments, as has been so here.
16. The Council failed to engage proactively with the applicant, now the appellant,
    during the determination period of the planning application. Timelines of various
    correspondence have been provided. I have been advised that post-decision
    discussions with the Council have taken place and it is said that design issues of
    concern could be addressed had the Council engaged with the appellant and agent
    in accordance with the Framework. Such concerns relating to the processing of the
    planning application are not a matter that is primarily before me in respect of this
    appeal. These are issues that, if necessary, should be raised with the Council
    separate to this appeal. In any event, these concerns would not lead me to alter
    my findings above.
Conclusion
17. Having regard to the above findings, the appeal should be dismissed.



Nicola Davies
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
