 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 14 August 2026
 by Jonathan Price BA(Hons) DipTP DMS MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 25 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012327
 11 Foxmead, Rivenhall End, Witham, Essex CM8 3HD
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Ms Louise Fuller against the decision of Braintree District Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00733/HH.
 •    The development proposed is to demolish garage to side and build two-storey extension, build
      ground-floor extension to rear and make fenestration changes .

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted to demolish garage to
   side and build two-storey extension, build ground-floor extension to rear and make
   fenestration changes at 11 Foxmead, Rivenhall End, Witham, Essex CM8 3HD in
   accordance with the terms of the application 26/00733/HH and subject to the
   following conditions:
     1) The development hereby permitted shall begin no later than three years from
        the date of this decision.
     2) Other than in respect of materials to be used in the construction of the external
        surfaces of the extensions, the development hereby permitted shall accord with
        the following drawings: general plans & elevations plan ref A1-102603-4P,
        location plan A4-102506-4L, existing block plan A4-102506-4SE and proposed
        block plan A4-102506-4SP REV 2.
     3) Notwithstanding the details shown in the approved drawings, no development
        above ground level shall take place until details of the materials to be used in
        the construction of the external surfaces of the extensions hereby permitted
        have been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority.
        The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved details.
Preliminary Matter
2. The Government published the revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) on 17 August 2026, after this appeal was made. Although this
   makes substantial amendments, its policies over achieving well-designed
   places remain generally consistent with those of the previous version. With
   regard to the issues in this appeal, it has not been found necessary to seek the
   further views of parties over this recently published Framework.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012327


Main Issues
3. The effects of the proposal on the character and appearance of the area and on the
   living conditions of neighbouring occupiers at 1 Foxden, in particular regard to light
   to and outlook from adjacent side windows.
Reasons
Character and appearance
4. The dwelling at No 11 falls within an estate of modern detached houses built to a
   quite consistent layout, density and scale. It is the final house in a sequence
   characterised by rendered, or in some cases boarded walling. Starting at next door
   1 Foxden, this character changes to a series of brick faced dwellings with timber
   detailing. The two storey part of the proposal partly occupies space currently
   containing a detached single garage. Adjacent to this, No 1 has a single storey
   lean-to side extension. These two single storey elements, and the gap between
   them, separates the main two storey parts of the respective houses and
   contributes to the degree of openness within the street scene. No 11 would be
   extended sideways at a slightly lower roof ridge height and onto this to the rear
   through a two-storey, gabled roof projection. These two storey additions would
   wrap around a single storey rear extension. Although contributing to the
   proportionately large scale of the extensions overall, this single storey element
   would have no impact on the street scene.
5. However, the more prominent two storey side and rear additions would both feature
   in the street scene and inevitably erode its degree of openness, although not to any
   greater degree than similar house extensions in the immediate neighbourhood. The
   existing openness at this juncture is not especially critical because of the change in
   house architecture, which would remain distinct. The first floor cladding to the
   proposed front elevation and the red brick to the new side elevation might jar
   somewhat with the mainly rendered character of the other housing along Foxmead.
   However, this concern might be overcome by a condition reserving approval for
   facing materials, which the appellant is amenable to. Subject to this, the proposal is
   found to be suitable in respect of its overall effect on the character and appearance
   of the area.
Living conditions
6. The outlook from and light to the main habitable rooms at No 1 rely on fenestration
   concentrated on the front and rear elevations of the house. The rear two-storey
   extension proposed at No 11 would be roughly in line with the back wall at No 1,
   thus not impacting upon outlook. The refusal reason refers to the effect on the
   ground floor side window at No 1, which already faces the existing detached
   garage at No 11. In respect of providing light and outlook to the main habitable
   rooms, this appears to, at most, play a secondary role compared to the larger
   windows at the front and rear. The upstairs side window would remain set back
   from the proposed two storey extension by the ground floor lean-to below and still
   offer adequate light to what appears, from the obscure glazing fitted, to be a
   bathroom. For the above reasons, the proposal would not have a materially harmful
   impact on the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers at No 1, including with
   regard to any reduced light to and outlook from either of the adjacent side windows.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
 Appeal Decision 6012327


Conclusion
7. In addition to conditions applying the standard three-year time limit for
   commencement and specifying the approved drawings, a third is necessary to
   reserve final approval of facing materials. Subject to these conditions, and for the
   reasons explained, the proposal would comply with policies SP7, LPP36 and
   LPP52 of the Braintree District Local Plan 2013 - 2033. On this basis, I conclude
   that the appeal succeeds.

Jonathan Price
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
