 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 28 August 2026
 by G Ellis BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 18 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012106
 2 Killy Hill, Chobham, GU24 8RF
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Joe Verlander against the decision of Surrey Heath Borough Council
 •   The application Ref is 26/0127/FFU.
 •   The development proposed is the erection of a two-storey side extension and single storey rear
     extension following partial demolition of existing rear projection.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) was published. The parts of the Framework relevant to this appeal
   have not substantively changed. I have therefore not sought further submissions. I
   have had regard to the latest version of the Framework where relevant in this
   appeal.
3. The Council changed the description of development from that on the application
   form. This was agreed with the applicant, and it was confirmed that the porch
   shown on the plans did not form part of the proposal. This forms the basis of my
   assessment, and I have therefore used the Council’s description in the header.
Background and Main Issues
4. A planning appeal for side and rear extensions following part demolition of the
   existing dwelling was dismissed in August 2025 – Ref 3365476. The Council, in its
   officer’s report, tabulates the differences in floor area and volume between the two
   schemes relative to the original building. While there are some small percentage
   differences overall, the proposals are very similar, and the main parties agree that
   the proposed development would constitute inappropriate development in the
   Green Belt.
5. Therefore, the main issues are:
     •    The effect of the proposed development on the openness of the Green Belt;
          and
     •    Whether the harm by reason of inappropriateness and any other harm is clearly
          outweighed by other considerations, so as to amount to the very special
          circumstances necessary to justify the development.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
    Appeal Decision 6012106


Reasons
Openness
6. The Framework identifies that the objective of Green Belt policy is to prevent urban
   sprawl by keeping land permanently open.
7. No.2 is the end property of a short terrace of houses. To the other side is
   woodland, including a footpath running along the edge of the appeal site. The
   proposed two-storey extension would reduce the space to the side, extending up to
   the boundary, and would be visible from both Killy Hill and the footpath. The depth
   of the proposed single-storey rear element would be less than the existing rear
   projection, although the Council questions the status of that element, and it would
   also extend across the rear of the proposed two-storey element
8. Overall, I concur with the assessment of openness in the previous appeal decision
   that whilst localised, there would be harm to both the spatial and visual aspects.
   This therefore adds to the Green Belt harm.
Other Considerations
9. The appellant promotes a fallback position comprising a number of alterations
   through permitted development rights, which is supported by a lawful development
   certificate1. These comprise a flat-roof dormer across the full width of the roof, a
   single-storey side extension which also projects to the rear, a detached garden
   cabin, and a porch. Together, these aspects would increase the total floor area by
   approximately an additional 8 sqm compared to the proposal. While the Council
   agrees with the floor area figures set out by the appellant, it calculates that the
   volume increase would be lower based on the area of the dormer.
10. Notwithstanding the technicalities of any measurements, these elements would
    individually and together result in a different composition and form of development
    compared to the appeal proposal. The side extension would not extend as close to
    the side boundary, but would be deeper, and with the outbuilding, the built form
    would be spread further across the plot. However, as single-storey features, they
    would have reduced visual presence and would be primarily screened by the
    boundary treatments. The dormer window, owing to its elevated placement, would
    serve as a conspicuous feature, although, being situated at the rear, it would
    remain unseen from the road and would not impact the overall footprint.
11. The proposal would result in a more coherent and integrated form, and features
    such as the large flat roof dormer would be less sympathetic to the appearance of
    the property and the terrace as a whole. However, design is not a direct
    consideration in relation to the permitted development right schemes, and nor is it
    in relation to Green Belt considerations.
12. I accept that the fallback is more than a theoretical prospect and provides a realistic
    means of achieving additional space if the appeal is dismissed. If implemented
    instead of the appeal proposal, it would produce a different form of development
    with some greater impacts. However, the dormer and outbuilding are independent
    elements that could also be implemented alongside the appeal proposal.



1
    Council reference 25/1208/CES


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
    Appeal Decision 6012106


13. Although there is no indication that the appellant intends to pursue this course,
    there is no effective mechanism to prevent it. As the Council notes, a condition
    removing permitted development rights would take effect only upon implementation
    of the appeal scheme, leaving scope for elements of the fallback, and/or other
    permitted extensions and alterations, to be undertaken beforehand. In that event,
    the comparative benefit relied upon would not arise, and the combined
    development would cause greater spatial and visual harm to openness.
14. The fallback therefore does not provide a reliable improvement over the appeal
    proposal and attracts only moderate weight in its favour.
15. In consideration of the fallback, I have had regard to the established caselaw2 and
    the two appeal decisions referenced by the appellant. The Hazels case3 relates to a
    replacement dwelling, and in Chedley4 both the proposal and fallback were a
    single-storey rear extension. As such, I do not find that these are directly
    comparable to this proposal. Moreover, while accepting that a fallback can be a
    material consideration capable of providing or contributing to very special
    circumstances, each case must be considered on its own merits.
16. The appellant explains the need for additional space, and the proposal would
    increase the size of the property, providing enhanced living conditions for the
    occupiers.
17. The Council raise no other concerns in relation to the proposal, and I have no
    reason to disagree. However, compliance with other policies is a neutral factor.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
18. The proposal would be inappropriate development within the Green Belt. The harm
    to openness would not be significant and localised, but nonetheless, in accordance
    with the Framework, substantial weight should be given to any harm to the Green
    Belt.
19. The fallback attracts moderate weight, but its benefits are reduced by the potential
    for elements of both schemes to be implemented. Even when the fallback and the
    other identified benefits are taken together, they do not clearly outweigh the harm
    arising from inappropriate development and the additional harm to openness.
20. Consequently, the very special circumstances necessary to justify the proposal do
    not exist. The proposal therefore fails to accord with the Framework, and no other
    material considerations indicate that the appeal should be determined otherwise.
21. For these reasons, the appeal is dismissed.

G Ellis
INSPECTOR




2
  Mansell v Tonbridge and Malling Borough Council [2017] EWCA Civ 1314,
3
  APP/A3655/W/21/3279153
4
  APP/N0410/D/24/3349362


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 3
