Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 August 2026 by A Chan Markovitz BA (Hons)
Decision by Tamsin Law BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012004
14 The Orchard, Flackwell Heath, Buckinghamshire HP10 9PR
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Nic Rand against the decision of Buckinghamshire Council.
•   The application Ref is PL/26/02423/FA.
•   The development proposed is “Construction of a timber framed open front garage and store. Floor
    Plan is 5m x 5m with a flat roof which will extend approximately 30-60cm beyond this. Front of the
    construction with be of maximum height to the top of the roof 2.5m falling down to 2.4 at the rear. To
    the front R/H side will be an opening of approximately 2.4 with a central dividing wall for a vehicle to
    park. To the L/H side an opening of approx 1.8 which will have either an opening barn door style or
    roller shutter. To the L\H flank will be a pedestrian door approx half way down. To the left of the
    construction will be a fence set back from the front elevation with a gate to keep bins and log store.
    Roof will be flat roof with edm rubber finished with black soffit and fascia boards and hopefully a
    sedum/living roof. Walls will be clad with timber cedar battens or equivalent.”


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matter
3. On my site visit I observed that development had begun construction but it was not
   complete. I have therefore considered the appeal on the basis of the plans before
   me, rather than what has been built.
4. A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published in
   August 2026. In this instance, the issues most relevant to the appeal are unaffected
   by the revisions to the Framework. I am therefore satisfied that there is no
   requirement to seek further submissions on the revised Framework, and that no
   party would be disadvantaged by this.
Main Issue
5. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
   appearance of the host dwelling and the surrounding area.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012004


Reasons for the Recommendation
6. The surrounding area is characterised by two-storey detached dwellings with
   hipped tiled roofs, red brick elevations and attached side garages. Owing to the
   curved alignment of The Orchard and adjacent cul-de-sacs, some dwellings and
   garages are positioned forward of others. Nevertheless, most properties are set
   well back from the highway behind deep, undeveloped front gardens and
   driveways, which are either open or enclosed by low hedges and vegetation.
   Collectively, these features contribute to the area's verdant character and create an
   open, spacious streetscape.
7. The host dwelling is typical of development in the surrounding area, with an
   attached right side garage flush with its principal elevation. It occupies a corner plot
   with a front garden extending across the full width of the dwelling and beyond the
   side garage. The majority of the front garden is enclosed by low hedges, while its
   right-hand boundary is defined by taller hedges and vegetation.
8. The proposal’s prominent siting forward of the host dwelling’s principal elevation,
   together with its height extending significantly above the low boundary hedges,
   would result in a disproportionate and visually intrusive addition. It would draw
   attention to itself as an incongruous feature within the street scene. Due its scale
   and siting, the proposed development would detract from the appearance of both
   the host dwelling and the surrounding area and would erode the area's open and
   spacious character.
9. From the right, the proposed development would be screened from public visibility
   by the tall vegetation along that boundary. From the left, the proposed development
   would be partially screened by a willow tree within the front garden. A condition has
   been suggested to retain and maintain this vegetation. Whilst this would reduce the
   proposal’s prominence in some views, its excessive scale and conspicuous siting
   would mean that the partial screening provided by the tree would not sufficiently
   mitigate its visual impact. Consequently, even with the retention of the vegetation,
   the proposal would still dominate the street scene and erode the area’s open and
   spacious character.
10. For these reasons, the proposed development would harm the character and
    appearance of the host dwelling and the surrounding area. The adverse effects
    identified under the main issue substantially outweigh any benefits derived from the
    proposed development. It would conflict with Policies DM35 and DM36 of the
    Wycombe District Local Plan (2019), and the guidance contained within the
    Wycombe District Council Householder Planning and Design Guidance
    Supplementary Planning Document (2020). Together these seek to ensure that
    development respects its surroundings, particularly in terms of style and form, and
    does not result in unacceptable harm to the character and distinctiveness of the
    built environment. Conclusion and Recommendation
11. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I
    recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

A Chan Markovitz
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012004


Inspector’s Decision
12. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

Tamsin Law
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
