    Appeal Decision
    Site visit made on 27 August 2026
    by Les Greenwood MRTPI
    an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
    Decision date: 10 September 2026


    Appeal Ref: 6012026
    297 Frankby Road, Frankby, Wirral CH48 1PE
    •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
         against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    •    The appeal is made by James Taylor for Aughton Estates Ltd against the decision of Wirral
         Metropolitan Borough Council.
    •    The application Ref is APPH/26/00073.
    •    The development proposed is the construction of a first floor side extension.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary matters
2. The proposal is described as a first floor side extension. I saw at my site visit that
   this has already been built, so that the proposal is retrospective. The appellant
   advises that the ground floor extension underneath the appeal extension was also
   built recently, under permitted development rights1, as confirmed in principle by a
   Lawful Development Certificate issued by the Council. The Council states that the
   ground floor and first floor side extensions appear to have been built concurrently,
   but I have seen no evidence on this point. This appeal decision deals with the first
   floor extension only.
3. I also noted on my site visit that an additional ground floor extension and roof
   terrace appears to have been added at the back of the appeal extension. This is
   not shown on the submitted plans. To be clear, this decision relates to the
   submitted proposal and not to the as built version.
4. Two significant new documents have been published since the Council’s refusal of
   the appeal application: (1) a revised version of the National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework); and (2) the Council’s Supplementary Planning
   Document Householder Extensions (SPD). The SPD is based on policies in the
   Wirral Local Plan (WLP) and supersedes the Council’s previous Supplementary
   Planning Guidance Note 11, also entitled Householder Extensions. Both the
   appellant and the Council have had a chance to comment on the implications of
   these new documents.




1
        Town and County Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015, Sch 2 Part 1

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012026


Main Issues
5. The main issues are:
   i) whether the proposal constitutes inappropriate development in the Green Belt;
   ii) its effect on the openness of the Green Belt; and
   iii) if it is inappropriate development, whether the harm by reason of
        inappropriateness and any other harm would be clearly outweighed by other
        considerations, amounting to the very special circumstances necessary to
        justify development.
Reasons
Whether inappropriate development in the Green Belt
6. 297 Frankby Road is a detached, 2 storey, 1980s house on a large plot within an
   area of sporadic development on the fringe of the village of Frankby. The appeal
   proposal has been added to the west side of the house. A 2 storey extension has
   also been built onto the east side recently, with a separate planning permission and
   in place of a previously existing detached garage.
7. The Framework confirms that the objective of Green Belt policy is to prevent urban
   sprawl by keeping land permanently open. Framework policy GB6 advises that
   inappropriate development is, by definition, harmful to the Green Belt and should
   not be approved except in very special circumstances.
8. Framework policy GB7 sets out the categories of development which are not
   inappropriate in the Green Belt, explaining that construction of new buildings should
   be regarded as inappropriate with only specific listed exceptions. One of these
   exceptions is for extensions and alterations that would not result in a
   disproportionate increase in size compared to the original building. Wirral Local
   Plan (WLP) policy WS1 confirms that national policy will be applied to Green Belt
   development proposals, so national and local Green Belt policies fully align.
9. Although the Framework does not provide guidance on the scale of extensions that
   would be disproportionate, the SPD says that increases of more than 50% of the
   floorspace of the original dwelling, in combination with all previous additions, will be
   considered disproportionate. In this case the original dwelling is reasonably
   considered to be the house and the detached garage. On this basis the Council
   calculates that the overall floorspace increase is about 73%. The appellant does
   not dispute that figure.
10. This is a significant increase over the SPD’s guideline figure, strongly suggesting
    that the scale of extensions here has become disproportionate. The nature of the
    extensions in this case, spreading 2 storey development across the vast majority of
    the width of this wide plot reinforces the impression that the house has grown
    disproportionately. The overall increase in the scale of the house is substantial.
11. I therefore conclude that the proposal is inappropriate development in the Green
    Belt. Framework policy GB6 says that such development is harmful to the Green
    Belt, by definition, and that substantial weight should be given to that harm.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
 Appeal Decision 6012026


Openness
12. The effect on openness can be assessed in terms of both physical and visual
    impacts. As above, the proposal and other extensions have made the house
    markedly larger. This physically reduces openness at the edge of the village,
    consolidating the built form of this outlying area.
13. In visual terms the house, although set back from the street behind a hedge and a
    parking area, is a prominent feature in the street scene. The appellant argues that
    there would be no increase in the building’s footprint so no additional encroachment
    into the Green Belt. The approved plans for the single storey side extension,
    however, show a low profile roof with a very limited visual impact. The addition of
    the appeal extension makes this structure much taller and more prominent,
    detracting from the visual openness of its rural setting.
14. I therefore find that significant harm is caused to the openness of the Green Belt.
    This also weighs against the proposal.
Whether very special circumstances exist
15. Framework policy GB6 states that the very special circumstances needed to justify
    inappropriate development in the Green Belt will not exist unless the potential harm
    to the Green Belt by reason of inappropriateness and any other harm resulting from
    the proposed development is clearly outweighed by other considerations.
16. The Council raises no design-based objection to the appeal proposal. The
    appellant argues that the first floor extension is appropriately subservient in form
    and scale, restoring a degree of symmetry to the house’s frontage. I agree to the
    extent that the appeal extension is reasonably designed to fit in with the house’s
    architecture, but I consider this to be a relatively neutral factor in the overall
    assessment. The house has a somewhat informal character which helps it to fit into
    the rural area. It was not designed to be symmetrical and I see no clear design
    need for a first floor extension on this side. I further note that the resulting house is
    not of such a size that it is out of proportion to its large plot, but this is also a neutral
    factor.
17. I recognise that the proposal makes more effective use of the site to provide
    improved family accommodation. This weighs in favour of the proposal.
    Nevertheless, taking into account all matters raised, I find nothing to clearly
    outweigh the harm to the Green Belt by reason of inappropriateness and loss of
    openness. The very special circumstances required by Framework policy GB6 and
    WLP policy WS1 therefore do not exist in this case.
Conclusion
18. I find that the proposal conflicts with the development plan and the Framework. For
    the reasons set out above, I conclude that the appeal should not succeed.
Les Greenwood
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
