Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 9 September 2026
by B Pattison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012481
 Well Hill Nursery, Fountain Farm, Firmingers Road, Orpington, Kent BR6 7QH
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant outline planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr N Hyselli against the decision of Sevenoaks District Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00213/OUT.
 •    The development proposed is Erection of residential development.

 Decision
 1.     The appeal is dismissed.
 Preliminary Matters
 2.     On 17 August 2026, Government published a revised National Planning Policy
        Framework (the Framework). This included revisions to policies that are pertinent
        to the appeal, such as those relating to development in the Green Belt. During the
        appeal the main parties were invited to comment on the relevance of the revised
        Framework to the appeal proposal. In my decision, I have had regard to the written
        responses.
 3.     The application was made in outline with all matters reserved. I have therefore
        dealt with the appeal on this basis. The application was accompanied by an
        indicative plan showing a suggested layout, which I shall treat as being for
        illustrative purposes only.
 Main Issues
 4.     The main issues are:
            •    whether or not the proposal would be inappropriate development within the
                 Green Belt having regard to the Framework and any other relevant
                 development plan policies;
            •    the effect of the proposal on the openness of the Green Belt;
            •    the effect of the proposal on protected species;
            •    the effect of the proposal on highway safety;
            •    whether the future occupiers of the proposal would have acceptable living
                 conditions, with particular reference to noise; and
            •    if the appeal scheme is found to be inappropriate development, whether the
                 harm by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm, is clearly

 https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012481


                 outweighed by other considerations so as to amount to the very special
                 circumstances needed to justify the development.
Reasons
Whether or not inappropriate development
5.      The appeal site is an open grass field. Access is via a gated entrance from
        Firmingers Road onto a shared access, providing access to Fountain Farm and a
        gypsy traveller site located to the south of the site. Adjacent to the site, but within
        the appellant’s ownership is a small cluster of buildings, some of which are in
        commercial use. To the north, two bungalows at The Nursery adjoin the boundary
        with this additional land in the appellant’s ownership. The M25 motorway runs
        along the appeal site’s eastern boundary.
6.      The appeal site is located in the Metropolitan Green Belt. Chapter 13 of the
        Framework identifies that the fundamental aim of Green Belt policy is to prevent
        urban sprawl by keeping land permanently open. The essential characteristics of
        Green Belts are their openness and their permanence. Policy GB6.2. of the
        Framework states that inappropriate development is, by definition, harmful to the
        Green Belt and should not be approved except in very special circumstances.
7.      Policy GB7 of the Framework sets out certain exceptions where development in
        the Green Belt is not inappropriate development. The appellant argues that Policy
        GB7.1.e. of the Framework is of relevance to the appeal. This identifies the
        redevelopment of previously developed land (including a material change of use to
        residential or mixed-use including residential), which would not cause substantial
        harm to the openness of the Green Belt, as an exception which would not be
        inappropriate development.
8.      I note that, in determining a previous appeal1 at Fountain Farm, the Inspector
        found that the proposal would be on previously developed land (PDL). However,
        the appeal decision makes clear that this conclusion related to the land occupied
        by the cluster of existing buildings on the appellant’s adjoining land, rather than the
        appeal site before me.
9.      The Framework defines PDL as that which has been lawfully developed and is or
        was occupied by a permanent structure and any fixed surface infrastructure
        associated with it, including the curtilage of the developed land (although it should
        not be assumed that the whole of the curtilage should be developed). The appeal
        site is a grass field which does not have any built form within it. The existence of
        PDL adjacent to the appeal site does not automatically make the whole site PDL.
10. Consequently, based on the evidence before me, I do not find that the appeal site
    accords with the definition of PDL within the Framework. The proposal does not
    fall within any of the categories of development which are not inappropriate
    development outlined within Policy GB7.1 of the Framework.
Grey Belt
11. The Framework defines ‘grey belt’ as land in the Green Belt comprising previously
    developed land and/or any other land that, in either case, does not strongly


1
    PINS Ref: APP/G2245/C/22/3310954


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012481


       contribute to any of purposes (a), (b), or (d) in policy GB2. The main parties agree
       that the appeal site can be considered ‘grey belt’ land.
12. Under Policy GB7.g of the Framework, development should not be regarded as
    inappropriate in the Green Belt if four criteria are met. The main parties agree that
    the proposal complies with criteria GB7.g.i and GB7.g.ii and that criteria GB7.g.iv
    does not apply.
13. Criteria GB7.g.iii requires that the development would be in a sustainable location
    with particular reference to Policy TR3 of the Framework. Policy TR3 requires
    development to be located where it can support sustainable patterns of movement,
    enable good accessibility for different users and make the most of existing and
    proposed transport infrastructure. It also requires that the Governments’
    Connectivity Tool is used to assess the connectivity of locations proposed for
    development.
14. The Council indicates, and it is not disputed by the appellant, that the appeal site
    scores poorly on the Connectivity Tool as a result of its low accessibility and
    connectivity to surrounding services and transport routes. The appeal site is not
    located within any defined settlement, and the submitted evidence indicates that
    the closest nearby settlement of Well Hill has few services or community facilities.
    This is therefore unlikely to meet the day-to-day needs of future occupiers, who
    would likely need to travel further afield for essential goods and services.
15. The submitted evidence indicates that there is no easily accessible public
    transport. The absence of street lighting, dedicated footpaths, and cycle lanes on
    the surrounding local, rural roads significantly reduces their suitability for walking
    or cycling, particularly outside daylight hours or in poor weather conditions.
    Therefore, essential services, facilities and employment opportunities would not be
    readily accessible from the appeal site without the use of a private car.
16. I acknowledge that the existing commercial use on the adjoining site already
    generates trips, often by larger vehicles. However, I have not been provided any
    evidence setting out the number of employees, work patterns and vehicular
    activities associated with the business. Regardless, on this matter, I conclude that
    the development would not be in a sustainable location, having regard to Policy
    TR3 of the Framework and the limited opportunities available to maximise
    sustainable transport solutions.
17. In summary, although the appeal site is grey belt land, the proposal conflicts with
    criteria GB7.g.iii of the Framework. Consequently, the proposal is inappropriate
    development in the Green Belt.
Openness
18. The essential characteristics of Green Belts are their openness and their
    permanence. Openness has both a visual and spatial dimension.
19. The proposal would introduce upto six residential dwellings onto the site. Whilst
    the scale and layout would be determined as part of future reserved matters
    applications, an indicative volume for the proposal’s built form of 1,600 cubic
    metres has been provided. The proposal would introduce significant built form into
    a space where currently there is no development, thereby eroding open space.
    This would have a substantial harmful effect on spatial openness.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6012481


20. The dense hedgerow to the appeal site would provide some visual screening of
    the proposal. However, the dwellings would be visible in views through the gated
    vehicular access to the site. As a result, the appeal site’s existing open character
    would be visually eroded. This would have a substantial harmful effect on visual
    openness.
21. Therefore, I conclude that the proposal would not preserve, and would have a
    harmful effect on, the openness of the Green Belt. Given the likely scale of the
    proposal, I consider the harm to openness to be substantial. As such, the proposal
    would conflict with the provisions within the Framework which seek to preserve the
    openness of the Green Belt.
Protected species
22. The appellant’s Preliminary Ecological Appraisal and Roost Assessment has been
    produced following a site survey which includes a habitat classification. It includes
    a description of the habitats on the site and provides comments on the likelihood of
    protected and priority species being present on the land.
23. In relation to the presence of Great Crested Newts (GCN), the PEA indicates that
    there are no ponds on the appeal site, however aerial images indicate the
    presence of five ponds within 500 metres. When combined with the on-site habitat,
    the PEA confirms that the development produces an Amber risk score.
24. The appellant indicates that works would be undertaken within the GCN breeding
    season, when they are likely to be within the ponds off-site. Clearance works
    would not take place during the typical hibernation period between October and
    February when amphibians are more vulnerable to injury or death. A number of
    other measures are proposed, including the installation of amphibian exclusion
    fencing around the construction area prior to the commencement of any
    construction works to ensure that GCN and other common amphibians cannot
    enter the working area.
25. GCN are a European Protected Species (EPS) protected by the Regulations2 and
    a precautionary approach should be taken. Circular 06/20053 states that it is
    essential that the presence or otherwise of protected species, and the extent that
    they may be affected by development, is established before planning permission is
    granted otherwise all relevant material considerations may not have been
    addressed in making the decision.
26. Given the presence of waterbodies within 500m and that no specific survey for
    GCN has been undertaken, I cannot be satisfied that GCN’s are not present in the
    area and I am unable to make an informed decision about the effect of the
    proposal on the protected species, including assessing whether any mitigation
    measures would adequately safeguard against any harm.
27. The PEA states that reptile surveys will be required to determine the presence or
    likely absence of reptiles on the site, and that surveys are likely to be required
    before planning permission can be granted. The submitted evidence does not
    include a reptile survey. In relation to reptiles, I am unable to make an informed
    decision about the effect of the proposal on the protected species, including

2
    Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 and the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (as amended).
3
    Paragraph 99 of ODPM Circular 06/2005


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 4
Appeal Decision 6012481


       assessing whether any mitigation measures would adequately safeguard against
       any harm.
28. In relation to bats, the appellant indicates that the buildings to the north of the
    appeal site would be demolished to compensate for the proposed dwellings. The
    PEA confirms that this demolition has the potential to have a detrimental impact on
    bats and recommends that further surveys should be carried out. This would
    include bat emergence/re-entry surveys for some of the buildings to confirm the
    presence or absence of roosting bats. Such surveys have not been provided. For
    this reason, the appellant's evidence does not sufficiently demonstrate that there
    would be no impacts on bats overall.
29. The additional surveys relating to GCN, bats and reptiles cannot be secured by
    planning conditions, as this approach would not comply with guidance set out
    within the Circular. The need to ensure that ecological surveys are carried out
    should only be left to coverage under planning conditions in exceptional
    circumstances. No such circumstances have been demonstrated in this case and it
    is therefore a reasonable expectation that the surveys be carried out prior to any
    grant of planning permission.
30. Consequently, I have insufficient information to assess the extent of the impact on
    GCN, bats or reptiles. I therefore cannot determine that it would not lead to
    significant harm. As such, I must take a precautionary approach and find the
    proposal would conflict with Policy N2 of the Framework which states that if
    significant harm to biodiversity resulting from a development cannot be avoided,
    adequately mitigated, or, as a last resort, compensated for, then the development
    should be refused. Without details of measures to avoid, mitigate or compensate
    for adverse effects, the proposal conflicts with Policy SP11 of the Sevenoaks Core
    Strategy (2011) which requires proposals to enhance habitats and protect on-site
    biodiversity.
Noise
31. In determining the previous appeal at the adjoining site, the Inspector referred to
    background noise from the M25, when assessing the effects of a proposal on the
    living conditions of nearby existing residential occupiers. Nonetheless, the
    submitted Noise Assessment with this appeal indicates that road traffic from the
    M25 motorway is such that acoustic mitigation would be necesarry.
32. The Noise Assessment indicates that the noise levels within the external areas
    would be above the recommendations of British Standard BS8233:2014. In the
    absence of any substantive evidence to demonstrate otherwise, this is likely to
    have a harmful effect on the living conditions of future occupiers.
33. I acknowledge that there are different approaches to developing the site, and that
    further details for the mitigation of noise may be provided through future Reserved
    Matters Applications. The Noise Assessment indicates that a variety of acoustic
    mitigation measures could be used to achieve satisfactory internal noise levels.
    However, the submitted Noise Assessment does not provide details of the
    equipment used to undertake the noise measurements, nor does it include the full
    measurement data underpinning the assessment. Furthermore, the report does
    not provide confirmation of the author’s qualifications related to the assessment of
    noise and acoustic design or whether they are a member of the Institute of
    Acoustics or a similar organisation. Without knowledge of the equipment used, the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6012481


       full acoustic measurements data or qualifications of the report author, it is not
       possible to confidently ascertain that future occupiers would be sufficiently
       protected from noise from the M25.
34. For these reasons, I find that the proposal would not comply with Policies EN2 and
    EN7 of the Sevenoaks Allocations and Development Management Plan (2015)
    (SADMP) insofar as they require that proposals provide adequate residential
    amenities, and would not have an unacceptable effect on the indoor and outdoor
    acoustic environments for future occupiers. There would also be conflict Policy P3
    of the Framework which requires proposals to provide healthy living conditions
    whilst avoiding exposure to noise.
Highway safety
35. Article 5(3) of the Town and Country Planning (Development Management
    Procedure) (England) Order 2015 states that “where access is a reserved matter,
    the application for outline planning permission must state the area or areas where
    access points to the development proposed will be situated”. The submitted
    evidence indicates that the proposal would use the existing point of access at the
    junction of Firmingers Road and Rock Hill.
36. I acknowledge that in determining the previous appeal the Inspector did not find
    any harm to highway safety. However, it seems to me that the introduction of upto
    six residential dwellings, with resultant comings and goings from occupiers and
    visitors is likely to see an intensification in the use of the access. In coming to this
    view, I have taken into account that the proposal could come forward following the
    removal of the existing buildings within the blue line area on the site location plan,
    thereby seeing a reduction in commercial vehicles.
37. However, the access is narrow and close to a junction. The adjacent hedgerow is
    above driver eye height and there are limited visibility splays. Visibility for drivers of
    vehicles exiting the appeal site is therefore poor. There are no proposals to
    improve visibility and I consider that this could not be addressed by condition given
    the potential impacts on the adjacent hedgerow, and as the Council indicate that
    the future provision of visibility splays may encroach on land outside of the
    ownership of the appellant.
38. I conclude that the proposal has failed to demonstrate that a safe and suitable
    access to serve the development could be achieved so as to avoid a detrimental
    impact upon highway safety. The proposal would conflict with Policy EN1 of the
    SADMP and Policy TR6.4 of the Framework insofar as they require that
    development proposals should ensure satisfactory means of access for vehicles
    and should be refused if they have an unacceptable impact on highways safety.
Other considerations
39. The appellant states that buildings located to the north of the appeal site, which
    are also within the appellant’s ownership, would be removed to offset the proposed
    dwellings. It is suggested that this would result in an overall reduction in the impact
    of built development on the openness of the Green Belt.
40. In the absence of agreed reserved matters, I cannot be certain of the exact layout
    and scale of the dwellings. However, the appellant indicates that the proposed
    dwellings would be two storeys and would have an indicative volume of 1,600


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6012481


       cubic metres which would match the volume of the existing buildings to be
       removed. I understand that 600 square metres of hardstanding within the site
       would be removed. However, it seems to me that the siting of the proposed
       buildings, on an open grass area close to the vehicular access onto the Firminger
       Road, is likely to result in highly visible new built form. Indeed, they would likely be
       more visible in views from the public domain than the existing buildings. Whilst the
       submitted layout is indicative, it seems likely that the dwellings would be spaced
       out across the width of the appeal site. Furthermore, the separate residential
       curtilages would also result in the introduction of domestic paraphernalia for
       multiple households.
41. For these reasons, whilst I note the reduction in hardstanding at the site, even in
    the event that the existing buildings were removed, I do not consider that the
    proposal would have a beneficial effect on the spatial or visual openness of the
    Green Belt. For this reason, this factor does not weigh in favour of the proposal.
Other Matters
42. The Council acknowledge that a five year supply of housing land is not in place.
    The appellant indicates that the latest figure is 2.96 years supply which is a
    significant shortfall. The proposal would contribute upto six dwellings towards
    addressing that shortfall and would also contribute to the delivery of housing on
    small sites, which can generally be delivered quickly. Nevertheless, the positive
    effect on housing land supply would be small. Furthermore, the lack of realistic
    alternatives to travel by car moderates the benefit arising from additional housing
    in this particular location, having regard to policies in the Framework for directing
    development to sustainable locations.
43. The appellant indicates that Sevenoaks District has major policy constraints,
    including the Green Belt, National Landscape, and areas subject to flooding.
    Whilst suitable housing land within the borough may be constrained, as I have
    found that the proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt, I do
    not afford this weight.
44. The removal of the commercial buildings would end noise from lorries undertaking
    deliveries which are reported to cause adverse impacts to the local residents. This
    would be beneficial to local residents and I afford this moderate weight.
45. The appeal proposal would create employment, and support growth during the
    construction period albeit for a limited time. Future occupiers could boost the
    spending power of the local economy, and would also help support services in the
    surrounding area. In this instance I attach limited weight to it given the actual level
    of benefit has not been evidenced and would be limited by the low level of
    additional dwellings proposed. The development would be liable for the
    Community Infrastructure Levy, contributing towards new and improved local
    facilities, open space, and vital services to mitigate the effects of the increase in
    homes in the area. Future occupiers would also pay Council tax. This matter is a
    benefit to which I attribute limited weight.
46. The appellant indicates that the proposal would not result in the loss of best and
    most versatile agricultural land and would not result in the loss of any Areas of
    Great Landscape Value. It has been suggested that the addition of dwellings is not
    considered to have a detrimental impact on the capacity of local services such as
    GPs and schools, and the appeal scheme does not give rise to any further

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6012481


       conflicts with the policies of SADMP. The proposal could provide policy compliant
       cycle and car parking. However, these matters are of neutral consequence to my
       assessment.
47. The proposal would not result in the net loss of important landscape features such
    as trees, hedgerows or other fauna and flora. However, given my findings in
    relation to likely further requirements for visibility splays this is not a factor which I
    afford more than limited weight.
48. The new dwellings would be well-insulated with renewable energy provision, with
    measures such as solar panels or air-source heat pumps, to ensure reduced
    carbon dioxide emissions. Given the scale of the development, I afford this factor
    limited weight.
49. The appellant indicates that the dwellings would be self-build. Planning Practice
    Guidance recognises that self-build custom housing helps to diversify the housing
    market and increase customer choice. The Framework accordingly includes a
    range of measures designed to boost the supply of such housing.
50. However, at the application stage and as part of the appeal there was no planning
    obligation or other mechanism to secure a means of ensuring the proposal would
    be constructed for such use. There is therefore no mechanism to ensure that the
    proposal would be a self-build housing. As such, I have to assess the proposal as
    market housing.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
51. The proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt which is, by
    definition, harmful. There is also harm to the Green Belt due to the effect on
    openness. Substantial weight should be given to the harm to the Green Belt. Very
    special circumstances will not exist unless the harm to the Green Belt and any
    other harm is clearly outweighed by other considerations.
52. The benefits as presented to me are worthy of some positive weight, but this would
    be limited overall. Against this, I must give the harm to the Green Belt by way of
    inappropriateness substantial weight as per policy GB6 of the Framework. While
    the removal of the adjoining cluster of buildings could reduce the overall effect, I
    have still found that the proposal would result in a loss of openness. This is also
    afforded substantial weight as per policy GB6 of the Framework. Consequently,
    the considerations advanced by the appellant, even when considered together, do
    not clearly outweigh the totality of the harm. The very special circumstances
    necessary to justify the development therefore do not exist.
53. Additionally, given the lack of information available, I am unable to rule out harm to
    GCN, bats and reptiles which are protected species. This conflicts with Policy N2
    of the Framework. I attach substantial weight to these harms. Furthermore, I
    cannot rule out an adverse impact on the living conditions of proposed occupiers
    as a result of the proximity of the appeal site to the M25 motorway. Collectively,
    these harms are substantial and bring the scheme into conflict with the decision-
    making policies of the Framework taken as a whole, an important material
    consideration. Consequently, the benefits do not outweigh the conflict with the
    development plan, or those contained within the Framework.
54. Therefore, for the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
Appeal Decision 6012481



B Pattison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   9
