 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 24 August 2026
 by John D Allan BA(Hons) BTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 15 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012561
 43 Prescelly Place, Edgware, Harrow, HA8 6DH
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Emmanuel Akubue against the decision of the Council of the London
      Borough of Harrow.
 •    The application Ref is PL/3042/25.
 •    The development proposed is conversion of existing outbuilding to an ensuite bedroom and a games
      room and change of internal bedroom and en-suite to office space and store.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for conversion of existing
   outbuilding to an ensuite bedroom and a games room and change of internal
   bedroom and en-suite to office space and store at 43 Prescelly Place, Edgware,
   Harrow, HA8 6DH in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref PL/3042/25,
   subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the approved plans: Site Location Plan at scale 1:1250 and Drg Nos A103
              ‘Elevations Existing’ and A103 ‘Proposed Existing’.
     3)       The converted outbuilding hereby permitted shall not be occupied at any time
              other than for purposes ancillary to the residential use of the dwelling at 43
              Prescelly Place.
Preliminary Matter
2. During the course of the appeal, the revised National Planning Policy Framework
   2026 (the Framework 2026) was published. Both parties were invited to comment
   about the relevance of the Framework 2026 to their case.
Main Issue
3. The main issue is the effects of the proposed use of the outbuilding having specific
   regard to its occupancy.
Reasons
4. The appeal relates to a single-storey outbuilding located at the foot of the garden to
   No 43, a two-storey semi-detached dwelling in use by up to six residents living

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012561


     together as a single household with care provided. The proposal is to alter the
     existing garage/store by dividing the space in two with an internal wall and creating
     two separate rooms, one to be used as an en-suite bedroom and the second as a
     games room. Each space would be accessed independent of each other direct
     from the property’s fairly shallow rear garden, with doors and windows facing back
     towards the rear elevation of the dwelling.
5. The Council has raised no issue with respect to the ancillary use of the games
   room but is concerned that the proposal would include a bedroom that would
   comprise primary living accommodation within a separate residential unit. However,
   I have been provided with no clear definition of ‘primary living accommodation’ or
   directed to any development plan policy which would assist. At the same time the
   Council acknowledges that the proposal would represent the adaption of an
   existing structure within the curtilage of No 43 without introducing a new or
   independent planning use and that the established residential character of the host
   property and surrounding area would be preserved.
6. The plans which accompanied the application show the one half of the divided
   floorspace within the outbuilding to be used as a bedroom with only an ensuite and
   nothing by way of kitchen or laundry facilities to facilitate independent day to day
   living. The appellant has confirmed that these functions would remain reliant upon
   those already provided within the main house. It is further explained that the
   bedroom space would be wheelchair accessible and intended specifically for a
   disabled service user who requires step free, accessible, and self-contained
   sleeping and sanitary facilities as part of the supported living provision at the
   property as a whole. The Council has provided no evidence to demonstrate that the
   space would in any way be uninhabitable as a bedroom.
7. The property’s rear garden space would be obviously shared, as would access to it,
   with the outbuilding being sited in proximity to the house with mutual and direct
   intervisibility between both buildings. Given this and based upon all the information
   presented to me, I am satisfied that the outbuilding would be used ancillary to the
   principal accommodation at No 43 and that there would be no likelihood of it being
   independently used, with both it and the host dwelling functioning together as a
   single planning unit. As such, it would not be out of keeping with the established
   residential character of the surrounding area.
8. Despite being referenced within their reason for refusal, I have not been directed to
   any conflict with the Council’s Supplementary Planning Document: Residential
   Design Guide (2010). Moreover, I am unable to identify any conflict with Policy GR1
   of the Harrow Local Plan (2021-2041) which seeks to secure a high standard of
   development that respects the character and context of the locality, safeguards the
   amenity of residents and which is accessible. Neither do I find conflict with Policy
   D3 parts D(7) and D(11) of The London Plan 2021 which relate to achieving
   appropriate levels of outlook, privacy and amenity, and respect for the quality and
   character of an area. For these same reasons there would be no conflict with the
   Framework 2026’s decision-making policies for achieving well-designed places.
Other Matter
9. The Council has questioned the provision of an additional bedroom at the property
   and that as a consequence more than six residents would be living together as a
   single household. But that is not what is proposed. There is no suggestion by the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
 Appeal Decision 6012561


     Council that the provision of an office space and store within the dwelling would be
     unacceptable. Should occupancy of No 43 exceed the six residents threshold, or
     should the outbuilding not be used as proposed, then circumstances may arise
     where a separate grant of planning permission would be required for a material
     change of use, with subsequent risk of enforcement action if any such permission
     was not granted.
Conditions
10. In addition to the standard time limit condition, a condition requiring the
    development to be carried out in accordance with the approved plans is necessary
    for the avoidance of doubt and in the interests of proper planning. I further agree
    with the Council that a condition is necessary to control future use of the outbuilding
    for the avoidance of doubt and in the interests of maintaining the character and
    appearance of the area. For reasons explained above, I see no reason to impose a
    condition restricting levels of occupancy within the premises as a whole, as has
    been suggested by the Council.
Conclusion
11. For the reasons given, I am unable to identify any harm or conflict with the
    development plan or national planning policy. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed.



John D Allan
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
