 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 5 August 2026
 by N McGurk BSc (Hons) MCD MBA MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 28 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012119
 5 Grey Knotts, Worsley, Salford, M28 1US
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr Jonathan Barrow against the decision of Salford City Council.
 •   The application Ref is PA/2026/0475.
 •   The development proposed is demolition of a single storey detached garage, front porch and front
     bay window, and erection of a two-storey side/front and single storey front/porch extension, together
     with associated external alterations including a two-storey box bay window surround.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. The description of development varies between the application form and the
   Council’s decision notice. I have used the description provided by the Council on its
   decision notice, as this most accurately and comprehensively describes the
   proposal the subject of this appeal.
3. One of the Council’s reasons for refusal relates to insufficient information regarding
   the effect of the proposed development on a protected Oak tree within the
   neighbouring garden of No. 3 Grey Knotts, subject to a Tree Preservation Order.
   The Council’s own arboricultural consultant identified specific outstanding matters,
   relating to tree protection measures and supervision during construction, rather
   than concluding that the development would necessarily result in unacceptable
   harm to the tree. I consider that, notwithstanding the outcome of this appeal, such
   matters could ordinarily be addressed by way of an appropriately worded planning
   condition or conditions.
4. The appellant raises concerns regarding a perceived lack of engagement from the
   Council’s case officer during the determination of the application. This is a matter
   between the appellant and the Council.
Main Issue
5. The main issue in this case is the effect of the proposed development on the
   character and appearance of the area.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
    Appeal Decision 6012119


Reasons
6. The appeal property is a two storey detached dwelling of buff brick construction,
   with a pitched roof, located at the end of a cul-de-sac within a relatively modern
   residential estate at Grey Knotts, Worsley. Whilst accessed and visible from Grey
   Knotts, the dwelling’s principal elevation faces Booths Hall Way.
7. The surrounding estate is characterised by consistency in the general designs,
   materials and appearance of the dwellings within it, resulting in a strong sense of
   uniformity. Where extensions have previously been carried out, these have largely
   been undertaken sensitively, reflecting the character and features of host dwellings
   and the surrounding area, with only a few instances of contrasting materials being
   used.
8. The proposal comprises the demolition of the appeal property’s existing detached
   garage, front porch and front bay window, together with the erection of a two-storey
   side/front and single storey front/porch extension. The extension would incorporate
   a two-storey box bay window surround, finished in black timber/composite cladding,
   together with tall, Crittall-style aluminium framed openings finished in black ash to
   the forward projecting gable and box bay surround.
9. During my site visit, I observed that the host dwelling and its neighbours are
   finished predominantly in buff facing brick with mostly white and occasionally
   darker, window frames. Thus, apart from slight differences, development largely
   appears in keeping with the estate’s consistent modern vernacular and sustains an
   attractive sense of uniformity.
10. The stark contrast between the proposed black-framed openings combined with
    black cladding, and this established local palette of materials would, I find, appear
    jarring and incongruous against the host dwelling and surrounding properties.
11. Further, I find that the arrangement of the tall, Crittall-style openings and the box
    bay window surround would appear poorly proportioned in relation to the host
    dwelling’s existing fenestration. This would compound the visual discordance
    arising from the proposed change in materials.
12. Given the property’s prominent corner position, with visibility from both Grey Knotts
    and Booths Hall Way, I find that the resultant development would fail to sit
    comfortably within its surroundings but would rather serve to dominate and visually
    compete with neighbouring dwellings, to the detriment of the area’s established
    character.
13. Whilst the appellant states that the extensive glazing proposed is in response to the
    presence of a mature, protected tree that reduces natural daylight to the dwelling,
    this does not, in my view, justify a scale and style of glazing and materials that
    would lead to the identified harm.
14. Taking all of the above into account, I find that the proposed development would
    harm the character and appearance of the area, contrary to the National Planning
    Policy Framework and to Policies D1, D2 and D8 of the Salford Local Plan:
    Development Management Policies and Designations1, which together amongst
    other things, seek to protect local character.

1
    Salford Local Plan: Development Management Policies and Designations (2023).


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                    2
 Appeal Decision 6012119


Other Matters
15. The appellant, in support of his case, refers to a number of other developments
    elsewhere within the locality. However, there is no substantive information before
    me to lead me to find that these examples are so similar to the proposed
    development as to provide a precedent for it. Notwithstanding this and in any case,
    I have found that the proposed development would result in significant harm and
    hence the decision below.
16. Whilst the appellant has stated a willingness to replace the proposed box bay
    surround with a more traditional brick-built treatment should this be considered
    necessary, no amended scheme incorporating any such change was formally
    submitted for consideration.
Conclusion
17. For the reasons given above, the appeal does not succeed.

N McGurk
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
