 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 8 September 2026
 By Terrence Kemmann-Lane JP DipTP FRTPI MCMI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 22 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012326
 75 Kingsmans Road, Stanford-Le-Hope, SS17 0JN
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Danny Smith against the decision of Thurrock Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00249/HHA.
 •    The development proposed is demolition of existing outbuilding to construct a new annexe.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issues
2. The main issues in this case are: i) the effect of the proposed development on the
   site and the character of the area; ii) the effect of the annexe on the living
   conditions of the neighbours at No.36a Caldwell Road, in terms of privacy and
   outlook.
Reasons
3. The appeal site is an end-of-terrace dwelling situated on a right-angle bend in the
   road, with a large triangular rear garden. It has a two-storey side extension, a
   single-storey rear extension and a rear loft dormer. The neighbouring property to
   the east, No.77 Kingsmans Road, the first house in another terrace having turned
   the bend, also has a triangular garden. The neighbouring dwelling to the west is
   No.36a Caldwell Road. The garden to this dwelling runs along the perpendicular
   side, opposite the hypotenuse, of the appeal site’s triangular garden, and has a
   small outbuilding at the end. The appeal site has an existing single-storey
   outbuilding located toward the northern corner of the garden, situated along most of
   the length of the garden to No.36a. There are several outbuildings within the
   vicinity, all single storey structures.
The effect of the proposal on the site and the character of the area
4. On the ground floor of the proposed annexe there would be an entrance hallway
   providing access to a lounge area, a bar area, a gym and a shower/toilet. The first
   floor would provide 2 bedrooms and a shower room. The building would have a
   maximum height of 5.6 metres, having a gabled roof with projecting two-storey
   feature window. On the rear slope of the roof, a flat roofed dormer would fill the
   majority of the roof space. At the rear of the annexe there would be a single-storey
   element, with a skylight, filling most of the apex of the garden. To the side would be



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012326



     a flat-roofed single-storey element with bi-folding doors facing towards the host
     dwelling.
5. The host dwelling has an uncharacteristically large garden for a terraced house in
   this area, but the proposed annexe would be a major feature, disproportionally
   large, with a greater footprint than the existing house. Whilst the annexe would be
   at the rear, it would be visible from the rear of a considerable number of
   neighbouring properties, and its presence would be discordant and harmful to the
   appearance of the site and the character of the area.
The effect of the annexe on the living conditions of the neighbours at No.36a Caldwell
Road, in terms of privacy and outlook
6. No.36a Caldwell Road has a comparatively narrow and short rear garden. The
   proposed annexe would be sited along most of the eastern boundary of its garden.
   The imposing front elevation of the annexe would be a major discordant feature in
   the outlook from the rear of No.36a that would diminish the attractiveness of its
   back garden. The gabled projecting two-storey feature window at the front of the
   annexe, whilst apparently simply giving light to a hallway and stairwell, would
   detract from the privacy of the rear of the house and garden of this neighbour.
   Whilst the degree of overlooking might be more apparent than real, it would
   undermine the quality of what should be a reasonably private area.
7. A substantial part of the appellant’s statement makes reference to appeal decision
   reference APP/M1595/W/19/3233310 dated 17 October 2019. That appeal
   concerned a proposal for an additional 2-storey house on land that was then part of
   the curtilage of No.36 and is now the existing No.36a. I do not find that appeal
   decision helpful in the present case. It referred to a new house in an established
   row of houses, and not to a development in a rear garden: the details and
   relationships in the current case and that appeal case are markedly different.
8. I note that the council’s officer’s report is criticised for referring to No.36a Caldwell
   Road as No.136a, but I do not regard this as indicating any misunderstanding of
   the relationship of dwellings in the vicinity of the appeal site. I also see that the
   appellant mentions that the council had a concern about the annexe being used as
   an independent dwelling, but this did not result in an additional refusal reason and
   is not part of the council’s case in this appeal.
9. For the reasons that I have set out above, I find that the proposed annexe would be
   discordant and harmful to the appearance of the site and the character of the area
   and would be damaging to the living conditions of the neighbours at No.36a
   Caldwell Road, in terms of privacy and outlook. It would therefore be contrary to
   Policies PMD1, PMD2 and CSTP22 of the Thurrock Local Development Framework
   Core Strategy and Policies for Management of Development 2015, and the
   Residential Extensions and Alterations Supplementary Planning Document 2017.
   For these reasons, the appeal will be dismissed.


Terrence Kemmann-Lane
INSPECTOR



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
