Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 20 August 2026
by Eleni Marshall BSc (hons) MSc FRICS FAAV MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 21 August 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012080
101 Carlton Drive, Wigston, Leicestershire, LE18 1DH
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
    to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Amrit Memi against Oadby and Wigston Borough Council.
•   The application Ref is 26/00029/FUL.
•   The development proposed is retrospective erection of fence to front boundary.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Background and Procedural Matters
2. The appeal proposal seeks permission for what is described on the decision notice
   as the erection of a fence to the front boundary. I have utilised the Council’s
   description of the proposal, due to it being more concise than that on the
   application form (which is combined with more commentary as to the appellant’s
   requirements for the fence in question), but I note within the application form
   (description of proposed works) that the appellant has referred to the fence as
   being 6 foot (which equates to 1.82 metres). This is confirmed again within the
   appeal forms. The Council, within their refusal reasons, refer to retention of the 1.8
   metre close boarded fence.
3. The Council’s decision notice states that the application was refused on the
   following plans: location plan, block plan and fence photos (received by the Local
   Planning Authority on the 6 May 2026). The plans which have been provided are in
   black and white and do not clearly define the extent of the fencing which forms part
   of the proposal given that (based upon my observations at the time of my site visit)
   the constructed fencing goes beyond that which could be described as the front
   boundary based upon the principal elevation of the appeal site.
4. Furthermore, and more notably, the application is not supported by any scale
   drawings of the proposed fencing. As outlined above, application form refers to a
   1.82 metre (6 foot) fence, however, the annotated photographs submitted state
   varying measurements stated to be at 1.56 metres and 1.6 metres respectively.
   The annotation on the photographs provided is inconsistent with the height stated
   within the application form, and as referred to within the refusal reasons, which
   creates notable inconsistency which is of concern.
5. I am mindful that requirements for information and plans should be proportionate to
   but regardless of the application type, all applications should be accompanied by
   sufficient detail to allow appropriate assessment of the proposals. In addition, in
   the event permission is granted, sufficient plans are required to be secured by

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012080


     condition to control and define the development for the avoidance of doubt and in
     the interests of proper planning. It is therefore questionable whether the application,
     in its current format, should have been validated by the Council.
6. In the case of the appeal which is now before me I have no formal plans of the
   fenceline which is combined with strong concern as to the accuracy of the
   description of the location of the fence as well as discrepancies as to height. If I
   had been minded allowing the appeal this would mean I would have been unable to
   define what had been granted planning permission, based upon what has been
   submitted, via a plan condition. On the basis of the points outlined above, I do not
   find it is possible to consider the proposal on its own merits against the Local Plan
   as is required for all planning applications due to the insufficient information and
   plans which have been provided and the inconsistencies outlined.
7. Regardless of the interaction between the Council, and the appellant, (insofar as
   the Council went onto to determine the proposal) given my findings on the
   procedural matters as outlined above, with those being determinative, it is not
   necessary for me to consider the merits of any other issues raised in this case, as
   they would not alter my overall decision.
Conclusion
8. For the reasons outlined above, and taking into account all other matters raised, I
   conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

Eleni Marshall
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
