Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 9 September 2026
by B Astley-Serougi BA(Hons) LLM MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 01 October 2026
Appeal ‘A’ Ref: 6012344
189 Greenwich High Road, London SE10 8JA
    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    The appeal is made by Mr Alfred Ben Menahem against the decision of Royal Borough of
     Greenwich.
    The application Ref is 26/0700/F.
    The development proposed is Change of use on the ground and lower ground floor from a Bar (Sui
     Generis Part Q) to a Convenience Store (Class E(a)).
Appeal ‘B’ Ref: 6012348
189 Greenwich High Road, London SE10 8JA
    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    The appeal is made by Mr Ben Menahem against the decision of Royal Borough of Greenwich.
    The application Ref is 26/0699/F.
    The development proposed is Change of use on the ground and lower ground floor from a Bar (Sui
     Generis Part Q) to a Café (Class E(b)).


Decision
Appeal ‘A’
1.    The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for change of use on the
      ground and lower ground floor from a Bar (Sui Generis Part Q) to a Convenience
      Store (Class E(a)) at 189 Greenwich High Road, London, SE10 8JA in accordance
      with the terms of the application, Ref 26/0700/F subject to the conditions in the
      attached schedule.
Appeal ‘B’
2.    The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for change of use on the
      ground and lower ground floor from a Bar (Sui Generis Part Q) to a Café (Class
      E(b)) at 189 Greenwich High Road, London, SE10 8JA in accordance with the
      terms of the application, Ref 26/0699/F, subject to the conditions in the attached
      schedule.
Preliminary Matters
3.    A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published in
      August 2026. The parties have been provided with the opportunity to comment on
      the implications of the revisions to their cases. I have taken account of the revised
      Framework, and any comments made, in my determination of both appeal ‘A’ and
      appeal ‘B’.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012344 & 6012348


4.    As the proposals are in a conservation area, I have had special regard to section
      72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the
      Act).
5.    The two appeals concern the same site. Appeal ‘A’ relates to a proposed change
      of use from a bar to a convenience store. Appeal ‘B’ relates to a proposed change
      of use from a bar to a café. I have considered each on its own merits.
      Nevertheless, given that they raise similar issues, I have combined both decisions
      into a single decision letter.
6.    The procedural guide for planning appeals advises that the appeal process should
      not be used to evolve a scheme as it is important that what is considered by the
      Inspector at appeal is essentially the same scheme that was considered by the
      local planning authority and by interested parties at application stage. Therefore, to
      consider the updated operational letter (dated 21 May 2026), updated Marketing
      Report which has been prepared by Ascent Real Estate (dated 1 June 2026),
      Marketing Letter by Christie & Co (dated 26 May 2026) and the independent
      Rental Valuation Report prepared by May & Company Real Estate Advisors
      Limited, a RICS-regulated firm of Chartered Surveyors, (dated 26 June 2026)
      could procedurally prejudice interested parties. Given, it is not for the appeal
      procedure to advance proposals, this is best achieved through the submission of
      revised planning applications. For this reason, I have determined the appeals on
      the basis of the evidence that was before the Council when it made its’ decisions.
Main Issue
7.    The main issue in both appeal ‘A’ and appeal ‘B’ is the effect of the proposed
      change of use on the availability of community facilities.
Reasons
8.    189 Greenwich High Road (No 189) is a two-to-three-storey detached building that
      is located close to Greenwich Railway Station. The ground and lower floor was
      most recently used by Belushi’s Bar, however based on the evidence before me,
      the use as a bar ceased around May 2026. Prior to its use as a bar, it has been
      used as a public house known as The Prince of Orange. Additionally, the upper
      floors have also been used to provide private accommodation.
9.    Policy HC6 of the Framework aims to ensure the retention of key community
      facilities and public service infrastructure however it does provide exceptions. It
      outlines, amongst other things, that development proposals should not result in the
      loss of key community facilities and public service infrastructure unless it can be
      demonstrated that there is no reasonable prospect of the use being retained. It
      provides further detail regarding public houses where commercial viability is an
      issue. It states that in these cases evidence should be provided to demonstrate
      that reasonable steps have been taken to market the property for its existing use
      without success, for a period of at least 12 months (HC6(1)(a)).
10. The exception outlined in HC6(1)(b) relates to the circumstances where the loss
    resulting from the proposed development would be replaced by equivalent or
    better provision, in a location which offers comparable or improved accessibility for
    the community it serves. The final exception is HC6(1)(c) which provides that the
    loss of a facility is acceptable where the decision-maker is satisfied that there is
    sufficient alternative provision of the type of use concerned in the local area, such

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012344 & 6012348


         that its loss will not diminish access to key community facilities and public service
         infrastructure.
11. Policy HC7 of the London Plan 2021 (the LP) provides that planning decisions
    should, amongst other things, protect public houses where they have a heritage,
    economic, social or cultural value to communities, or where they contribute to
    wider policy objectives for town centres, night-time economy areas, Cultural
    Quarters and Creative Enterprise Zones. Additionally, that developments which
    propose the loss of public houses with heritage, cultural, economic or social value
    should be refused unless there is authoritative marketing evidence that
    demonstrates that there is no realistic prospect of the building being used as a pub
    in the foreseeable future.
12. Policy EA(b) of the Royal Greenwich Local Plan: Core Strategy with Detailed
    Policies 2014 (the RGLP) supports the retention of pubs that have a community
    role and resist the change of use or demolition except where continued use as a
    pub is no longer viable. It requires that evidence must be submitted to clearly
    demonstrate that reasonable attempts have been made to actively market the site
    as a pub for at least two years.
13. I note the Inspector in a previous appeal decision1 has referred to the appeal site
    as being known as previously ‘the Prince of Orange Public House’ and that the
    current use at the time of the decision was as a bar/restaurant and backpacker inn.
14. Nevertheless, Policy HC7 of the LP does not provide a definition of what
    constitutes a public house and consequently it is a matter of planning judgement
    as to whether No 189 should for the purpose of this decision be categorised as
    such.
15. No 189 is within the ‘sui generis’ class as outlined in 3(6) of the Town and Country
    Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 as amended. Based on the evidence before
    me, including previous appeal decisions, whilst the appeal property has previously
    been a pub, it was most recently occupied and functioning as Belushi’s Bar. I note
    that the former Belushi’s Bar offered a form of food provision. There is no definition
    of what constitutes a public house, wine bar or drinking establishment nor a
    drinking establishment with expanded food provision ( P and Q of the sui generis
    Class respectively).
16. The Council accepts in its Officer Report that food was prepared and provided on
    the site but considers that it was limited in terms of the extent of the food which
    was offered by the establishment. Furthermore, that the food provision was not the
    primary attraction/function of the premises. However, given that part Q of the sui
    generis class specifically refers to food provision unlike part P and that the food
    provision was, to my mind, greater than ancillary bar snacks, on the balance of
    probabilities, the last use of No 189 constitutes a drinking establishment with
    expanded food provision.
17. Policy HC7 of the LP and Policy EA(b) of the RGLP refer specifically to public
    houses rather than drinking establishments. Accordingly, they are not wholly
    determinative for this appeal given that I have found No 189 to not be a public
    house. Consequently, whilst I am cognisant of paragraph 7.76 and 7.77 of the
    supporting text of Policy HC7, which outline what should be considered when

1
    Appeal Decision Ref: APP/E5330/Z/18/3206598


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          3
Appeal Decision 6012344 & 6012348


       assessing whether a pub has heritage, cultural, economic or social value as well
       as the relevant marketing period for a pub in terms of viability assessment these
       are not determinative for this appeal.
18. Policy HC6 of the LP relates to supporting the night-time economy and therefore, it
    would still be relevant to the appeal scheme given I have identified its most recent
    use to be as a drinking establishment. I am mindful that paragraph 7.6.1 of the
    supporting text of the policy defines the nighttime economy as referring to all
    economic activity taking place between the hours of 6pm and 6am, and includes
    evening uses.
19. The appeal site is located within the Town Centre and an area of night-time
    economy strategic contribution. The LP identifies it as NT3 classification, which is
    an area of more than local significance to the night-time economy.
20. I am mindful of the history of the appeal site and its use as a drinking
    establishment. However, No 189 has not been operating since approximately May
    2026. Given its location in the Town Centre and there are numerous other drinking
    establishments in close proximity, it would likely make a modest contribution to the
    night-time economy as a drinking establishment. Nevertheless, there remains
    limited evidence before me to adequately demonstrate that the loss of a drinking
    establishment in this location would result in unacceptable harm to the overall
    night-time economy and vitality of Greenwich’s Town Centre.
21. Moreover, HC6(B)(3) of the LP outlines that planning decisions, amongst other
    things, should diversify the range of night-time activities, including extending the
    operating hours of existing daytime facilities including cafes.
22. In appeal ‘A’ whilst I note interested party comments regarding nearby
    supermarkets and another convenience store, it remains to my mind that the
    proposed convenience store use would to an extent contribute to the night-time
    economy given that they typically operate to late evening. I acknowledge that it
    does not fall directly within the entertainment or hospitality sector and would likely
    not result in a high level of night-time employment. However, its position adjacent
    to Greenwich Station would likely result in it being used by commuters, visitors as
    well as local residents as part of the night-time economy given the proposed hours
    of opening.
23. I acknowledge it would likely not be open as late as a drinking establishment and
    that the previous use of No 189 didn’t just operate in the evening. Nevertheless, on
    the balance of probabilities given the proposed operating hours of the appeal
    scheme in appeal ‘B’, the proposed use of No 189 as a café would help diversify
    the range of night-time activities.
24. I am also mindful, that the Council in its Officer Report states that on principle,
    notwithstanding its concerns regarding the loss of a drinking establishment, it has
    no concerns regarding the principle of a convenience store or café at this location.
    Therefore, to my mind, the appeal schemes would on balance comply with Policy
    HC6 of the LP.
25. Finally, regarding HC6 of the Framework, based on the evidence before me, there
    are a number of drinking establishments located within the town centre of
    Greenwich. Accordingly, I am satisfied that there is sufficient alternative provision
    of drinking establishments in the local area, such that the loss of the drinking

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6012344 & 6012348


          establishment as part of the appeal schemes would not diminish access to key
          community facilities and public service infrastructure. Accordingly, the appeal
          schemes would accord with Policy HC6(1)(C) of the Framework.
26. In conclusion, given all of the above, the appeal schemes in both appeal ‘A’ and
    appeal ‘B’ would not result in the loss of a pub and nor would it unacceptably harm
    the night-time economy of Greenwich Town Centre. Therefore, the development
    would not result in an unacceptable impact upon the availability of community
    facilities. It therefore would comply with Policy HC6 of the LP insofar as it seeks to
    ensure that planning decisions diversify the range of night-time activities, including
    extending the opening hours of existing daytime facilities.
27. The Council has referred in its Decision Notice to Policy HC7 of the LP and Policy
    EA(b) of the RGLP, for the reasons I have identified above these are not
    determinative for the appeal scheme in this case.
Other Matters
28. Adjacent to the appeal site are the Grade II listed buildings known as Greenwich
          Station (Incorporating Number 187)[1] and Queen Elizabeth’s Almshouses[2].
          Mindful of the statutory duty set out in s66(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
          Conservation Areas) Act 1990, I have had special regard to the desirability of
          preserving their setting. The special interest and significance of both Greenwich
          Station and Queen Elizabeth’s Almshouses derives in part from their architectural
          interest and historic fabric dating from approximately 1840 and 1818 respectively
          (albeit the latter was originally founded around 1576 whilst the former was re-
          erected in approximately 1878). Notwithstanding that No 189 is near to these
          designated heritage assets, and there is some intervisibility between them, in my
          judgement, given the limited physical alterations proposed to the exterior of the
          building, the appeal proposals would preserve the setting of both Greenwich
          Station and Queen Elizabeth’s Almshouses.
29. The Council has indicated that the appeal site is within the West Greenwich
    Conservation Area (the CA). The West Greenwich Conservation Area Appraisal
    2013 highlights that the CA extends from the town centre, the pier, the Thames
    Foreshore and Cutty Sark to the railway station, the Georgian and Victorian
    housing and the open heath on the edges of Blackheath. It is significant for the
    quality of its townscape, the diversity of its architecture, it also includes the Grade I
    listed Cutty Sark. It is also notable for the formal set pieces such as Gloucester
    Circus and the Regency replanning of the town centre around the market. Given
    the extent of the appeal schemes and their specific context, I consider that the
    proposed change of uses would retain and conserve the features which make a
    positive contribution to the character and appearance of the CA as well as its
    special architectural and historic interest.
30. Additionally, the Council has also highlighted that the appeal site is within the
    UNESCO Maritime Greenwich World Heritage Site Buffer Zone. Considering,
    Policies HE5, HE6 as well as HE8 of the Framework and based on the evidence
    before me including the extent of the appeal schemes, I do not consider that the
    appeal schemes would result in harm to the significance or Outstanding Universal


[1]
      List Entry Number: 1290851
[2]
      List Entry Number: 1220818


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    5
Appeal Decision 6012344 & 6012348


       Value of the World Heritage Site. The Council has not raised this as reason for
       refusal in either appeal and thus I find no reason to disagree.
31. 189 Prince of Orange Public House as well as 191-195 (odd) Greenwich High
    Road are listed on the Council’s Local Heritage List. They are noted for their
    architecture dating from around the 19th Century and historic fabric. Given the
    extent of the appeal schemes regarding the proposed change of uses, I consider
    them to not result in harm to the significance of these non-designated heritage
    assets. I note that the Council does not raise concerns in this matter either.
32. The Council has not raised concerns regarding an over concentration of either
    cafes or convenience stores, setting a precedent, cumulative effect or safety
    considerations. Based on the evidence before me, I find no reason to disagree
    with its conclusion on these matters.
Conditions
33. The Council has provided a list of suggested conditions. I have amended the
    wording of suggested conditions for clarity and to ensure accordance with the tests
    set out in Policy DM6 of the Framework.
Appeal A
34. In respect of appeal ‘A’ in addition to the standard time limit condition (1), I have
    attached a condition specifying the approved plans to provide certainty (2). Given
    that the appellant has submitted the proposed hours of opening for the appeal
    scheme, it is necessary that I impose a condition requiring accordance with these
    hours rather than the submission of the information in the interests of residential
    amenity (3).
35. Additionally, I note that the appellant provided a delivery and servicing plan. I have
    imposed a condition requiring a further delivery and servicing plan to be provided
    given the consultee comments from Transport for London which outline concerns
    regarding the hours of waste collection. Accordingly, the condition is necessary in
    the interests of residential amenity and highway safety (4).
36. Furthermore, given that refuse and recycling storage facilities are shown on the
    submitted plans, I consider it is not necessary for further details to be submitted.
    Accordingly, a condition requiring that the refuse and recycling storage facilities
    shown on the submitted plans should be provided prior to the use commencing is
    necessary to ensure that adequate refuse/recycling facilities are delivered on site
    (5).
37. Finally, it has not been adequately demonstrated why a condition requiring the
    provision of cycle parking is necessary for the proposed scheme given the
    previous use of No 189 and the proximity of other methods of public transport such
    as the railway station.
Appeal B
38. Regarding appeal ‘B’ in addition to the standard time limit condition (1), I have
    attached a condition specifying the approved plans to provide certainty (2). Given
    that the appellant has submitted the proposed hours of opening for the appeal
    scheme, it is necessary that I impose a condition requiring accordance with these



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6012344 & 6012348


       hours rather than the submission of the information in the interests of residential
       amenity (3).
39. Additionally, I note that the appellant provided a delivery and servicing plan. I have
    imposed a condition requiring a further delivery and servicing plan to be provided
    given the consultee comments from Transport for London which outline concerns
    regarding the hours of waste collection. Accordingly, the condition is necessary in
    the interests of residential amenity and highway safety (4).
40. Furthermore, given that refuse and recycling storage facilities are shown on the
    submitted plans, I consider it is not necessary for further details to be submitted.
    Accordingly, a condition requiring that the refuse and recycling storage facilities
    shown on the submitted plans should be provided prior to the use commencing is
    necessary to ensure that adequate refuse/recycling facilities are delivered on site
    (5).
41. In the interests of residential amenity of adjoining occupants as well as the design
    and historical value of the locally listed asset, adjacent listed buildings and the
    wider CA it is necessary to require the submission of any new or improved
    extraction and ducting systems (6). I have amended the suggested condition by
    the Council to ensure the condition is triggered should new or altered equipment
    be proposed for the appeal scheme given the existing use of No 189 and absence
    of significant concern regarding amenity on behalf of the Council.
42. Finally, it has not been adequately demonstrated why a condition requiring the
    provision of cycle parking is necessary for the proposed scheme given the
    previous use of No 189 and the proximity of other methods of public transport such
    as the railway station.
Conclusion
43. The material considerations do not indicate that a decision should be made other
    than in accordance with the development plan. For the reasons given above both
    appeal ‘A’ and appeal ‘B’ should be allowed.

B Astley-Serougi
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6012344 & 6012348




                                       Appeal ‘A’ Schedule of Conditions

     1)       The use hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the date of
              this decision.
     2)       The use hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
              following approved plans: Location Plan - Plan Reference Number:
              TQRQM25283153626428, P80-FAA-XX-GF-DR-A-0010, P80-FAA-XX-GF-
              DR-A-0011, P80-FAA-XX GF-DR-A-0100, P80-FAA-XX-GF-DR-A-0101,
              P80-FAA-XX-ZZ-DR-A-0030, P80-FAA-XX ZZ-DR-A-0031, P80-FAA-XX-ZZ-
              DR-A-0032, P80-FAA-XX-ZZ-DR-A-0033, P80-FAA-XX ZZ-DR-A-0300, P80-
              FAA-XX-ZZ-DR-A-0301, P80-FAA-XX-ZZ-DR-A-0302, P80-FAA-XX ZZ-DR-
              A-0303.
     3)       The use hereby permitted shall only take place between the following hours:
              07:00 – 23:00 Mondays - Fridays
              07:00 – 23:00 Saturdays
              07:00 – 23:00 Sundays and Bank or Public Holidays.
     4)       Before the use hereby permitted takes place, an updated Delivery and
              Servicing Plan shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority. The development shall thereafter operate in accordance
              with the approved details for the lifetime of the development.
     5)       Before the use hereby permitted takes place, the refuse and recycling
              storage facilities shown on the approved plans shall be provided and made
              available for use. The approved facilities shall thereafter be retained and
              maintained for the lifetime of the development




                           ============END OF SCHEDULE=========




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         8
Appeal Decision 6012344 & 6012348



                                       Appeal ‘B’ Schedule of Conditions
     1)       The use hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the date of
              this decision.
     2)       The use hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
              following approved plans: Location Plan - Plan Reference Number:
              TQRQM25283153626428, P80-FAA-XX-GF-DR-A-0010, P80-FAA-XX-GF-
              DR-A-0011, P80-FAA-XX GF-DR-A-0100 REV C, P80-FAA-XX-GF-DR-A-
              0101 Rev C, P80-FAA-XX-ZZ-DR-A-0030, P80-FAA-XX ZZ-DR-A-0031, P80-
              FAA-XX-ZZ-DR-A-0032, P80-FAA-XX-ZZ-DR-A-0033, P80-FAA-XX ZZ-DR-
              A-0300, P80-FAA-XX-ZZ-DR-A-0301, P80-FAA-XX-ZZ-DR-A-0302, P80-
              FAA-XX ZZ-DR-A-0303.
     3)       The use hereby permitted shall only take place between the following hours:
              06:30 – 20:00 Mondays - Fridays
              06:30 – 20:00 Saturdays
              06:30 – 20:00 Sundays and Bank or Public Holidays.
     4)       Before the use hereby permitted takes place, an updated Delivery and
              Servicing Plan shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
              Planning Authority. The development shall thereafter operate in accordance
              with the approved details for the lifetime of the development.
     5)       Before the use hereby permitted takes place, the refuse and recycling
              storage facilities shown on the approved plans shall be provided and made
              available for use. The approved facilities shall thereafter be retained and
              maintained for the lifetime of the development
     6)       In the event that any new or materially altered extraction or ventilation
              equipment is proposed as part of the development, details of such equipment
              shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority
              prior to installation. The approved details shall thereafter be implemented and
              retained for the lifetime of the development.


                           ============END OF SCHEDULE=========




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         9
