Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 29 September 2026
by C Walker BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012900
Hogs Back Farm Yard, Monkshatch, Compton, Guildford, Surrey, GU3 1DL
   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class R of the
    Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended)
    (GPDO).
   The appeal is made by Mark Phillips of Phillips Agricultural Estate Limited against the decision of
    Guildford Borough Council.
   The application Ref is 26/W/00030.
   The development proposed is described in the application form as ‘change of use of two agricultural
    buildings totalling 429.95 square metres to flexible commercial use.’

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. The site is the subject of a separate appeal under reference 6009810, which is
   being determined by way of a separate decision.
3. Whilst the application form refers to the site address as ‘The Barn’, for consistency,
   the address in the heading above reflects that given in the other appeal.
4. The provisions of the GPDO do not require regard to be had to the development
   plan or the National Planning Policy Framework that was revised in August 2026.
   Therefore, I only need to have regard to these insofar as they are material
   considerations relevant to the main issues.
Background and Main Issues
5. Under the GPDO, Class R allows the change from agricultural buildings to a flexible
   commercial use, falling within one of the following provisions of the Use Classes
   Order; Class B2 (general industrial), Class B8 (storage or distribution), Class C1
   (hotels), Class E (commercial, business or service), Class F.2(c) (outdoor sport or
   recreation) or for the provision of agricultural training.
6. The appellant’s application does not clearly identify which of the flexible uses within
   Class R is proposed, noting that the permitted development right relates to a single
   use and does not extend to a mixture of the specified uses. However, the Council
   considers that the proposal is for a commercial, business and service use within
   Use Class E(g), a matter that is not disputed by the appellant. I have therefore
   proceeded on that basis.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012900


7. Where an application is made for a determination as to whether prior approval is
   required for development, the local planning authority may refuse the application
   where it considers that the proposed development does not comply with the
   conditions, limitations or restrictions that are applicable to such permitted
   development. The Council contend the proposal does not meet the requirements
   set out within the GDPO.
8. The appeal site forms part of an established agricultural unit exceeding 150 square
   metres in floor area. Consequently, paragraph R.3(1) of the GPDO requires the
   developer to seek a determination from the local planning authority as to whether
   prior approval is required in respect of certain specified matters. Amongst these are
   the transport and highway impacts of the proposed development. The Council
   refused prior approval on that basis.
9. In light of the above, the main issues are:
           whether or not the proposal would comply with the conditions, limitations and
            restrictions of Schedule 2, Part 3, Class R of the GDPO; and
           if so, whether or not prior approval should be given in respect of the transport
            and highway impacts of the proposal.
Reasons
Whether permitted development
10. Schedule 2, Part 3, Class R of the GDPO permits development consisting of a
    change of use of a building and any land within its curtilage from a use as an
    agricultural building to a flexible use.
11. As defined in paragraph X of Part 3, for the purposes of Class R, “curtilage” means
    whichever is the lesser of either:
        (a) the piece of land, whether enclosed or unenclosed, immediately beside or
        around the agricultural building, closely associated with and serving the purposes
        of the agricultural building, or
        (b) an area of land immediately beside or around the agricultural building no larger
        than the land area occupied by the agricultural building.
12. The site location-layout plan1 shows the barns would be surrounded by areas
    substantially larger than the area occupied by the buildings themselves. The
    appellant’s description of development indicates the combined footprint of the
    buildings amounts to around 429.95 square metres. This compares to around 3,100
    square metres of surrounding land, according to the Council’s undisputed
    calculations. In the absence of any annotation or other clear indication on the
    submitted plans identifying the extent of the proposed residential curtilage, I have
    proceeded on the basis that the entirety of the land within the red-line boundary
    would form part of the curtilage associated with the development.
13. Consequently, the proposal does not comply with the relevant conditions,
    limitations and restrictions of Schedule 2, Part 3, Class R of the GDPO and it does
    not benefit from permitted development.

1
    Drawing reference: P240326 02 Rev P2


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6012900


14. In light of this finding, it is unnecessary for me to consider whether prior approval
    should be granted in respect of the transport and highways impacts, as any
    conclusions reached on those matters would not alter the outcome of this appeal.
Conclusion
15. For the above reasons, the appeal is dismissed.

C Walker
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
