Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 22 September 2026
by L Francis BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6012954
Land outside 6 – 10 Central Parade, London E17 4RT
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Safia Rana-Jaswal, BT Group PLC against the decision of the Council of the
     London Borough of Waltham Forest.
•    The application Ref is 260335.
•    The development proposed is the installation of a proposed new Global street hub.

Appeal B Ref: 6012953
Land outside 6 – 10 Central Parade, London E17 4RT
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express consent.
•    The appeal is made by Safia Rana-Jaswal, BT Group PLC against the decision of the Council of the
     London Borough of Waltham Forest.
•    The application Ref is 260266.
•    The advertisement proposed is the display of advertisements on both sides of the proposed Global
     street hub.


Decision
1.     Appeals A and B are dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     Appeal A relates to the refusal of planning permission for the proposed hub. Appeal
       B is in respect of the refusal of advertisement consent for the digital advertisement
       which would be an integral part of the hub. I have combined the appeals into a single
       decision letter as they are intrinsically linked and raise similar issues though I have
       considered each on its individual merits.
3.     I have amended the description of Appeal A to remove references to the
       advertisement.
4.     In respect of Appeal B, Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
       Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (the Regulations) and the National
       Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) make it clear that advertisements are
       subject to control only in the interests of amenity and public safety. While not
       decisive, I have taken the relevant development plan policies into account as a
       material consideration.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6012954 and 6012953


Main Issues
5.     For appeal A, the main issues are the effect of the proposal on i) the character and
       appearance of the area; and, ii) highway safety.
6.     For appeal B, the main issues are the effect of the advertisement on i) the visual
       amenity of the area; and ii) public safety.
Reasons
Character and Appearance/ Visual Amenity
7.     The appeal site is located in a busy commercial area, just north of the junction of
       Hoe Street, High Street and Church Hill. Ground floor uses are typically shops and
       services, with residential flats or occasional office uses on upper floors. Central
       Parade comprises a row of shops with residential uses above. A canopy projects
       over street level to provide an element of shelter to pedestrians.
8.     The ‘street hub’ would be a freestanding rectangular structure with a dark aluminium
       finish. It would provide various facilities for the public to use and would contain digital
       display screens on both sides.
9.     There is already a significant amount of street furniture located adjacent to the
       carriageway including bike stands, bins, lamp posts and a bus shelter with a digital
       advertisement display. The hub would be set a short distance away from the
       surrounding street furniture which would lead it to appear as a stand-alone feature in
       the street scene. Due to its height and bulk, the structure would appear as a
       prominent and visually intrusive addition. Whilst I acknowledge the hub would be
       perceived as separate from the existing street furniture, it would effectively extend
       the area of street clutter.
10. The proposed advertisement display would however form part of the hub, which I
    have already found would be harmful to the character and appearance of the area.
    Due to its scale, prominent location, and illumination, the electronic display would
    unacceptably increase the visual clutter which would be harmful to the visual amenity
    of the area. Although I appreciate that the rate of image change and intensity of
    illumination could reasonably be controlled by condition, I do not consider this would
    overcome the harm I have identified.
11. In conclusion on appeal A therefore, due to its location, size and bulk, the proposed
    freestanding communications hub would harm the character and appearance of the
    area. This would conflict with Policy 53 of the Waltham Forest Local Plan 2024,
    which amongst other things, aims to ensure proposals preserve or enhance the
    character of an area.
12. In conclusion on appeal B, for the reasons outlined above, the advertisement would
    unacceptably detract from the visual amenities of the street scene.
Highway Safety/Public Safety
13. There would be a distance of just over 3m between the shopfronts and the proposed
    hub to allow for pedestrian movement. I have been referred to the Department of
    Transport’s Inclusive Mobility Guidance (2021) which recommends a minimum clear
    footway width of 2m, which would be achieved by the proposal. However, this is
    guidance for minimum distance rather than maximum. The footway in this location is


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6012954 and 6012953


       exceptionally busy, given the location close to shops, services and a major junction,
       along with the proximity of the bus stop which serves several bus routes.
14. The area marked on the highway for buses to stop is sufficient to accommodate 3
    buses. Whilst this is a snapshot in time, at my site visit on a Tuesday lunchtime,
    there were frequent occurrences where the stop was occupied by 3 buses at once
    with people getting on and off. Although the hub would be located beyond the bus
    shelter, it would nevertheless have the potential to obstruct people getting on and off
    buses given the extent of the bus stop area marked on the carriageway. The location
    of the hub would impede accessibility for passengers, including those requiring step-
    free access. In particular, the deployment of bus ramps for disabled passengers
    could be compromised by the location of the hub. As the hub would contain
    touchscreens and an element of interactive use, it would be reasonable to expect
    people to be using the screens, potentially obstructing pedestrians waiting at the bus
    stop. Consequently, the footway would be impeded by the proposed development
    and advertisement, it would significantly harm safe pedestrian movement to the
    detriment of highway and public safety.
15. There is little substantive evidence before me that the position or form of the
    advertisements would impede drivers’ sightlines relative to bus stop signage.
    Similarly, there is little substantive evidence before me to suggest that the position of
    the hub would interfere with the legibility of traffic signals or signs. This would not
    overcome the harm I have identified to public safety arising from the location of the
    hub and advertisement.
16. Appeal A would have a harmful effect on highway safety with particular regard to
    pedestrian movement. This is due to the high potential for obstructing people getting
    on and off buses, including those requiring the use of bus ramps for step free
    access. There would therefore conflict with Local Plan Policy 60, which states that
    new development will be expected to contribute to the Council’s objective to deliver
    more attractive, accessible, healthy and safe streets.
17. Appeal B would harm public safety for the reasons outlined above. I have taken into
    account Local Plan Policy 60 which is material in this case, and the advertisement
    would conflict with the aims of the policy to deliver accessible and safe streets.
Other Matters
18. Central Parade is Grade II listed. It is a Festival style building, dating from the 1950s.
    It comprises a mixture of commercial, residential and community uses in a flagship
    civic project. Its significance is derived from its architecture including surface
    decoration and mosaics, a prominent clock tower.
19. I have had regard to the statutory duty set out in s66(1) of the Planning (Listed
    Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act) with respect to the desirability
    of preserving the setting of Central Parade. There would be some intervisibility
    between the street hub and Central Parade. However, given the urban setting and
    street furniture at the junction of Church Hill and Hoe Lane, the setting of Central
    Parade would be preserved, along with the contribution the setting makes to its
    significance.
20. Whilst I note there are advertisement screens on nearby bus shelters, these form
    part of the shelters and are not freestanding digital advertisements. I do not consider


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6012954 and 6012953


       their presence should necessarily lead me to conclude that the appeal should
       otherwise be allowed.
21. My attention has been drawn to a section in the officer’s report stating that the digital
    advertisement would not be out of keeping with the street scene. However, the
    application for advertisement consent was nevertheless refused on the basis of
    visual amenity. I have, as set out above, drawn my own conclusions with regard to
    the effect of the advertisement on visual amenity based upon the evidence before
    me and observations on my site visit.
Planning Balance (Appeal A)
22. In respect of Appeal A, chapter 9 of the Framework states that advanced, high
    quality and reliable communications are essential to meet changing technological,
    social, business and security requirements. The Framework also seeks to support
    the expansion of and upgrading of electronic communication networks. The hub
    would therefore support the Government’s aim of improving digital infrastructure.
23. The installation would improve communication provision and would provide 5G
    capability. It would provide a platform for emergency messaging, contributing to
    community safety. The Wi-Fi connection provided by the hub would be of high quality
    and would provide a free service to the public locally. Free phone calls and device
    charging would be available from the hub. The screens would provide local
    information through wayfinding through use of the touchscreen. These benefits
    would be commercially funded and would not come at a cost to the public purse. I
    attach moderate weight to these benefits.
24. Whilst it is not a matter in dispute that no harm has been identified to designated
    heritage assets, or living conditions, these matters are neutral in the planning
    balance.
25. Notwithstanding the benefits described above, I have identified significant harm to
    the character and appearance of the area and to highway safety. Planning conditions
    would not overcome this harm. When taken together, I do not find that the identified
    benefits would amount to material considerations that would indicate that the
    proposal should be decided other than in accordance with the development plan.
Conclusion
26. For the above reasons, the proposed development conflicts with the development
    plan and the material considerations do not indicate that the appeal should be
    decided other than in accordance with it. Therefore, I conclude that Appeal A should
    be dismissed.
27. For the reasons given above the proposed advertisement would be harmful to the
    interests of visual amenity and public safety. Therefore, I conclude that Appeal B
    should be dismissed.

L Francis
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
