Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 22 September 2026
by Bhupinder Thandi BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 October 2026
Appeal Ref: 6012871
26 Valentines Way, Rush Green, Romford RM7 0YH
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mrs Sultanara Khanom against the decision of the Council of the London
     Borough of Barking & Dagenham.
•    The application Ref is 26/00609/HSE.
•    The development proposed is conversion of the garage into a habitable space including replacement
     of the existing garage door with a window and construction of a front porch, a single storey rear and
     side extension and a first-floor rear and side extension.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the conversion of the
       garage into a habitable space including replacement of the existing garage door
       with a window and construction of a front porch, a single storey rear and side
       extension and a first floor rear and side extension at 26 Valentines Way, Rush
       Green, Romford RM7 0YH in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref
       26/00609/HSE, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              drawing numbers: Location Plan drawing number 1029-SM-XX-S-DR-A-001;
              Site Plans drawing number 1029-SM-XX-S-DR-A-002 Rev A; Existing Plans
              and Elevations drawing number SM-XX-00-DR-A-101; Proposed Plans and
              Elevations drawing number SM-XX-00-DR-A110 and Isometric Perspectives
              drawing number SM-XX-00-3D-A-900 3D;
     3)       The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
              extension shall match those used in the existing building.
Applications for costs
2.     An application for an award of costs was made by Mrs Sultanara Khanom against
       the London Borough of Barking and Dagenham. This application is the subject of a
       separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3.     The proposal includes conversion of the garage into a habitable room, construction
       of a porch, single storey side and rear extensions and a first-floor side and rear
       extension. The reasons for refusal on the Council’s decision notice indicate that
       the first-floor side extension is the only matter in dispute. I have no reason to
       disagree with the Council’s conclusion that the rest of the scheme is acceptable in


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012871


        planning terms. My reasoning below therefore relates only to the first-floor side
        extension.
4.      Following determination of the planning application and during the course of the
        appeal a new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) has been
        published. My decision is made in the context of this revised Framework, and I am
        satisfied that no interested party has been prejudiced by my approach.
Main Issues
5.      The main issues are:
             •   The effect of the proposed development upon the character and
                 appearance of the host property and the area; and
             •   Whether the proposal would provide satisfactory living conditions for the
                 intended occupiers.
Reasons
Character and appearance
6.      The appeal site comprises a two-storey semi-detached dwelling located within a
        predominantly suburban residential area. It forms part of a similar pair with 28
        Valentines Way with both dwellings displaying similar proportions, albeit there are
        visible variations between the two when viewed from the street. Whilst regular
        spacing between dwellings is a notable feature of the street a number of properties
        benefit from first floor and two storey side extensions which have reduced this
        spacing and resulted in architectural variation of the built form.
7.      There is no doubt that the first-floor side extension would alter the appearance of
        the host dwelling and the pair of properties. That said, it would be set down from
        the ridge, set back from the front elevation and set in from the shared boundary.
        The roof form would reflect the design and pitch of the main roof. Whilst this set
        back would not align with that recommended in the Residential Extensions and
        Alterations Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) it would still appear as a
        subservient addition leaving adequate spacing around the host property.
        Accordingly, the established rhythm of separation that currently exists would not
        be unacceptably undermined to any real degree.
8.      Although the proposed development would be visible within the area, the resultant
        dwelling would not appear out of context or incongruous given the variety of house
        designs and roof forms locally. Despite the Council’s concerns about the
        cumulative effect of the appellant’s proposed extensions and alterations, I am not
        persuaded that the first-floor extension would tip the balance so as to overwhelm
        or unacceptably unbalance the pair of dwellings.
9.      Whilst the Council advise that they do not wish to replicate extensions that pre-
        date the SPD they are nonetheless notable features that make up part of the
        area’s character and appearance. My attention has also been drawn to a
        previously dismissed appeal1 at the site, however, this related to a different
        scheme and based on the limited information before me I am not satisfied that they


1
    APP/Z5060/D/24/3355677


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6012871


       are comparable. In any event every application and appeal must be considered on
       its own merits, as I have done.
10. As such, the proposed development would not harm the character and
    appearance of the host property and area. It would accord with Policies DMD1,
    DMD5 and SP2 of the London Borough of Barking and Dagenham Local Plan
    (2024) (BDLP), Policies D4 and D5 of the London Plan (2021) (LP) and the SPD
    which, amongst other things, seek high-quality design that relate to their context
    and for extensions to be sympathetic and subordinate to the design of the original
    dwelling.
11. The council has referred to Policy D1 of the LP in the reasons for refusal, however,
    I find that with specific regard to this appeal I give it negligible weight in coming to
    my decision.
Living conditions for the intended occupiers
12. The Council advise that the internal floorspace of the first-floor single bedroom
    would fall short of the requirements set out in the National described space
    standards (NDSS) thereby resulting in a poor quality internal space for future
    occupiers.
13. The NDSS and the Planning Practice Guidance (PPG), for that matter, are clear
    that the technical standards relate to the internal space for new dwellings. There is
    nothing to indicate that the standard applies to domestic extensions to existing
    houses. I, therefore, question its relevance in respect of the scheme before me.
14. In terms of the internal arrangement whilst the bedroom would be narrow it would
    be of a reasonable size and a functional space, served by a window providing
    outlook, daylight and sunlight. Taking these considerations into account, along with
    the plans and details before me, the extent of the internal space would not be
    inadequate in this instance.
15. As such, I am satisfied that the proposal would provide satisfactory living conditions
    for the intended occupiers in accordance with LP Policy D6.
Conditions
16. I have considered the imposition of conditions in accordance with the Framework
    and the PPG. In addition to the standard time limit condition, it is necessary in the
    interests of precision, to define the plans with which the development should
    accord and that it should be of materials to match the host property.
Conclusion
17. For the reasons set out above the appeal succeeds.



B Thandi
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
