Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 1 September 2026
by J Hills MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012293
South Barn, Elworthy Farm, Elworthy Farm Road, Greenham, Wellington
TA21 0JP
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Elliot Lamb of Instrumel Ltd against the decision of Somerset Council.
•    The application Ref is 35/25/0005.
•    The development proposed is conversion, with erection of single storey extensions, of agricultural
     barn in to form a residential dwelling at Elworthy Farm, Greenham, Wellington TA21 0JP.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Applications for costs
2.     The appellant has made an application for costs against Somerset Council which
       is the subject of a different decision.
Preliminary matter
3.     An updated version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework)
       was issued in August 2026. The main parties and landowner were invited to
       comment on the implications of the revised NPPF and so no prejudice has
       occurred. Parts of the responses extended beyond the scope of that consultation
       and sought to amplify matters already addressed in the appeal evidence. I have
       had regard only to those submissions insofar as they relate to the policy changes
       and have not relied upon any wider arguments.
Main issues
4.     The main issues are:
       • the effect of the development on the character and appearance of the area, with
       particular regard to the significance of the non-designated heritage asset (NDHA);
       • whether the proposal would amount to a conversion; and
       • the effect of the proposed development on drainage and water supplies.
Reasons
Character and appearance
5.     The appeal building is in the countryside and forms part of a historic farmstead that
       includes a farmhouse and some other traditional barns. Having paid regard to the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012293


       heritage submissions, it is likely that the appeal building’s significance derives from
       its survival as a vestige of a medieval house in an area where there are important
       listed mansions. Taking account of the open gable and its evolution over time, the
       building has otherwise retained a simple agricultural character. Moreover, the
       small and scattered openings bound by attractive walls, which are mostly built from
       stone, are positive attributes. A key feature that remains is the late medieval
       jointed cruck roof. This would be repaired and left exposed as part of the
       development, which, when taken alone, would have a positive effect on the NDHA.
6.     The form and massing of the western gable extension would follow a consistent
       hipped design to create an unassuming and proportionate symmetry to the
       building. While large, its scale would not be excessive. However, both north and
       south elevations would be unusually dominated by overtly domestic fenestration
       patterns. This, together with the incorporated door and heavy use of cladding,
       would detract from the simple stonework qualities of the building. Additionally,
       although not particularly visible from the adjoining farmstead or wider landscape,
       the fenestration design and cladding found on the proposed lean-to extension
       would irrevocably erode the clean linear form of the west elevation. Collectively,
       these alterations would harmfully compete with the architectural and historic
       qualities of the building.
7.     While certain detailing can be secured using planning conditions, in this case, it is
       the extent of domestic-style openings that is harmful. It would not therefore be
       appropriate to attempt to deal with this matter by way of condition.
8.     For the reasons given, I conclude on this main issue that there would be conflict
       with policies DM1, DM2, and CP8 of the Taunton Dean Core Strategy (CS), and
       Policy D7 of the Site Allocations and Development Management Plan (DMP).
       Together in this respect, and amongst other things, these policies aim to avoid
       unacceptable harm to the architectural or historic qualities of buildings.
Conversion
9.     As touched on above, the appeal building is mostly constructed from stone walls
       and is evidently a longstanding feature in the landscape that is of permanent and
       substantial construction, as required by CS Policy DM2. It is acknowledged that
       deterioration has been ongoing and there are areas where vegetation has taken
       hold. However, having had regard to the structural reports, it is likely that the
       principal form of the building would be reused in the conversion.
10. The Council is concerned that the cumulative works, which would include a new
    roof, floor, wall repairs, and lintels, would amount to major rebuilding. While these
    elements would be notable, barns of this age and construction will invariably
    require significant interventions to bring them up to a modern-day habitable state.
    That is not to say such works, including new load-bearing elements would
    necessarily amount to a major rebuild. DM2 does not require the existing building
    to be structurally sound and there is nothing strikingly unusual about the nature of
    the proposed works that indicate it is incapable of being converted. In coming to
    this view, I have had regard to the proximity of a nearby tree and its possible root
    spread. Even though recent inspections have their limitations, as a matter of
    planning judgement, including my own observations, the proposal would amount to
    a conversion.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012293


11. The Council refers to the “Hibbitt judgement” as a relevant test for consideration.
    While noted, this does not alter my view on the acceptability of the proposal. It is
    also unclear how this judgement specifically relates to applications for planning
    permission. My attention has also been drawn to an appeal decision1 at Langford
    Budville. The inspector reviewed the likely required works in addition to the
    submitted structural survey but did note that the building was of insubstantial
    construction. I have however come to a different view on the nature of this appeal
    building and I give the other appeal little weight.
12. For the reasons given, I conclude on this main issue that the proposal would
    amount to a conversion. As such, there would be no conflict with CS Policy DM2.
    Other CS policies SP1, CP1, and CP8, as well as DMP Policy SB1 are primarily
    concerned with steering new development to the right places. However, given the
    proposal would be a conversion, there is little to show any conflict with these
    policies in respect of this main issue.
Drainage and water
13. Concerns have been raised regarding the proximity of the proposed septic tank to
    a neighbouring private water supply and whether the proposed dwelling could be
    served by adequate foul drainage and a wholesome water supply.
14. The proposed area identified for foul drainage infrastructure lies outside the
    appellant's ownership, albeit within the application site. Any necessary legal rights
    are a separate matter that would not be determined through the planning process.
    It has been suggested that the area available would be insufficient to
    accommodate the required drainage infrastructure. Informal percolation testing has
    been carried out, though I have been provided with little substantive technical
    evidence demonstrating that a compliant drainage solution could not be achieved.
    Furthermore, there is no compelling case to indicate that alternative drainage
    arrangements could not be accommodated elsewhere within the appeal site.
15. I note that the neighbouring private water supply has a route across the appeal
    site’s access drive. Even so, the Council's Environmental Health Officer advised
    that the proposed septic tank would likely require a permit from the Environment
    Agency owing to its proximity to this private water supply, but, importantly, did not
    object to the proposal. Additionally, the Environment Agency advised that the
    application fell outside its consultation remit and raised no concerns. Within that
    context, the Framework says that it should be assumed separate regulatory
    regimes will operate effectively unless there is clear evidence to the contrary.
16. Whilst inaccuracies within the submitted drainage information have been
    highlighted and there is no obvious mains water supply in the area, the evidence
    before me does not demonstrate that the site could not be served by an adequate
    foul drainage system or a wholesome water supply.
17. I therefore conclude on this main issue that the development would have an
    acceptable effect on drainage and water supplies. As such, there would be no
    conflict with CS Policy DM1 and DMP Policy I4, which, together and in part, say
    that sites should be served by necessary utility services, adequate drainage
    facilities, and surface water disposal. There would also be no conflict with
    Framework policies DM7 and P3, insofar as they seek to ensure that development

1
    APP/W3330/W/23/2324084


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6012293


       is supported by appropriate infrastructure and avoids unacceptable pollution or
       risks to health.
Other considerations
18. The application form states that the proposal should be considered as
    self-build or custom-build housing. However, in order to qualify for this exemption,
    it would be necessary to secure this by way of an obligation. Nevertheless, even if
    such an obligation were secured, as it would exempt the proposal from providing
    any biodiversity net gain, it could not be considered a benefit of the proposal.
19. My attention has been drawn to the planning history at this location. In that
    context, there is no dispute between the main parties that the similarly designed
    2017 permission for a residential conversion has expired. Consequently, there is
    no fallback position before me that could be relied upon. Even though the
    similarities between the schemes are evident, national policy has changed in the
    fairly lengthy intervening period. Moreover, the Council highlights the adoption of
    supplementary district-wide design guidance in 2021. While not part of the
    development plan, the document emphasises the importance of avoiding domestic
    alterations to barns. In addition, the evidence shows some visible deterioration in
    the condition of the building over the last 10 years or so. For these reasons, I
    attach very little weight to the previous permission.
Planning balance and conclusion
20. The proposal would amount to a conversion, and the development would have an
    acceptable effect on drainage and water supplies. However, it would harm the
    significance of the NDHA and would conflict with development plan policies that
    seek to achieve appropriate design and conserve the historic environment.
21. The Council cannot demonstrate a five-year supply of deliverable housing sites,
    with the most recent evidence indicating a supply of 3.9 years. In accordance with
    the Framework, I give substantial weight to the provision of one additional
    dwelling. I also attach modest weight to the limited economic benefits arising from
    the construction and occupation of it.
22. Against those benefits, the proposal would cause moderate harm to the
    significance of an NDHA. The appeal building is an irreplaceable resource, and the
    relevant local plan policies are broadly consistent with the Framework in seeking
    development that responds positively to its context and conserves heritage assets
    in a manner appropriate to their significance.
23. Framework Policy HE7 requires the harm to an NDHA to be weighed against the
    benefits of the proposal, having regard to the scale of the harm and the
    significance of the asset. I attach significant weight to the identified heritage harm.
    That harm also places the proposal in conflict with Framework Policy DP3, which
    indicates that development should be refused where, without clear justification, it
    fails to respond appropriately to its context, including through materials,
    architectural features, and the restoration and reuse of heritage assets.
24. While the proposal would retain and expose elements of the historic structure and
    provide it with a viable use, this does not clearly justify the presented design.
    Moreover, any such benefits could conceivably be achieved through a less harmful



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6012293


       scheme. Accordingly, even with the deteriorating condition of the building, those
       factors do not overcome the identified harm.
25. Drawing these matters together, the benefits of the proposal, including the
    substantial weight I give to the provision of one dwelling, do not outweigh the harm
    to the NDHA and the conflict with the development plan. There are no other
    considerations, including the policies of the Framework, that outweigh this finding.
    Therefore, for the reasons given, the appeal should not succeed.




J Hills
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
