Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 7 September 2026
by C Cooper-Young MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 02 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012289
Rear of 2 High Street, Edgware, Barnet HA8 7EF
    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    The appeal is made by Elmer Gardens Limited against the decision of the Council of the London
     Borough of Barnet.
    The application reference is 25/4795/FUL.
    The development proposed is described as, erection of three storey above existing structure
     consisting of 9 flats associated private and communal amenity space; refuse cycle storage and a car
     park.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    I have taken the address from the Council’s decision notice as this better
      describes the location of the appeal site.
3.    The main parties have had the opportunity to comment on any implications of the
      recent publication of the amended National Planning Policy Framework (the
      Framework) on their cases. Their comments have been considered in the
      determination of this appeal.
4.    The Council’s Statement of Case refers to two reasons for refusal, whereas their
      decision notice outlines three. In the interest of clarity, I have addressed the
      reasons for refusal outlined on the Council’s decision notice.
5.    As part of the appeal, the appellant has submitted an updated Flood Risk
      Assessment and SuDS Appeal Statement (June 2026) prepared by EAS Transport
      Planning Ltd. The Council has had the opportunity to comment on this submission.
      I consider that the inclusion of this document would not evolve the scheme or
      amount to a fundamental change which would ultimately result in a different
      application to that which was considered by the Council.
Main Issues
6.    The main issues in this appeal are the effect of the development on:
          the character and appearance of the area;
          the living conditions of the occupiers of neighbouring residential properties; and
          the effect of the development on flood risk and drainage.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012289


Reasons
Character and appearance
7.       The appeal site is a single storey building, part flat roof, part mono-pitch roof,
         currently occupied by a car repair business (the garage), and set back some
         distance from the main thoroughfare frontage. High Street and the adjacent Burnt
         Oak Broadway lie within the established commercial centre of Edgware, which is
         characterised by a varied mix of retail, commercial and residential development,
         comprising buildings of differing ages, scales, separation distances and
         architectural styles.
8.       To the rear of the appeal site, the locality is characterised by predominantly
         residential development comprising mainly two-storey semi-detached and
         detached dwellings interspersed with some converted and flatted accommodation.
         These streets exhibit a generally suburban character and appearance, with low-
         rise built form and a relatively consistent building line. At my site visit I observed
         that Elmer Gardens had a comparatively quiet residential environment despite its
         proximity to the commercial centre of Edgware.
9.       The visual relationship between the appeal site and the residential properties on
         Elmer Gardens is currently limited to the single-storey rear elevation of the garage.
         However, the evidence indicates that planning permission has been granted1 for
         additional storeys at first and second floor levels to provide 7 self-contained flats,
         associated private and communal amenity space, refuse/recycling/cycle storage
         and car parking.
10. Given that a fallback scheme comprising a three-storey building has already been
    approved, I attach significant weight to that fallback position, having regard to the
    realistic prospect of its implementation. However, whilst the approved scheme
    establishes that a building could lawfully be constructed on the site, the appeal
    proposal would go beyond that baseline through the addition of a fourth storey,
    increasing the overall height by approximately 3 metres. This additional height
    would result in a markedly taller, bulkier and more visually prominent building,
    appreciably increasing its presence within its immediate context.
11. The appeal building occupies a transitional position between the varied
    commercial frontage of the High Street and the established residential
    environments of Elmer Gardens and Garratt Road. Whilst the High Street displays
    significant architectural diversity and buildings of varying mass and scale, Elmer
    Gardens and Garratt Road are characterised by predominantly two-storey
    residential development with a consistent suburban scale and grain.
12. The proposed four-storey, flat-roofed building would fail to mediate between these
    contrasting townscape contexts. Instead, its height, bulk and overtly boxy form
    would create an abrupt and jarring transition, appearing incongruous within its
    setback setting.
13. Furthermore, the proposal would erode the coherence of the residential townscape
    and appear as an intrusive feature when observed from close-by street scenes.
    The proposal would represent an overly dominant form of development that would
    fail to respect the established scale, grain and pattern of the surrounding

1
    Local Planning Authority Reference: 25/1099/FUL.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               2
Appeal Decision 6012289


       residential townscape, resulting in a jarring and harmful juxtaposition with the
       lower-rise dwellings of Garratt Road and Elmer Gardens
14. In conclusion, the proposed development would have a harmful effect on the
    character and appearance of the area, contrary to Policy D3 of the London Plan
    (2021) (LP) and Policy CDH01 of the Barnet Local Plan (2025) (BLP). Together,
    these policies seek to ensure that development is sympathetic to its context and
    makes a positive contribution to the character and appearance of the area.
Living conditions
15. The evidence indicates that the proposal would not lead to a significant
    overlooking and associated loss of privacy to nearby residential occupiers, given
    the separation distances. Whilst acceptable separation distances may be
    achieved, they do not in themselves determine whether a development would
    provide a satisfactory relationship with nearby or neighbouring occupiers.
16. By reason of the increased height and mass of the building, the proposal would
    present substantial elevations to the nearby residential properties, particularly the
    occupiers of 2 High Street. Due to the position of the proposed building and its
    increased height and mass, despite the difference in ground levels, the four-storey
    walls would present as tall, dominant and oppressive elevations, the majority of
    which would be visible above the rear boundaries of close by residential gardens.
    As a result, the proposal would give rise to an overbearing visual sense of
    enclosure when viewed from 2 High Street and the rear of properties on Elmer
    Gardens and Garratt Road.
17. Taking these factors together, I find that the cumulative effect of the proposal's
    increased height, breadth and massing would result in an oppressive and
    overbearing form of development. It would unacceptably erode the living
    conditions of neighbouring residents through a harmful sense of enclosure, visual
    intrusion and loss of outlook. The proposal would therefore cause significant harm
    to neighbouring residential amenity.
18. Accordingly, the proposal would harm the living conditions of neighbouring
    occupiers with particular regard to overbearing effects. As such, the proposal is
    contrary to Policy D3 of the LP, and Policy CDH 01 of the BLP which taken
    together, seek to ensure that development does not result in unacceptable impacts
    on residential occupiers of neighbouring properties.
Flood risk and drainage
19. The appellant submitted a Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) and Sustainable
    Drainage Systems (SuDS) strategy, with the appeal.
20. Whilst the site is identified as being susceptible to flood risk, particularly from
    surface water flooding, the proposed residential accommodation would be located
    entirely above ground-floor level and would therefore not be directly affected by
    the flood depths identified within the submitted assessment.
21. The appellant has also provided mitigation measures including flood warning
    procedures, a flood plan and an alternative route for access and egress in the
    event of severe flooding. Taken together, the evidence demonstrates that the
    development would be safe for its lifetime and that residual flood risks can be
    appropriately managed.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6012289


22. In relation to drainage, the submitted evidence identifies a clear and deliverable
    SuDS strategy comprising raingarden planters and permeable paving with below-
    ground attenuation storage. Surface water would be discharged at a controlled
    rate and significantly reduce runoff rates compared with the existing site and
    achieving a level below the equivalent greenfield runoff rate for storm events up to
    and including the 1 in 100-year event with an allowance for climate change.
23. Thames Water has confirmed capacity within the receiving network for the
    proposed discharge, and detailed maintenance arrangements have been provided
    for the lifetime of the development.
24. While the revised FRA and SuDS report suggests that the development could
    potentially overcome the Council’s concerns in relation to drainage and flood risk,
    the documents were submitted for the first time at the appeal stage and have not
    been subject to scrutiny by the Council or relevant consultees.
25. Consequently, and whilst I am mindful of the fallback permission, I am not fully
    satisfied as to the effectiveness and deliverability of the proposed mitigation
    measures and therefore attach moderate weight to this evidence. In any event, as
    I have found the proposal unacceptable for other substantive reasons, the matter
    is not determinative of the appeal’s outcome and does not alter my overall
    conclusion.
Other Matters
26. Whilst the appellant contends that the site is currently unattractive and subject to
    noise, and that the proposal would improve its appearance and make more
    effective use of the land, these benefits could similarly be achieved through the
    fallback position. As such, they attract only limited weight in favour of the appeal.
27. I also note that no interested party comments or objections have been received
    regarding the proposal. However, the absence of third-party representations is not
    determinative of the planning merits of a proposal and does not outweigh the
    identified concerns.
28. Furthermore, the absence of harm in relation to ecology, highway safety, the
    principle of development, and the living conditions of future occupiers are neutral
    matters, as they reflect compliance with policy expectations rather than providing
    positive benefits.
29. The appellant has suggested a number of planning conditions, including the
    provision of obscure glazing to windows facing 2 High Street, these measures
    would not overcome the fundamental harms identified in this decision and would
    not render the development acceptable in planning terms.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
30. Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 (the Act) sets
    out that applications should be determined in accordance with the development
    plan unless material considerations indicate otherwise.
31. The Framework outlines that development plan policies which are materially
    inconsistent with national decision-making policies in this Framework should be
    given very limited weight. However, development plan policies should not be given
    reduced weight simply because they were adopted prior to the publication of this

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6012289


       iteration of the Framework. Given the consistency with the Framework’s decision-
       making policies, I attribute substantial weight to the development plan policies
       considered as part of this submission.
32. Policy S3 of the Framework requires that decisions on development proposals
    should apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development and goes on to
    state that in all locations proposals that accord with both an up-to-date
    development plan and the decision-making policies in the Framework should be
    approved without delay.
33. The proposal would provide additional dwellings, but it would be more harmful than
    the fallback permission in terms of the harm to the character and appearance of
    the area and the living conditions of neighbouring residential occupiers. The
    proposal therefore conflicts with the development plan, taken as a whole.
34. Policy S4 of the Framework sets out that development proposals within
    settlements should be approved, unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework.
35. Policy L2 of the Framework attributes substantial weight to development that
    creates additional homes or floorspace within settlements by using the airspace
    above existing residential and commercial premises, or through sensitive
    redevelopment or additional development within existing plots. However, such
    development should be consistent with the overall street scene. Accordingly, I
    attribute little weight to the proposal in this regard.
36. Framework Policy L3 provides, amongst other things, that the importance of
    securing well-designed places and increased densities in residential proposals
    should be assessed against the existing character of an area, subject to the
    considerations of policy DP3, but not preclude development which makes the most
    of an area’s potential. Framework policy DP3 requires development proposals to
    respond to their context (the history, character and features of their site and its
    setting), so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings. This too
    attracts little weight in favour of the proposal.
37. Taken together, the benefits of the proposal would be substantially outweighed by
    its adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-making policies of
    the Framework. As such, framework policy S4 does not point to permission being
    granted in this instance.
38. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
39. For the reasons given above the appeal is dismissed.



C Cooper-Young
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
