Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 14 September 2026
by S. Burch BSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25th September 2026
Appeal Ref: 6012303
Land north of Scrubs Farm, Lower Gravel Road, Bromley BR2 8LL
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Kelly Holmes against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
     Bromley.
•    The application Ref is 25/05644/FPA.
•    The development proposed is described as ‘erection of 4no. outdoor padel courts and WC/office
     building; with associated access, fencing/gates, landscaping and car parking.’

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the erection of 4no.
       outdoor padel courts and WC/office building; with associated access,
       fencing/gates, landscaping and car parking at land north of Scrubs Farm, Lower
       Gravel Road, Bromley BR28LL in accordance with the terms of the application,
       Ref 25/05644/FPA, and the plans submitted with it, subject to the conditions in the
       attached schedule.
Preliminary Matter
2.     During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
       (the Framework) was published. The main parties were provided with an
       opportunity to comment. I have had regard to the 2026 version of the Framework
       in my decision.
Main Issue
3.     The main issues in this appeal are:
           •    whether the proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt
                having regard to relevant development plan policies, the provisions of the
                Framework and the effect on openness; and
           •    if the scheme is inappropriate development, whether the harm by reason of
                inappropriateness, and any other harm, is clearly outweighed by other
                considerations so as to amount to the very special circumstances required
                to justify the development.
Reasons
Green Belt
4.     The appeal site comprises a parcel of land to the north of Scrubs Farm. It is
       largely flat and positioned to the eastern side of an agricultural field. It is devoid of
       built development and consists of areas of hardstanding, partially sealed surfaces,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012303


       and the storage of various items of agricultural equipment. To the west lies a
       playing field and associated clubhouse, whilst Richmal Compton Fields is situated
       to the north. To the south is a commercial/ industrial estate comprising a range of
       agricultural-style buildings. There is a residential area further west of the site,
       along Lower Gravel Road. The site is located within the Metropolitan Green Belt.
5.     The Framework sets out that inappropriate development is, by definition, harmful
       to the Green Belt and should not be approved except in very special
       circumstances. Policy 49 of the Bromley Local Plan (BLP) and Policy G2 of the
       London Plan (LP) similarly state that the Green Belt should be protected from
       inappropriate development.
6.     Certain forms of development are, however, not inappropriate. A number of
       exceptions have been put forward by the appellant. I have considered these
       below.
Policy GB7(f)(iv)
7.     One such exception is the provision of appropriate facilities (in connection with the
       existing use of land or a change of use), including buildings, for outdoor sport, and
       outdoor recreation, amongst other things provided the impact of the openness of
       the Green Belt is minimised and there would not be a significant conflict with the
       Green Belt purposes. The Council accept that the proposal would amount to a
       change of use and includes associated facilities for a purpose relating to outdoor
       sport and recreation. As such, this exception is relevant.
8.     Policy 49 of the BLP however requires such development to preserve the
       openness of the Green Belt and not conflict with the purposes of including land in
       it. It is therefore inconsistent with the Framework in this regard. As such, I have
       afforded limited weight to this policy and assessed the proposal principally against
       the most up to date policy and wording of the Framework.
9.     I must firstly consider whether the impact on the openness of the Green Belt would
       be minimised. The proposed courts would be positioned to the eastern end of the
       site and 15 car parking spaces would be located off the access way. There would
       be a small office, bin store, WC/shower and seating area located centrally within
       the site.
10. The courts and car park would result in some loss of openness through the
    physical occupation of the site. Whilst they would be partially screened from Lower
    Gravel Road by the intervening accessway and existing hedging, they would
    remain visible in views from the adjoining commercial/ industrial estate, as well as
    in wider views from the playing fields and local park. However, having regard to
    the relatively open nature of the courts, the modest scale of the proposed car park,
    which would provide the minimum amount of parking necessary, and the site's
    context adjacent to the commercial/ industrial estate and in proximity to the nearby
    residential area, the resulting impact on openness would be somewhat minimised.
11. The courts would be enclosed by approximately 3-4 metre high structures
    comprising mesh and tempered glass. By virtue of their height and scale, the
    enclosures would have some effect on the openness of the Green Belt. However,
    the appellant explains that the enclosures are an integral component of padel
    courts and are appropriately scaled for their intended function. Moreover, the use
    of transparent glazing and mesh would maintain a degree of visual permeability,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012303


       thereby reducing their apparent scale and helping to minimise the effect on
       openness.
12. Each court would be served by four floodlights. These would have some effect on
    the openness of the Green Belt. However, rather than comprising tall freestanding
    columns, the lights would be mounted on and integrated within the proposed glass
    enclosure, forming part of the overall structure. The appellant also explains that
    they would be lightweight in design, with modest downward-facing fittings intended
    to minimise light spillage and visual intrusion within the Green Belt. Furthermore, I
    am mindful that the lights would be viewed in the context of existing security
    lighting associated with the adjacent commercial/industrial estate, together with the
    floodlighting serving the playing field. This would further minimise any impact on
    openness.
13. As noted above, the proposal also includes a WC/shower building, bin store, office
    and a small seating area. These structures would each be single storey in scale
    with low lean-to roofs. Whilst they would introduce additional built form and
    therefore have some effect on the openness of the Green Belt, their modest scale
    and siting between the proposed parking area and courts would limit their visual
    impact. As such, I am satisfied that the impact on openness would therefore be
    minimised.
14. I acknowledge that the proposal would also affect openness through the activity
    associated with the use, including people playing padel and vehicles parked within
    the car park. However, such activity would be experienced in the context of the
    adjoining commercial and industrial estate, which generates activity throughout the
    day, as well as the nearby playing fields and associated clubhouse, which I
    understand are used by a local football club. Moreover, with four courts and 15
    parking spaces proposed, the scale of the use would be relatively modest and
    would not give rise to overly intensive levels of activity. As such, the effect of
    activity associated with the development on the openness of the Green Belt would
    be minimised.
15. Therefore, for the above reasons, I am satisfied that the impact of the proposal on
    the openness of the Green Belt would be minimised. Accordingly, my assessment
    turns to whether the proposal would significantly conflict with any of the purposes
    of including land within the Green Belt. The five purposes of the Green Belt are set
    out in Policy GB2 of the Framework.
16. The Council submits that, when considered in isolation, the appeal site performs
    only a limited role in checking the unrestricted sprawl of large built-up areas. The
    site is bound to the north by an existing park and playground and to the east by
    playing fields. It is also located adjacent to a large commercial/industrial estate.
    Given its close relationship with existing development and the presence of physical
    features that provide a degree of containment, I am satisfied that there would not
    be a significant conflict with this Green Belt purpose.
17. The Council also accept that it does not prevent neighbouring towns merging and
    does not contribute to the setting or special character of a historic town. I agree
    with the Council’s conclusions in this regard.
18. With regard to the Green Belt purpose of safeguarding the countryside from
    encroachment, the appeal site is located in proximity to a commercial/industrial
    estate, playing fields, a park and a playground. Consequently, it is not experienced

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6012303


       wholly within a rural setting. Nevertheless, the site forms part of a wider field,
       which has a more rural character. The proposed padel courts and associated
       infrastructure would therefore result in a degree of encroachment into this area.
       However, within the context of the wider area, including the park, playing fields and
       commercial/industrial estate, this would not result in a significant conflict with the
       purpose of assisting in safeguarding the countryside from encroachment.
19. In terms of assisting urban regeneration by encouraging the recycling of derelict or
    other urban land, the main parties have not indicated that the scheme would
    significantly conflict with this purpose. I see no reason to come to a different
    conclusion.
20. Overall, for the reasons set out above, I am satisfied that the impact on openness
    would be minimised and there would not be a significant conflict with the Green
    Belt purposes. I therefore find that the proposal would fall within the exception set
    out under Policy GB7(f)(iv) of the Framework. Accordingly, the proposal would not
    comprise inappropriate development in the Green Belt. Insofar as they are
    consistent with the Framework, I also find no conflict with Policy 49 of the BLP or
    Policy G2 of the London Plan (2021) (the LP), which collectively seek, amongst
    other things, to protect the Green Belt from inappropriate development. It would
    also comply with Policies 37, 57 and 58 of the BLP and Policy S5 of the LP in this
    regard.
21. As I have concluded that the proposal would not amount to inappropriate
    development in the Green Belt, I do not need to consider other considerations and
    whether these amount to very special circumstances. Nor do I need to consider
    the case under the Grey Belt exception, or any other exception, given I have found
    the proposal would comply with the exception as described above.
Other Matters
22. The Council’s refusal reason references harm to the character of the Green Belt,
    citing noncompliance with Policy 37 of the BLP, which relates to general design.
    The case officer report also sets out that the design of the scheme would be
    unacceptable. With regard to the schemes effect on the character and appearance
    of the area, given the positioning of the courts and intervening vegetation, they
    would be minimally visible from Lower Gravel Road. Whilst they would be visible
    from the adjacent commercial/industrial estate, playing fields and local park, this
    would be in the context of the other built development at the industrial estate and
    the playing fields.
23. Although the flood lights would be visible, particularly when in use, in longer views
    of the site, this would be against the backdrop of existing security lighting at the
    industrial estate and flood lights at the playing fields. As such, the scheme would
    not appear out of keeping with surrounding development. It would comply with
    Policy 37 of the BLP in this regard. Amongst other matters, this policy seeks to
    ensure that development responds to the local character of an area.
24. In considering whether the site can be regarded as grey belt land, the Council
    submits that it is not situated in a sustainable location. However, this was not a
    reason for refusal, and I note that the Council's Highway Officer raises no
    objection to the proposal. Nevertheless, I acknowledge that the site has a Public
    Transport Accessibility Level (PTAL) score of 0, indicating limited access to public


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6012303


       transport, and that concerns have been raised regarding the absence of a footway
       along the access road.
25. Notwithstanding the above, the site is located 800 metres from a bus garage,
    which is served by four regular bus services, and a 30-minute walk from Petts
    Wood Rail Station. Although there are no on-road cycle facilities along Lower
    Gravel Road, from my site visit it was apparent vehicles travel relatively slowly
    around the area. The access lane itself measures approximately 130 metres in
    length. Therefore, anyone who does walk or cycle to the site would only be
    travelling along the access way for a relatively short period. Furthermore, the
    scheme would deliver various benefits associated with delivering a sports facility,
    close to a residential area, such as increased health and wellbeing. I also note the
    generally high levels of support for the scheme, which is somewhat indicative of a
    level of demand for such facilites. As such, whilst I accept that the site is not
    situated in a particularly sustainable location, on balance, and when considered
    alongside the benefits of the scheme, I find the scheme to be acceptable in this
    regard.
26. Concerns have been raised by an interested party regarding increased traffic
    generation, highway safety and the potential for overspill parking on surrounding
    streets. However, the Council’s Highway Officer raises no objection to the proposal
    on highway grounds, including highway safety and parking provision. The
    submitted TRICS-based parking accumulation assessment indicates a peak
    parking demand of 12 vehicles during the early evening period. This would be
    accommodated within the 15 on-site parking spaces proposed. Moreover, even if
    there were to be some overlap between arriving and departing visitors, a degree of
    spare parking capacity would remain available to accommodate such fluctuations.
    As such, based on the evidence before me, I agree with the Council’s conclusion
    on this point.
Conditions
27. I have considered the Council’s suggested conditions against the tests in Policy
    DM6 of the Framework and the Planning Practice Guidance. Where appropriate, I
    have adjusted the wording of the conditions in the interests of precision and
    enforceability.
28. The standard time limit condition is necessary to comply with section 91 of the
    Town and Country Planning Act 1990. A condition requiring the development to be
    carried out in accordance with the approved plans is necessary in the interests of
    certainty.
29. A pre commencement condition to ensure that any contamination present on the
    site is appropriately identified and remediated is necessary in the interests of
    human health. A pre commencement condition requiring the submission of a
    surface water drainage scheme is necessary to ensure a satisfactory means of
    drainage and to reduce the risk of flooding. I have removed the reference to
    demolition, as there are no buildings located on the site.
30. A condition requiring the provision of cycle parking details is necessary in the
    interests of promoting sustainable transport. However, I have amended the
    suggested wording so that the details are required to be submitted prior to the first
    use of the facility, rather than before the commencement of above-ground works.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6012303


       This approach would still ensure that appropriate cycle parking is provided and
       made available before the facility becomes operational.
31. In the interests of visual and residential amenity, a condition to ensure that the
    lighting is installed in accordance with the submitted details is used. This condition
    will also require the submission of a verification report prior to the first use of the
    facility. A condition is also used to ensure that the parking and turning space is
    completed prior to first use of the facility, in the interests of highway safety.
32. In the interests of highway safety and the living conditions of neighbours, a
    condition to ensure that the development is carried out in accordance with the
    submitted construction phase plan is used. I have also imposed a condition limiting
    the hours of operation, in the interests of the living conditions of neighbours.
33. The Council’s Highway Officer suggests a condition regarding refuse.. However,
    the submitted plans clearly show the bin store. Additionally, this is not in the
    Council’s suggested list of conditions. I therefore do not consider such a condition
    to be necessary.
34.     I have also not attached a condition relating to a parking management plan, as a
       degree of spare parking capacity would remain available to accommodate any
       overlap in cars arriving, and therefore such a condition would not be necessary. I
       also note that this condition is not in the Council’s list of suggested conditions.
Conclusion
35. For the reasons given above the appeal is allowed.



S.Burch
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6012303


                                           SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS


     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.

     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans:

              •    Location & Block Plan, Drg No. 001 A (Insofar as it corresponds to
                   Proposed Site Plan, Drg No. 003 D)
              •    Proposed Site Plan, Drg No. 003 D
              •    Proposed Other Plans, Drg No. 003 C

       3) Prior to commencement of development a remediation strategy that includes
          the following components to deal with the risks associated with contamination
          of the site shall each be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local
          Planning Authority:

          a) A preliminary risk assessment which has identified all previous uses,
             potential contaminants associated with those uses, a conceptual model of the
             site indicating sources, pathways and receptors and potentially unacceptable
             risks arising from contamination at the site.
          b) A site investigation scheme, based on (a) to provide information for a detailed
             assessment of the risk to all receptors that may be affected, including those
             off site.
          c) The results of the site investigation and the detailed risk assessment referred
             to in (b) and, based on these, an options appraisal and remediation strategy
             giving full details of the remediation measures required and how they are to
             be undertaken.
          d) A verification plan providing details of the data that will be collected in order
             to demonstrate that the works set out in the remediation strategy in (c) are
             complete and identifying any requirements for longer-term monitoring of
             pollutant linkages, maintenance and arrangements for contingency action.

              Any changes to these components require the express written consent of the
              local planning authority. The scheme shall be implemented as approved.

       4) (a) Prior to commencement of development (excluding any ground clearance)
          a scheme for the provision of surface water drainage shall be submitted and
          approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
          (b) Before the details required to satisfy Part (a) are submitted an assessment
          shall be carried out of the potential for disposing of surface water by means of
          a sustainable drainage system (SuDS) to ground, watercourse or sewer in
          accordance with drainage hierarchy contained within the London Plan Policy
          SI13 and the advice contained within the National SuDS Standards.
          (c) Where a sustainable drainage scheme is to be provided, the submitted
          details shall provide information about the design storm period and intensity,
          the method employed to delay (attenuate) and control the rate of surface water
          discharged from the site as close to greenfield runoff rates (8l/s/ha) as



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          7
Appeal Decision 6012303


            reasonably practicable and the measures taken to prevent pollution of the
            receiving groundwater and/or surface water.
            (d) The drainage scheme approved under Parts a, b and c shall be
            implemented in full prior to first use of the development hereby approved.

       5) The proposed lighting shall be installed in full accordance with the submitted
          ‘Lighting Impact Assessment’ dated 25th February 2026. Prior to the first use
          of the development hereby permitted a verification report shall be submitted to
          the Local Planning Authority for written approval. The Report should include
          photographs and measurements where necessary and shall be produced by a
          suitably qualified person to confirm that lighting has been installed in
          accordance with the approved scheme. No further lighting shall be installed on
          the site without the prior approval in writing by the Local Planning Authority.

       6) Prior to first use of the development hereby approved, details of arrangements
          for bicycle parking (including covered storage facilities where appropriate)
          shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning Authority.
          The bicycle parking shall be provided in accordance with the approved details
          prior to first use of the development and permanently retained thereafter, for
          the lifetime of the development.

       7) Prior to first use of the development hereby approved, the parking spaces and
          turning space shall be completed in accordance with the approved details and
          thereafter shall be kept available for such use and no permitted development
          whether permitted by the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted
          Development) Order (England) 2015 (or any Order amending, revoking and re-
          enacting this Order) or not shall be carried out on the land indicated or in such
          a position as to preclude vehicular access to the land.

       8) The development shall be undertaken in full accordance with Construction
          Phase Plan: Documentation No. HSE/CDM/APP25/05644/FPA prepared by
          Hancock & Sons Builders Ltd dated 28th February 2026.

       9) The use shall only operate between 07:00 -21:30 Monday to Saturdays and
          between 08:00 to 21:30 on Sundays and Bank Holidays.



                                           **END OF SCHEDULE**




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        8
