Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 19 August 2026
by L J O'Brien BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 10 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012063
16 Eastbrook Road, London, SE3 8BT
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the
     Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•    The appeal is made by Nana Barfi-Sarpong against the decision of Royal Borough of Greenwich.
•    The application Ref is 26/1429/PN1.
•    The development proposed is described as “a single-storey extension at the rear no more than 4
     metres in height (measured externally from the natural ground level); and extend beyond the rear
     wall of the original dwellinghouse (measured externally) by over 3 but no more than 6 meters.”

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. The development as applied for appears as I have set out in the banner heading
   above. However, in the interests of clarity, and as it better describes the proposal
   before me, I have taken the description of development from the Council’s Decision
   Notice rather than that found on the original application form. This document
   describes the development as “Prior Approval for the construction of a single storey
   rear extension which will extend beyond the rear wall of the original dwelling by
   4.60m, for which the maximum height will be 3.67m and the height at the eaves will
   be 3.00m.”
3. The National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was updated in August
   2026, during the consideration of this appeal. Insofar as is directly relevant to the
   appeal, there are no substantive changes and no parties have been prejudiced as a
   result.
Background and Main Issue
4.     Under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the Town and Country
       Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 as amended
       (the GPDO), planning permission is granted for the enlargement, improvement or
       other alteration of a dwellinghouse subject to limitations and conditions. Paragraph
       A.4(7) to Part 1 requires the local planning authority to assess the impact of the
       proposed development on the amenity of all adjoining premises, taking into
       account any representations received.
5.     While the Council refused prior approval due to the impact of the proposal on the
       amenity of the occupants of No 18 Eastbrook Road, the conditions and limitations
       of Class A require that I consider the amenity of all adjoining premises as part of


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012063


       this appeal. Accordingly, I consider the main issue in this appeal is the effect of the
       proposed development on the amenity of the occupiers of neighbouring premises.
Reasons
6.     The appeal property is a two-storey, semi-detached dwelling situated on a
       residential street. Prior Approval is sought for the construction of a single storey
       rear extension.
7.     The proposed extension would run alongside the side boundary of the appeal
       property with the neighbouring dwelling at No 18 for around 4.6m at a height of
       approximately 3m at eaves level. The perceived height of the extension would be
       increased by the roof lantern atop the structure which would reach a height of
       around 3.6m.
8.     The proposed extension would project a substantial distance from the rear of the
       property and the height would be significantly greater than the height of the
       existing boundary treatment which comprises a fence with vegetation projecting
       above it. A significant proportion of the extension would be visible above the
       existing fence line. The plans indicate that the elevation of the proposed extension
       which would abut the boundary with No 18 would be of a brick construction and
       would not contain any detailing or features to add visual relief to the massing and
       bulk of the wall. Due to its height and depth, the solid, imposing and featureless
       wall would appear as a visually dominant structure when viewed from the rear
       ground floor windows and rear garden area of the property at No 18.
9.     Whilst I accept that the existing boundary treatment includes vegetation which
       projects above the height of the fence this, along with the fence, creates a
       relatively soft, semi-enclosed, boundary, which serves to define the space, offering
       privacy and containment without the hard visual barrier of a brick wall.
       Furthermore, vegetation such as this is of a more transient, temporary nature and
       differs in size throughout the year. The height of any vegetation can be easily
       controlled so as to ensure that it does not in and of itself have a harmful effect on
       the outlook from neighbouring properties.
10. In addition to the above, the property at No 18 also shares a side boundary with a
    building which appears to be a garage belonging to the property at No 20. The
    building at No 20 runs along the boundary for a considerable distance; creating an
    extensive, hard edge to this side of No 18’s rear garden area. The proposal would
    run along No 18’s other boundary and would, in combination with the existing
    building at No 20, have the effect of fully enclosing this part of the rear garden area
    at No 18. This high degree of enclosure would adversely affect the amenity of the
    occupiers of No 18 from which the proposal would appear as an overbearing and
    oppressive feature.
11. Though I have identified harm in respect of the effect of the proposal on the
    outlook from No 18, the separation distances and specific circumstances on the
    site, such as the orientation of properties and the locations of windows, are such
    that the proposal would not have an adverse effect on the levels of light reaching
    No 18 or any other nearby properties. For the same reasons, the proposal would
    not have a detrimental effect on No 18 in respect of privacy or on other
    neighbouring properties in terms of outlook or privacy. Thus, I consider that the
    proposal would not have an adverse effect on the amenity of the occupiers of other
    neighbouring properties surrounding the appeal site.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012063


12. Nevertheless, as set out above, I have found that the proposal would cause harm
    to the amenity of the occupiers of No 18 Eastbrook Road in respect of outlook. The
    proposed development would, therefore, fail to comply with the conditions and
    limitations as set out within the GPDO.
Other Matters
13. I note that the appellant has made changes to previous schemes with the aim of
    overcoming the harm which was identified. I accept that the depth of the proposed
    extension has been reduced in the current proposal, the reduction, however, is
    minimal. The overall height to the eaves, however, is the same as that previously
    dismissed at appeal1 and the maximum height would be greater. Though the
    appeal scheme is indeed somewhat smaller I have found that it would,
    nevertheless, have an adverse impact on the outlook from the property at No 18
    and create an oppressive sense of enclosure.
14. The appellant has referred to a proposal at 37 Riefield Road2 which they suggest
    confirms that the depth and height of the proposal before me is acceptable.
    However, though similarities may exist, each case must be determined on its own
    merits based on the specific circumstances at each site. These circumstances will
    rarely, if ever, be identical. The Inspector, in determining the appeal at 37 Riefield
    Road found that the conditions at that site, such as the existing boundary
    treatments and the arrangement of the properties, was such that no harm would
    be caused to the amenity of neighbouring occupiers. My findings in respect of the
    appeal before me are different and the existence of other extensions in different
    contexts is not sufficient to justify the grant of planning permission.
15. I acknowledge that the appellant is concerned with the Council’s approach during
    the application process. However, such matters fall beyond the scope of my remit
    as the Inspector determining this appeal and should be explored through the
    Council’s own processes. I also appreciate that it was believed that positive pre-
    application advice had been given. However, such advice is given without
    prejudice and the specific details and design of the proposal is such that the
    Council ultimately reached a different view.
16. The information before me indicates that further applications at the appeal site
    which are said to include a garden annex amongst other things had been
    submitted or approved at the time the evidence was submitted. However, I have
    not been provided with recent, specific, information in this regard. The other
    schemes do not form part of the proposal before me and, as such, on the basis of
    the limited information before me, I have not considered these other schemes or
    their potential implications as part of my consideration of this appeal.
17. I have also noted a number of other issues raised; however, as this proposal is to
    be dismissed for other reasons and the other concerns expressed do not have a
    direct bearing on the main issue, it is not necessary for these to be explored
    further as part of this appeal.




1
    Appeal Ref: 6003027
2
    Appeal Ref 6002322


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6012063


Conclusion
18. For the reasons given above, the proposed development would fail to accord with
    the conditions set out within the GPDO and I therefore conclude that the appeal
    should be dismissed.

L J O'Brien
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
