 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 29 August 2026
 by J D Westbrook BSc(Hons) MSc MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 7 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012427
 22 Long Causeway, Adel, Leeds, LS16 8EQ
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Riaz against the decision of Leeds City Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00980/FU.
 •    The development proposed is the construction of a two-storey side extension, a single-storey rear
      extension, and alterations to the front porch.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the construction of a
   two-storey side extension, a single-storey rear extension, and alterations to the
   front porch at 22 Long Causeway, Adel, Leeds, LS16 8EQ, in accordance with the
   terms of the application, Ref 26/00980/FU, and the plans submitted with it, subject to
   the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: 026-P01, 026-P04, 026-P05,
     3)       The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
              extension hereby permitted shall match those used in the existing building.
Procedural Matter
2. In my opinion, neither of the descriptions of the proposal as submitted by the
   Council and the appellant are wholly accurate and I have made minor amendments
   to more accurately describe the totality of what is proposed.
Main Issue
3. The main issue is the effect of the proposed extensions on the character and
   appearance of the host property and the surrounding area along Long Causeway.
Reason
4. No 22 is a detached house in a large plot, situated on the eastern side of Long
   Causeway. There are four dwellings along this section of the road which, at this
   point, consists of a length of private road separated from the main carriageway by a
   row of mature trees. The appeal property is not readily visible from the main
   carriageway. The existing house is a two-storey property of part-stone and part-
   rendered construction and with a hipped roof. It has a two-storey side extension,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012427


     set well back from the front elevation and a single-storey extension beyond this.
     Both of these extensions have flat roofs. There is a single-storey rear extension
     across part of the rear elevation with a hybrid hipped and flat roof.
5. The proposed development would involve the demolition of the existing side
   extensions and the construction of a new two-storey side extension on the same
   footprint as existing. It would have a hipped roof. The rear extension would
   continue along the whole of the rear elevation and would have a flat roof. The front
   porch would be re-configured but would be of a similar size to that existing.
6. The Council contends that the proposed extensions would, as a result of their
   scale, form, appearance and materials, result in an unacceptable impact on the
   character and setting of the existing property, to the detriment of visual amenity and
   the wider streetscene.
7. Policy P10 of the Council’s Core Strategy (CS) indicates that alterations to existing
   buildings and spaces should provide good design appropriate to its location, scale
   and function. Saved Policy BD6 of the Council’s UDP Review states that all
   alterations and extensions should respect the scale, form, detailing and materials of
   the original building.
8. The Council’s Householder Design Guide (HDG) gives guidance on house
   extensions. In particular, it indicates that two-storey side extensions should
   maintain adequate spaces between buildings; they should not generally exceed
   two-thirds of the width of the main house; roof form and window detail should match
   existing; and should achieve some degree of subservience.
9. In this case, the four houses served by the private road are of very similar design.
   They are, however, not seen in conjunction with one another by virtue of significant
   mature planting along the joint boundaries and because of the large set back of the
   houses within their plots. The appeal property extends to around 1.5 metres from
   the boundary with the adjacent No 24, and this would remain the situation, thereby
   maintaining the existing space. Although the side extension would be two-storey
   across its full width, it would not appear to impinge upon the boundary planting and
   would not result in harm to the juxtaposition of the two houses.
10. The width of the side extension would remain at 6 metres. It has been calculated by
    the appellant that two-thirds of the width of the main house would be approximately
    5.7 metres and this would appear accurate. Given that the extension would be set
    back from the main front elevation of the house by some 5 metres, and that the roof
    would be set down a little from the existing main roof, I consider that, regardless of
    its width, it would, in this case, appear as subservient to the original building and
    would relate well to the existing proportions of the dwelling. In addition, the
    replacement of the existing flat roofs with a hipped roof, and the use of windows of
    relatively similar design to those existing, would ensure that the extension would
    respect the scale, form, and details of the original.
11. The submitted plans show the rear extension as having have a flat roof and using
    buff bricks. The flat roof is not characteristic, but does not form part of the view of
    the house within the street scene. The proposed use of buff bricks would clash with
    the materials used in the rest of the house, but the appellant has indicated that a
    condition requiring the use of materials to match those of the existing house would
    be acceptable, and I agree that such a condition would result in the rear extension
    being generally respectful of the design and materials of the original building.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
 Appeal Decision 6012427


Other Matter
12. The appellant has made reference to a planning permission granted by the Council
    in 2021 relating to a two-storey side and single-storey rear extension at the
    neighbouring No 20 Long Causeway. I note certain similarities between the
    proposals, but I do not have full details of this earlier case and, at the time of my
    visit, it had not been implemented. In any event, I have dealt with the current
    appeal at No 22 on the merits of the proposal itself.
Conclusion
13. In conclusion, I note that the proposed two-storey side extension would be only
    slightly over two-thirds of the width of the main house, but would be set well back
    from the front elevation; would have a hipped roof set down below the level of the
    existing main ridge; and would have a more coherent visual appearance when
    compared with the existing extensions. It would achieve a degree of subservience
    to the main house and would not be a prominent feature in the street scene.
14. The rear extension would not be visible in the street scene, while use of matching
    materials would ensure that it maintained a close visual relationship to the existing
    main house. The proposed porch would be of a similar scale to that already existing
    and would respect the scale and form of the host property.
15. As a result of the above, I find that the proposals would not be harmful to the
    character or appearance of the host property or to the immediate surroundings
    along Long Causeway. They would not, therefore, conflict with Policy P10 of the
    CS, Saved Policy BD6 of the UDP Review, or guidance on extensions in the HDG.
    Accordingly, I allow the appeal subject to the conditions set out above.
Conditions
16. I have attached a condition relating to plans because it is necessary that the
    development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved plans for the
    avoidance of doubt and in the interests of proper planning. I have attached a further
    condition relating to materials in the interests of the visual amenities of the area.



J D Westbrook
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
