Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 21 September 2026
by T Bennett MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6012288
Pavement o/s 144 Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 8PB
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Safia Rana-Jaswal c/o BT Telecommunications PLC against the decision of
     Cambridge City Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/01380/ADV.
•    The advertisement proposed is the installation of 1no. BT Street Hub and removal of associated BT
     payphones.

Appeal B Ref: 6012284
Pavement o/s 144 Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 8PB
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Safia Rana-Jaswal c/o BT Telecommunications PLC against the decision of
     Cambridge City Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/01379/FUL.
•    The development proposed is the installation of 1no. BT Street Hub and removal of associated BT
     payphones.

Decisions
1.     Appeals A and B are dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     There are two appeals on this site. They differ only in that Appeal A relates to
       express advertisement consent to display advertisements on the street hub and
       Appeal B for planning permission. Although the appeals have each been
       considered on their own merits, they have been dealt with in one decision letter
       because they raise similar issues. Notwithstanding the descriptions in my banner,
       which are taken from the application forms, Appeal A seeks advertisement consent
       for the two digital display screens, whereas Appeal B seeks planning permission
       for the street hub itself.
3.     In regard to Appeal A, the Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements)
       (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) state that advertisements should be
       subject to control only in the interests of amenity and public safety. The
       development plan policies referred to by the Council are not determinative, but I
       have taken these into account as a material consideration.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6012288 & 6012284


4.     In relation to Appeal A, the Council has raised no concerns in relation to public
       safety. Based on the evidence provided, and from what I have seen during my
       visit, I have no reason to disagree. Therefore, the proposal under Appeal A has
       been assessed solely in relation to amenity.
5.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was issued on 17
       August 2026. Having reviewed the changes, I am satisfied that it does not affect
       the substantive matters of the appeal and that proceeding without further
       consultation with the main parties would not be prejudicial to their respective
       cases.
Main Issues
6.     For Appeal A, the main issue is the effect of the proposed advertisements on the
       visual amenity of the area.
7.     For Appeal B, the main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the
       character and appearance of the area.
Reasons
8.     The appeal site is located on a wide footpath along the western side of a straight
       stretch of Hills Road, a busy vehicular and cycle thoroughfare into the city. There
       are a mix of uses in the vicinity of the appeal site, predominantly ground floor
       commercial premises with advertisements limited to mainly fascia signage and
       with residential development on the upper floors. Whilst street lights, railings and
       street cabinets are visible, there is an overall limited presence of bulky street
       furniture in the pavement at this location which contributes positively to a pleasant
       open streetscape.
9.     Although the street hub would be slim and occupy a modest footprint, it would be
       tall, of a solid dark design and with two large digital display screens on either side.
       Given its size and position, set perpendicular to the road and close to the edge of
       the pavement in an otherwise largely open streetscape, the street hub with its
       illuminated digital advertisements would appear as a stark, highly prominent and
       discordant addition to the street scene. This would detract from and result in harm
       to the character and appearance and visual amenity of the area.
10. Although the advertisements could be conditioned to control the levels of
    luminance, frequency of image change, and for the use of only static images, this
    would not sufficiently mitigate the harm set out above as a result of the
    prominence of the advertisement displays.
11. In conclusion, with regard to Appeal A, the proposal would harm the visual amenity
    of the area. With regard to Appeal B, the proposal would harm the character and
    appearance of the area. Consequently, the proposal would conflict with policies 55
    and 65 of the Cambridge Local Plan (2018) (LP). Together these seek to ensure
    proposals respond positively to their context and do not have an adverse impact
    on the character of the area and its visual amenity and are in keeping with their
    setting.
12. Policy 64 of the LP has been cited on the decision notices in Appeal A and B.
    However, as this policy relates to shop fronts it has not been determinative in the
    appeal. Policies 57 and 59 of the LP have been cited on the decision notice in


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6012288 & 6012284


       relation to Appeal B. As these respectively relate to new buildings and landscape
       proposals, I have not found them to be determinative in this particular case.
Other Matters
13. The appellant states that the proposed scheme would involve the removal of an
    outdated kiosk at St Margarets Square, adjacent to Cherry Hinton Road. However,
    the removal of this kiosk would not directly impact upon the character and
    appearance and visual amenity of the immediate vicinity of the appeal site on Hills
    Road. This does not therefore mitigate against the harm that would be caused in
    this location. As such, I afford minimal weight to the proposed removal of the kiosk.
    In any event, I have no substantive evidence before me demonstrating how its
    removal would be secured as part of the appeal scheme.
14. In support of the street hub, the appellant has referred to similar installations found
    in other urban locations. However, I have not been provided the details of those
    locations and therefore cannot ascertain how the siting of those compares to the
    appeal location. This therefore carries very limited weight.
Planning Balance
15. The proposed development would conflict with Policies 55 and 65 of the LP. I
    afford significant weight to the conflict identified with these policies and I find that
    the proposal would conflict with the development plan as a whole.
16. Policy S4 of the Framework sets out that development proposals within
    settlements should be approved, unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework. Policy S4 sets out a non-
    exhaustive list of situations when the benefits of approving development are likely
    to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects. This includes a failure to comply
    with one of the national decision-making policies which state that development
    proposals should be refused in specific circumstances.
17. The proposal would support improved digital connectivity by providing a range of
    services, including free ultrafast Wi-Fi and calls, 5G capability, and USB charging.
    As such, the facility would support the Government’s aim of improving digital
    infrastructure. These benefits are afforded substantial weight in line with Policy
    CO1 of the Framework which recognises the benefits of maintaining and improving
    network coverage, capacity, reliability and resilience.
18. The proposal would also provide other benefits, including emergency
    communication facilities, public information displays and the ability to monitor air,
    light and sound. However, given the small scale of the development any benefits in
    this regard would be limited and I afford these limited weight.
19. Furthermore, Policy CO1 of the Framework states that proposals for
    telecommunications infrastructure should be sited and designed to minimise its
    visual impact, especially in situations where a new structure is proposed. I have
    found harm would arise in respect of the character and appearance of the area
    and visual amenity. Therefore, the street hub would not be sited so as to minimise
    the visual impact of the new structure.
20. The proposal would also conflict with Policy DP3 of the Framework by failing to
    respond, integrate with or enhance the surroundings. In particular, this requires

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6012288 & 6012284


       that substantial weight should be given to compliance with relevant development
       plan policies when assessing the design quality of proposals.
21. Although no harm has been identified to highway safety or to the living conditions
    of nearby occupiers with regard to lighting and noise, an absence of harm is of
    neutral weight, weighing neither for nor against the proposal.
22. Overall, having regard to Policy S4 of the Framework, the benefits of the proposal
    would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects when assessed against
    the national decision-making policies of the Framework.
Conclusion
23. Appeal A: For the reasons given, I conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.
24. Appeal B: The proposed development would conflict with the development plan as
    a whole and there are no material considerations which indicate that the decision
    should be made other than in accordance with it. Therefore, I conclude that the
    appeal should be dismissed.

T Bennett
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
