 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 17 August 2026
 by K Winnard LL.B Hons Solicitor
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 28 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012983
 44 Wood Lane, Streetly, Walsall B74 3LR
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr Davinder Singh Atwal against the decision of Walsall Metropolitan
     Borough Council.
 •   The application Ref is 26/0305.
 •   The development proposed is ground floor front extension, single storey rear extension, garage
     conversion and loft conversion with front and rear dormers.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. There have been changes to the National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) since the determination of the planning application. Both parties have
   been asked for their comments on the implications, if any, for this appeal. I have
   had regard to the position of both parties in making my decision and in so doing I
   am satisfied that no party has been prejudiced by my consideration of this issue.
3. I have adopted the Council’s description of the development in the banner heading
   above as this is more succinct. The proposal includes a number of different
   elements, as set out in the development description in the banner heading above.
   However, it is the loft conversion with front and rear dormers to which the Council’s
   reasons for refusal are directed. Based on the Council’s delegated report and
   decision notice the Council do not find the ground floor single storey rear extension,
   nor the garage conversion to be unacceptable. I accordingly shall direct my
   assessment to the loft conversion with front and rear dormers.
Main Issue
4. The main issue in the appeal is the effect of the development on the character and
   appearance of the host building and the area.
Reasons
5. The appeal property is a detached bungalow sited within a residential street
   characterised by detached dwellings. The layout of the street is spacious and open
   with the dwellings on a broadly similar building line set back from the road behind
   front gardens. There is a mixture of both two storey and single storey properties
   with considerable variation in design and style within the street. Whilst their
   appearance varies considerably, on that side of the street where the single storey

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012983


     development is sited, the separation distances and spaces at first floor level are
     generally relatively consistent and create a strong visual gap between dwellings.
     This appearance is maintained by the presence of single storey garages to the side
     of some of the properties, as is the case with the appeal property, with its
     neighbouring property No 42 Wood Lane (No 42). This visual gap is particularly
     significant within the streetscene given that there is already a reduced separation
     distance between the appeal property and its other neighbouring property, No 46
     Wood Lane (no 46).
6. As part of the proposed loft conversion, the proposal would see the introduction of
   large dormers with contemporary windows at first floor level and the loss of the
   gable at the front. Whilst the appearance of the dwelling would thus be changed as
   there is no uniformity of design amongst dwellings in the area, I do not find this
   unacceptable in principle. Nevertheless, the dormers by their width and height,
   including the provision of large expanses of glazing would be overly dominant
   within the front elevation to the detriment of the character and appearance of the
   host dwelling and the area.
7. I accept that there are a variety of fenestration features, including dormer windows,
   across the front elevations of the bungalows in the street but in the main these are
   adequately proportioned and subservient to the overall design of the dwellings. In
   this instance the proposed windows would not align in size and positioning with the
   windows and door at ground floor level creating an unsatisfactory unbalanced
   visual appearance to the host dwelling, in addition to the adverse impact to which I
   have referred above.
8. The Council’s Design Guidance ‘Designing Walsall’ Supplementary Planning
   document for Urban Design (SPD) provides that aspect distances between
   dwellings should reflect the existing character of the area and avoid the creation of
   terracing. The side extension would fill the gap at first floor level that currently
   separates the appeal property and No 42 and would remove the visual definition
   between the two dwellings. This terracing effect would be further exacerbated given
   the close proximity of the appeal property to No 46, resulting in a negative impact
   on the streetscene.
9. My attention has been drawn to an appeal in relation to No 42 where an Inspector
   concluded that the spaces above the garages at first floor level provide some
   openness which contributes positively to the character of this part of the
   streetscene. Such a decision does not limit the scope of my judgement in this
   case. However, the visual gap is an important characteristic of this part of the street
   scene, and it was an important factor for the inspector who dismissed the appeal.
   Having visited the area, I agree that the openness found in this location is
   significant within the street scene and whilst I have considered the present appeal
   on the merits of the case, I must give the previous Inspector’s findings significant
   weight.
10. In reaching my decision I have had regard to the policies within the Framework
    which support the proposal, including Policy L2 which indicates that substantial
    weight should be given to the benefits of a development proposal which creates
    additional floorspace. I acknowledge that the appellant has sought to achieve a
    collaborative approach with the Council and has sought to achieve a design of
    contemporary appearance whilst reflecting the variation in appearance, scale and
    style amongst the single storey development within Wood Lane.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
 Appeal Decision 6012983


11. Whilst the Framework expressly does not preclude innovation or change especially
    where an increased scale of development is justified, it is also clear that substantial
    weight should be given to compliance with relevant development plan policies when
    assessing design quality. However, notwithstanding that the proposal would result
    in enlarged accommodation, Policy DP3(1) of the Framework also requires that
    proposals should respond to their context so that they integrate with and enhance
    their surroundings. Policy DP3(3) also requires that development should be refused
    if without clear justification they conflict with paragraph 1. I have been presented
    with no clear justification in this case.
12. Therefore, I conclude that overall the proposal would harm the character and
    appearance of the host dwelling and the area. As such it would be contrary to
    Policies GP2 and ENV32 of the Walsall Unitary Development Plan (UDP) (2005),
    and Policies CPS4 and ENV3 of the Black Country Core Strategy. Together these
    policies require a high quality of design in all development. It would also be contrary
    to design guidelines within the SPD as set out above, and in conflict with the
    Framework which seeks to ensure the importance of achieving well designed
    development.
13. Policy S4 of the Framework states that development proposals within settlements
    should be approved unless adverse effects substantially outweigh the benefits. At
    S4(2)(c) one of the circumstances in which the benefits of approving the
    development are likely to be substantially outweighed by adverse effects would be
    failure to comply with one of the national decision-making policies which state that
    development proposals should be refused in specific circumstances. I have found
    that to be the case here with respect to Policy DP3. Hence, any limited economic
    benefits would be outweighed by the adverse effect to the character and
    appearance of the host property and the area, and it would not amount to
    substainable development or the effective use of land under the terms of the
    Framework.
14. I therefore dismiss the appeal.


K Winnard
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
