 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 11 August 2026
 by P D Sedgwick BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 25 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012387
 1 Lanscombe Walk, Lambeth, London SW8 2TW.
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr/Ms Daniel and Sarah Cottee and Charman against the decision of the
     Council of the London Borough of Lambeth.
 •   The application Ref is 26/00066/FUL.
 •   The development proposed is Erection of an additional storey to create a first floor extension with
     alterations to existing front and rear fenestration.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2. I have taken the description of the development in the banner heading above from
   the Council’s decision notice as this gives a more concise description of the
   development proposed.
3. Subsequent to the refusal of permission for the proposed development the
   Government published its revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) in August 2026. The wording of the relevant paragraphs of the new
   Framework are similar to that of the 2024 version. Therefore, I am satisfied that
   they do not affect the substantive matters of the appeal and that considering the
   development against the revised Framework without seeking further comments
   from the parties on it would not be prejudicial to their respective cases.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are:
     • whether the proposed development would preserve or enhance the character or
       appearance of the Lansdowne Gardens Conservation Area; and
     • the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of neighbouring
        occupiers, with particular regard to outlook and privacy.
Reasons
Character and appearance
5. The appeal site is the end property in a terrace of 5, single storey, houses within
   the Lansdowne Gardens Conservation Area (CA). They are located to the rear of

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision: 6012387


     houses on Thorne Road, Hartington Road and Lansdowne Gardens on the
     redeveloped site of a former printworks.
6. The special interest of the CA around the appeal site derives from the design of the
   terraced housing on Lansdowne Gardens and Hartington Road. They comprise a
   mix of 3 storey and 2 storey houses constructed of yellow stock brick with stucco
   moulded cornices and window and door surrounds and vertical emphasis wooden
   sash windows. The houses sit behind shallow front gardens with black painted
   decorative railings.
7. The appeal property and adjoining houses in the terrace have pitched roofs and
   recessed front doors with projecting pitched roof canopies above. They share a
   rear boundary wall with properties on Landsdowne Gardens. To their front a
   footway separates them from the rear garden walls on Hartington Road. To the
   north of the terrace a gated private parking area, accessed from Landsdowne
   Gardens, links to a footway that leads to Hartington Road along the rear of houses
   on Thorne Road. The Lansdowne Gardens Conservation Area Statement (2009)
   (CAS) describes the terrace as unobtrusive and the area around it as underused
   and unwelcome with no passive overlooking and suitable for enhancement.
8. The proposed development would extend the property up to add a floor. The roof
   would be significantly higher than the other houses within the terrace and with a
   square, rather than pitched, roof profile. The front porch would be removed and the
   windows replaced. Even though the proposed development would not be visible
   from within most of the CA, from the footway approaches and the rear of properties
   that back on to it, it would appear obtrusive and out of keeping with the remainder
   of the terrace in terms of its height, design and the increased mass of the
   replacement roof.
9. Given the small scale of the proposed development within the context of the CA as
   a whole, it would not harm its character. There would, however, be harm in terms of
   its appearance. The harm would be localised and less than substantial but would
   nevertheless be contrary to Policies Q2, Q5, Q11 and Q22 of the Lambeth Local
   Plan (2021) (LP) which seek to prevent development that dominates the host
   building and harms the integrity of a group of buildings.
10. Any harm to a designated heritage asset is a matter of considerable weight
    requiring justification and, in accordance with the Framework, I must weigh the
    harm against the public benefits of the proposal. There would be modest benefits
    arising from improved living accommodation and employment during construction.
    The potential for natural surveillance would be hampered by the existing tree and
    not significantly different from that which already exists from the rear of houses on
    Thorne Road. There is no indication on the plans submitted with the application that
    solar panels, referred to in the appellant’s statement of case, would be installed. As
    such, the limited weight I accord such benefits would not outweigh the harm to the
    appearance of the CA.
Living conditions
11. The proposed first floor rear windows would have a line of view above the existing
    rear shared boundary wall with Nos 2 and 4 Lansdowne Road. However, both rear
    gardens have substantial mature trees that would mostly screen views across from
    the proposed development into their rear gardens, particularly in the Spring and
    Summer when the garden space is most likely to be in use. Although my visit was

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
 Appeal Decision: 6012387


     during the summer when the trees were in full leaf, the photographs in the Council
     Officer’s delegated report indicate significant levels of foliage even when the larger
     trees were not in full bloom. Furthermore, there will already be mutual overlooking
     between Nos 2 and 4 from their rear first and second floor windows. I am therefore
     satisfied that the proposed development would not significantly reduce the privacy
     of their occupants.
12. The proposed first floor bedroom window at the front of the appeal property would
    be within a relatively short distance of the first-floor windows on a rear outrigger
    that projects back from Nos 85 and 87 Hartington Road. The window on No 87 is
    obscured glazed and would not be unduly affected. The window on No 85 would be
    partially screened by a tree in the rear corner of the garden but not sufficiently to
    fully prevent mutual overlooking between it and the proposed development which
    would lead to an unacceptable loss of privacy to its occupants. The additional
    height and mass of the proposed development would result in a more obtrusive
    building viewed from the rear garden and windows of both houses. However, the
    footpath at the front of the appeal property provides sufficient gap that the proposal
    would not create a sense of enclosure or be sufficiently overbearing as to
    significantly harm the outlook from the rear of both properties.
13. I conclude on this main issue that the proposed development would cause an
    unacceptable loss of privacy to occupiers of 85 Hartington Road and thus conflict
    with Policy Q2 of the LP which requires acceptable standards of privacy.
Other Matters
14. I have considered all other matters raised in the substantial number of supporting
    statements, including the need for family homes in the area and the proposed
    improvements to the living accommodation and fabric of the building. However,
    they do not outweigh the harm that I have identified.
Conclusion
15. For the reasons given above, and having regard to all matters raised, I conclude
    that the appeal should be dismissed.

P D Sedgwick
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
