Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 2 September 2026
by J Buxton BA(Hons) DipArch ARB RIBA
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 15 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012239
111-117 Sunbridge Road, Bradford BD1 2NJ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Rajan Gupta of Medipharm Bradford Ltd against the decision of City of
    Bradford Metropolitan District Council.
•   The application reference is 25/01696/FUL.
•   The development proposed is described as the conversion of existing ground floor shop unit to 2 no.
    apartments, including provision of new shopfront.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for conversion of existing
   ground floor shop unit to two apartments, including provision of new shopfront at
   111 Sunbridge Road, Bradford BD1 2NJ in accordance with the terms of the
   application, reference 25/01696/FUL, and the plans submitted with it, subject to the
   following condition:
     1) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
        drawing no’s:
           •       B/25/1707/01 Site Layout Plan
           •       B/25/1707/03 Existing and Proposed Plans and Elevations.
     2) Prior to completion of works and before occupation, details of all externally
        visible works and materials, including timber features and privacy glazing
        details, shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
        Authority. Once approved, the details shall accord with and be retained in
        accordance with the approved details.
Preliminary Matters
2. During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
   (the Framework) was published on the 17 August 2026. The main parties were
   provided with an opportunity to comment. I have had regard to the 2026 version of
   the Framework in reaching my decision. References hereafter are to the August
   2026 version.
3. At the time of my site visit, I saw that development had commenced. I have
   considered the appeal on the basis of the information shown on the plans and not
   what has been constructed on site. The appeal before me is not retrospective, and
   the commencement of works does not influence my assessment. I have determined
   the appeal on its planning merits, based on the evidence provided.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012239


Main Issue
4. The main issue is whether the proposal would provide acceptable living conditions
   for future occupiers, with particular regard to outlook, and privacy.
Reasons
5. The appeal site comprises a former ground-floor shop unit within a substantial early
   twentieth-century building occupying a prominent corner position on Sunbridge
   Road within Bradford City Centre. The building is arranged over several storeys,
   with residential accommodation above the appeal unit, and displays a range of
   traditional architectural features including historic detailing and a traditional
   shopfront. Together with neighbouring buildings, it contributes positively to the
   established character and appearance of the street scene and forms a noticeable
   feature within the surrounding historic townscape.
6. The site lies within the City Centre Conservation Area (CCCA) and immediately
   adjacent to the Goitside Conservation Area (GCA). The appeal building makes a
   positive contribution to the significance, character and appearance of the CCCA
   and is therefore a heritage asset of local townscape importance.
7. The proposal seeks the conversion of the existing ground-floor shop unit to two
   self-contained apartments. In doing so, it would bring a long-vacant unit back into
   productive use, make effective use of an existing building in a highly sustainable
   city-centre location and provide two additional dwellings.
8. At the time of my site visit, renovation works were underway and the replacement
   glazing, including the proposed window manifestations, had already been installed.
   Whilst I have determined the appeal on the basis of the submitted plans, the works
   enabled me to assess the appearance of the proposed frontage. The proposal
   includes replacement glazing to the front and side elevations together with the
   removal of the existing shop entrance doors, all of which were evident on site.
9. It was apparent on my site visit that the appeal property occupies a prominent
   position within Bradford City Centre and that its outlook is directed towards the
   public street scene rather than enclosed or blank built form. The outlook from the
   principal windows therefore comprises views of the street, passing activity and
   surrounding townscape. Whilst urban in character, such views nevertheless provide
   a meaningful outlook and contribute to the living conditions of future occupiers.
10. The principal windows serving the proposed flats would have a close relationship
    with the adjacent public realm. However, the proposed manifestations to the lower
    sections of the glazing would prevent direct overlooking between pedestrians using
    the adjoining footway and steps and the internal living accommodation. The
    proposed flats would meet nationally described space standards and benefit from
    extensive glazed frontages. As a result, the accommodation would receive good
    levels of natural daylight and occupants would retain outward views towards
    Sunbridge Road and the surrounding townscape.
11. I acknowledge the Council's concerns regarding privacy and the use of
    manifestations to sections of the glazing. However, the proposal would not rely
    solely on opaque treatment of the windows and occupiers would continue to benefit
    from outward views above the level of the proposed screening. Furthermore, the
    appeal property occupies a prominent position at the base of a sloping street. As a


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012239


     result, views from the upper portions of the windows would extend across
     Sunbridge Road, surrounding buildings and activity within the public realm. Having
     observed the installed glazing and manifestations during my site visit, I am satisfied
     that they strike an appropriate balance between securing privacy for future
     occupiers and maintaining a meaningful outlook.
12. Moreover, the site is situated within a busy city-centre environment where the
    relationship between residential accommodation and the public realm is inevitably
    closer than is generally the case in suburban residential areas. Future occupiers
    could reasonably expect a more active street environment than would normally
    apply in less densely developed locations. In that context, and having regard to the
    privacy afforded by the proposed manifestations, I do not find the relationship
    between the proposed accommodation and the adjoining public realm to be
    unusual or unacceptable. Therefore, having regard to the site's context, the internal
    size of the proposed flats, the levels of natural daylight available and the outlook
    obtained through the extensive glazing, I find that future occupiers would benefit
    from a meaningful outlook and an acceptable standard of residential
    accommodation.
13. In reaching my decision, I have had regard to the appeal site’s location within the
    CCCA and to the statutory duty under Section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed
    Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990, which requires special attention to be
    paid to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character and appearance of
    conservation areas. The building makes a positive contribution to the character and
    appearance of the CCCA and retains a number of historic features, including its
    traditional shopfront and historic detailing. Although alterations have occurred in the
    past, including changes to upper floor windows and the loss of original bay
    shopfronts to the side elevation, the building retains much of its historic character
    and architectural interest.
14. Whilst concerns were raised regarding the accuracy of the submitted drawings, I
    note the Conservation Officer's support for replacement of the deteriorated
    shopfront in principle. Having regard to my observations on site, including the
    replacement glazing and manifestations that had already been installed, I am
    satisfied that their retention would preserve the character and appearance of the
    building and the surrounding conservation area. The proposal is therefore
    acceptable in heritage terms.
15. Consequently, I find that the proposal would preserve the character and
    appearance of the CCCA and the adjacent GCA.
16. I have also considered the proximity of the Grade II listed Sunwin House. Given the
    limited nature of the proposals, which are largely internal and involve replacement
    of the existing shopfront, I find that the significance of the listed building would be
    preserved.
17. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the proposal would provide
    acceptable living conditions for future occupiers with particular regard to outlook
    and privacy and would accord with the relevant provision of Policies DS5 and HO9
    of the Core Strategy Development Plan Document 2017 and with the Framework.
    These amongst other things, seek to achieve well-designed development with the
    provision of a high standard of amenity for future users.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6012239


Conditions
18. In the interests of certainty, a condition specifying the approved plans is required. In
    addition, the specification of external facing materials is required to preserve the
    special interest of heritage assets. As the development has commenced, a
    condition specifying time limits for implementation would not be necessary.
Conclusion
19. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.

J Buxton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
