Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 September 2026
by R Gee BA (Hons) Dip TP PGCert UD MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012642
75-79 New Road, Peterborough PE1 1TZ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by M Khan against the decision of Peterborough City Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01341/FUL.
•    The development proposed is Demolition of 3 detached dwellings and the erection of 23 apartments.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     On 17 August 2026 a new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework)
       was published. As this could affect the issues and matters in this case, the Council
       and the appellant were invited to make further comments. My decision reflects the
       latest version of the Framework, and the responses received on it.
Main Issues
3.     The main issues are:

       i)       the effect of the proposal on character and appearance;

       ii)      the effect of the proposal on living conditions of existing occupiers with
                particular regard to privacy and outlook;

       iii)     the effect of the proposal on the living conditions of future occupiers by
                reason of noise and disturbance;

       iv)      the effect of the proposal on highway safety, with particular regard to the
                operation of waste service vehicles and deliveries;

       v)       the effect of the development on protected species;

       vi)      whether the proposal would provide Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG); and
       vii)     whether the proposed development would be provided with adequate
                means of drainage.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012642


Reasons
Character and appearance
4.     The site lies within a mixed-use area, with the City College to the north, a car
       dealership to the east, St Mary's Church and office development to the south, and
       bungalows and detached dwellings to the west.
5.     Whilst the Appellant argues that the prevailing character of the area is defined by
       large commercial and institutional buildings the appeal site occupies a transitional
       position between the city centre and surrounding residential roads. As such, the
       character of the area is influenced not only by larger-scale buildings but also by
       the smaller-scale residential development nearby. Consequently, the existing scale
       and form of nearby residential development remain important considerations.
6.     The proposed development would comprise of an L-shaped 2.5 storey apartment
       block with communal landscaped areas, cycle and bin storage. The proposed
       building would sit adjacent to a modest single-storey dwelling (No 73 New Road).
       Whilst it would be set back from the shared boundary, it would nevertheless be
       readily perceived in the context of the neighbouring residential properties
       extending towards the junction with Brook Street. The substantial bulk, height,
       massing and form of the proposed flats would appear at odds with these smaller-
       scale neighbouring dwellings and would be unduly prominent within the street
       scene, to the detriment of the character and appearance of this part of the area.
7.     I recognise that the Framework supports the efficient use of land and increased
       densities in sustainable locations. However, in this case the resulting density
       would fail to respond appropriately to the scale and character of the buildings that
       form the site's immediate context on the southern side of New Road. As a result,
       the proposed development would sit uncomfortably alongside existing built form.
8.     The Council also raises concerns regarding the impact of refuse and cycle storage
       on the street scene. Although some refuse storage is shown to the front of the site,
       it is understood that 4 x 1100-litre refuse bins, 4 x 1100-litre recycling bins and a
       140-litre food waste bin would be required to serve the proposed 23 dwellings. The
       storage area shown on the submitted plans would not be sufficient to
       accommodate this level of provision. Whilst I do not doubt that adequate space
       could be found within the site, the siting, design and screening of any enlarged
       storage area would require careful consideration given the site's prominent
       location. Such provision could necessitate a significant alteration to the proposed
       layout and, on the evidence before me, I cannot be satisfied that the necessary
       refuse and cycle storage could be accommodated without causing harm to the
       character and appearance of the site and surrounding street scene.
9.     The proposed building would provide an active frontage to New Road, adding
       interest to the street scene. The external materials of the proposed development
       could be conditioned; however, this would not sufficiently mitigate the harm I have
       identified in respect of the character and appearance of the area.
10. The Appellant contends that neighbouring sites may be re-developed in the future.
    Be that as it may, no evidence has been provided to indicate that such
    redevelopment is likely to occur within a foreseeable timeframe. In any event, I
    must determine the appeal on the basis of the proposal before me, and there are


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012642


       no plans for the comprehensive redevelopment of the wider area. As such, this
       consideration carries limited weight.
11. For the above reasons, I conclude the proposal would result in significant harm to
    the character and appearance of the surrounding area. It would be contrary to
    Policies LP6, LP16 and LP47 of the Peterborough Local Plan (LP) which,
    amongst other things, emphasise the importance of context-sensitive design,
    creating well-integrated places that make effective and efficient use of land and
    buildings and use appropriate high-quality materials.
Living conditions – existing occupiers
12. Amongst other things, LP17 of the LP states that permission will not be granted for
    development which would result in an unacceptable loss of privacy, loss of light to
    and overshadowing to existing occupiers.
13. Although I have not been directed to any adopted separation distance standards,
    the proposed building would be of significant height and depth and would contain
    numerous first and second floor windows facing towards the relatively modest rear
    garden of No. 73. Consequently, notwithstanding their position approximately 18
    metres from the shared boundary, the proposal would give rise to a materially
    harmful level of loss of privacy and would have an overbearing impact. A condition
    requiring obscure glazing would not be reasonable as many of these windows
    serve habitable rooms and rely on a direct outlook to provide acceptable living
    conditions for the future occupiers.
14. Whilst boundary vegetation may afford some seasonal screening it cannot be
    relied upon as a permanent means of mitigation. In any case, the adverse effects
    would stem from the proposal's height, scale and form, including the position of
    windows that would ensue irrespective of any soft landscaping.
15. No. 73 is a modest single storey dwelling, and its northern boundary already
    adjoins the substantial City College building. By reason of its height and its
    projection towards the site’s northern boundary the proposed building would
    introduce a readily perceptible built form that would create an undue sense of
    enclosure. Consequently, it would appear overbearing when experienced from the
    rear garden of No. 73, resulting in material harm to the occupiers' living conditions
    and enjoyment of the amenity space.
16. The proposed building would be approximately 8m in height to the eaves and
    10.45m to the ridge and would be located around 3m from the shared boundary
    with No. 73. Nevertheless, it would not extend beyond the rear elevation of the
    existing dwelling and there are no habitable room windows in its side elevation. In
    these circumstances, I am satisfied that the frontage building would not give rise to
    an unacceptable sense of enclosure or otherwise appear overbearing when
    viewed from No. 73.
17. Concluding on this issue, I find that the proposal would have a materially harmful
    impact upon the living conditions of existing occupiers which draws the proposal
    into conflict with Policy LP17 of the LP insofar as it seeks to safeguard the amenity
    of existing occupiers.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6012642


Living conditions – proposed occupiers
18. Policy LP17 of the LP states that proposals for new residential development
    should be designed and located to ensure that they provide for the needs of the
    future residents.
19. To the north of the appeal site lies the City College. Several air-handling units are
    positioned along the southern elevation of this building which is proximate to the
    shared boundary. Habitable room windows for the proposed flats would be
    positioned on the elevations closest to the site’s shared boundary. Without a noise
    assessment, there is insufficient evidence to demonstrate that noise from these
    units would not adversely affect future occupiers. Consequently, I cannot be
    satisfied that the proposal would provide acceptable living conditions.
20. The Council also raises concerns regarding the proposed internal layouts citing
    poor stacking where the living conditions of future occupiers could be
    compromised by reason of noise transfer.
21. Noise mitigation within new residential development is primarily a matter
    addressed through the Building Regulations. DM7 of the Framework makes clear
    that planning should not duplicate controls exercised through separate regulatory
    regimes and that decision-makers should assume those regimes will operate
    effectively unless there is clear evidence to the contrary. Furthermore, PM13 of the
    Framework advises that quantitative standards should not cover matters already
    addressed by the Building Regulations or relate solely to the internal layout of
    buildings. As such, I am satisfied that internal noise mitigation can be secured
    through the building control process and therefore find no harmful effect on the
    living conditions of future occupiers in this regard.
22. For the reasons stated, I cannot be satisfied that the proposal would provide for
    satisfactory living conditions for future occupiers with particular regard to noise and
    disturbance. This draws the proposal into conflict with Policy LP17 insofar as it
    seeks to ensure acceptable living conditions for future occupiers.
Highway safety
23. The appeal site is proximate to a main arterial route into the city, served by a
    roundabout1. The existing dwellings currently benefit from off-street parking
    provision. However, no parking would be provided as part of the proposed re-
    development to 23 residential units, resulting in a net loss of off-street parking
    spaces.
24. Whilst the Local Plan at Policies LP13 and LP47 includes a presumption against
    additional parking spaces within the city centre, and that new car parking will only
    be supported in very exceptional circumstances, in order to encourage the use of
    sustainable modes of transport, the practical implications of the proposal require
    careful consideration. The Council contends that to comply with policies LP13 and
    LP16 of the LP an on-site loading bay and accessible parking bay should be
    provided within the site boundaries.
25. Parking on New Road is restricted by double yellow lines, which limits
    opportunities for on-street parking and servicing. Whilst the existing dwellings are
    served from the highway, the scale of development proposed is materially greater.
1
    Boongate roundabout


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6012642


         In the absence of on-site parking or servicing facilities, delivery, maintenance and
         refuse collection vehicles would be required to stop on the public highway. The
         quantum of development proposed would generate a substantially higher volume
         of waste and recycling, resulting in refuse collection vehicles spending longer
         periods at the development than would be the case for the existing dwellings.
         Furthermore, given the substantially greater scale of development proposed, it is
         highly likely that vehicles attending the site for deliveries, maintenance and other
         servicing activities would do so more frequently than is currently the case. This
         would have the potential to impede the free flow of traffic on this busy section of
         highway and could give rise to hazards for highway users. On the evidence before
         me, I am not satisfied that the proposal would avoid harm to highway safety or the
         efficient operation of the highway network.
26. My attention has been drawn to nearby residential streets to the north and east
    including Eastfield Road, Crawthorne Road, Monument Street and Dickens Street.
    The Appellant states that these are terraced streets with no off-street space for
    refuse vehicle manoeuvring and refuse vehicles routinely park on the public
    highway to collect and empty wheeled bins. Whilst I have no reason to dispute this
    their location differs and the examples cited do not persuade me that the
    arrangements proposed would be acceptable.
27. My attention has been drawn to a nearby approved development. However, the
    information before me indicates that it relates to the reserved matters for erection
    of up to 112 apartments together with ground-floor Class E(a) retail and Class E(b)
    restaurant units2. Whilst there may be some broad similarities in terms of servicing
    and site operation, I do not have the full details of that proposal, including the
    evidence, site-specific circumstances and planning considerations that informed
    the decision. However, the Council states that refuse facilities were located within
    the building and that it would be serviced from an unclassified road which was
    lightly trafficked. On this basis the site context is not comparable to the appeal
    scheme before me. Consequently, I afford it limited weight in my assessment of
    this appeal which must be determined on its own merits.
28. Concluding on this main issue, I therefore cannot be satisfied that the proposal
    would not have an unacceptable impact upon highway safety. This draws the
    proposal into conflict with Policies LP13, LP16 and LP47 of the LP.
Protected species
29. The Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 imposes a duty to
    consider the relevant Directives and whether there is a reasonable likelihood of
    European Protected Species being present and affected. Bats are a European
    Protected Species.
30. The Preliminary Ecological Appraisal (PEA) has identified that all three existing
    buildings on site have a low roosting potential for roosting bats. However, it
    advises that further surveys are required to fully ascertain the presence of bats
    prior to development. This would also inform any requirement for bat mitigation or
    compensation.
31. Circular 06/20051 (the Circular) confirms that it is essential that the presence or
    otherwise of protected species, and the extent that they may be affected by the

2
    office ref. 23/01722/REM - The Solstice, Northminster, Peterborough, PE1 1YN


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                 5
Appeal Decision 6012642


       proposed development, is established before the planning permission is granted.
       As the additional surveys that have been recommended are not before me, I am
       unable to conclude that the proposal would not be likely to result in harm to bats.
32. The Circular goes on to state that the surveys should be carried out before
    planning permission is granted. Hence, it is not a matter that could be dealt with
    through the imposition of a planning condition if I was minded to allow the appeal.
    Nor would it be possible to put any necessary measures in place by condition to
    protect bats, or provide any required mitigation or compensation, in the absence of
    the results of the surveys. This is a matter that should be addressed and
    considered at this stage and not by means of the imposition of a planning
    condition.
33. I therefore cannot be satisfied that the proposal would not have an adverse impact
    on protected species and that the development would be in accordance with the
    biodiversity aims of LP28 of the LP. It would also not accord with the Framework
    insofar as it is concerned with the protection of biodiversity.
BNG
34. I note the Council’s concerns regarding the biodiversity metric, particularly the
    inclusion of private gardens within the calculations. However, BNG would be
    secured through the statutory biodiversity gain condition, which requires the
    submission and approval of a Biodiversity Gain Plan before development can
    lawfully commence. Consequently, any deficiencies in the submitted metric would
    be addressed through that separate process.
35. My attention has been drawn to the changes to BNG exemptions introduced in
    August 20263. The Appellant advances that the appeal site is below the 0.2-
    hectare threshold and does not contain any Priority Habitat and is therefore now
    exempt from BNG. However, the transitional and saving provisions states that the
    amendments apply only to new planning applications submitted from 6 August
    2026 and that existing planning permissions and applications submitted before this
    date remain subject to the previous BNG legislation.
36. Nevertheless, for the reasons stated I find no conflict with Policy LP28 of the LP
    with regards to its provisions in respect of biodiversity.
Drainage
37. The appeal site lies within Flood Zone 1 and is therefore at low risk of flooding
    from rivers and the sea, although mapping indicates that the rear portion of the site
    is susceptible to surface water flooding during a 1 in 100-year event. The
    submitted Flood Risk Assessment4 and Drainage Technical Note5 propose the
    discharge of surface water at a restricted rate of 2l/s to the Anglian Water surface
    water sewer in New Road. The Technical Note also confirms that intrusive ground
    investigations, including percolation testing, would be undertaken to establish
    whether infiltration drainage is feasible.
38. I acknowledge the Council's concern that site-specific ground investigations have
    not yet been undertaken and that the drainage hierarchy ordinarily requires
3
  The Biodiversity Gain (Town and Country Planning) (Amendments and Transitional Provisions) (England) Regulations 2026 (SI
2026/790)
4
  P2024-079
5
  P2024-079


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               6
Appeal Decision 6012642


       infiltration methods to be considered before discharge to a surface water sewer.
       The purpose of the planning system is to achieve sustainable development,
       including the use of the most sustainable means of surface water disposal where
       practicable and appropriate to the circumstances of the site. Accordingly, it is
       important that the drainage hierarchy is properly considered so that infiltration
       methods are utilised where feasible before less sustainable alternatives are
       pursued.
39. However, the site is located within an area of low flood risk and there is no
    substantive evidence before me to indicate that the development would result in an
    unacceptable increase in flood risk either on the site itself or elsewhere. Whilst
    compliance with Building Regulations Part H is a separate matter and does not
    negate the need to consider drainage through the planning process, I am satisfied
    that a condition requiring site-specific ground investigations, including percolation
    testing, together with the submission and approval of a detailed surface water
    drainage scheme following the drainage hierarchy, would be sufficiently precise,
    enforceable and reasonable.
40. Should the subsequent investigations demonstrate that infiltration is feasible, the
    drainage strategy could be amended accordingly. Equally, if infiltration is shown
    not to be viable, the applicant would be required to provide appropriate evidence to
    justify an alternative means of disposal in accordance with the drainage hierarchy.
    In these circumstances, I am satisfied that the matter can be dealt with through a
    planning condition and does not justify withholding planning permission. Failure to
    comply with such a condition would prevent lawful commencement of the
    development unless the condition were first varied through the appropriate
    statutory process.
41. Accordingly, I find that an acceptable surface water drainage strategy could be
    secured by condition and on that basis the proposal would not conflict with Policy
    LP32 of the LP and Framework objectives relating to flood risk and sustainable
    drainage.


Other Matters
42. The Council cannot demonstrate a deliverable 5-year housing land supply. The
    development of the site for 23no residential units would make effective use of
    urban land, providing a high standard of living accommodation, and would also
    make a meaningful contribution to the supply of housing. It would also incorporate
    a number of sustainable design features. These considerations weigh in favour of
    the development.
43. Policy LP8 requires developments of 15 or more dwellings to provide 30%
    affordable housing. In this case, that would equate to seven affordable units.
    During the processing of the application, the Appellant submitted a viability
    appraisal which concluded that the development could not viably support either
    affordable housing provision or other planning obligations. The Council
    commissioned an independent review of that appraisal, which similarly concluded
    that the scheme would be unviable were affordable housing and developer
    contributions to be required. Consequently, the Council does not seek any
    affordable housing provision or planning obligations in this instance. In the



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   7
Appeal Decision 6012642


       absence of substantive evidence to the contrary, I have no reason to reach a
       different conclusion.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
44. Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 requires that
    planning decisions are made in accordance with the development plan unless
    material considerations indicate otherwise.
45. Policy S3 of the Framework requires decision-makers to apply a presumption in
    favour of sustainable development and directs that Policy S4 be applied when
    considering development proposals within settlements. Policy S4 states that
    development proposals within settlements should be approved unless the benefits
    of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies in this Framework.
46. I have found that the proposal would result in significant harm to the character and
    appearance of the surrounding area. The development would appear visually
    overbearing to neighbouring properties, introduce harmful levels of overlooking,
    and create an uncomfortable relationship with the established pattern of
    development along New Road. I also cannot be satisfied that future occupiers
    would be afforded acceptable living conditions.
47. In addition, the proposal would fail to provide servicing facilities within the site,
    necessitating waste collection, deliveries and other servicing to occur from the
    public highway. This draws the proposal into conflict with TR6 4) of the Framework
    which states that development proposals should be refused if they would have an
    unacceptable impact on highway safety. In addition, I cannot be satisfied that the
    proposal would not harm protected species. Collectively, these adverse effects
    attract significant weight against the proposal.
48. Set against this, the proposal would make a positive contribution towards housing
    supply in an area where there is an evidenced unmet need, to which I attach
    substantial weight in accordance with HO7 of the Framework. The development
    would also give rise to economic benefits, including construction-related
    employment and expenditure, together with spending by future occupiers.
49. Under the provisions of L2 and L3 of the Framework, which support making
    effective use of land and increasing density in appropriate locations, it also
    requires regard to be had to the existing character of an area, consistent with
    Policy DP3. In this case, I have found that the juxtaposition of the proposal against
    the prevailing-built form would cause significant harm to local character and
    appearance. Accordingly, the benefits associated with the increased density of
    development attract reduced weight.
50. Drawing all the matters together, and having regard to the material considerations
    before me, I conclude that the benefits of granting permission would be
    substantially outweighed by the adverse effects when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies of the Framework as a whole. Accordingly, the
    appeal is dismissed.

     R Gee INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   8
