Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 14 September 2026
by H Whitfield BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 16 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012237
123 Benhill Road, Southwark, London SE5 7LZ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) against
     a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the Town and
     Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended).
•    The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Iain Carroll & Kathryn Oliver against the decision of the Council of the
     London Borough of Southwark.
•    The application Ref is 26/AP/1303.
•    The development proposed is Prior approval notification for the construction of a: Single storey side
     extension at lower ground level. Extension to have a maximum height of 3m at the boundary. Extension
     to have a maximum length of 4.85m from the parent building principal elevation. 2.4m side extension
     from the existing outrigger, less than half the width of the property. Existing lean-to rear extension
     pitched roof changed to a flat roof, with maximum height of 2.7m at the boundary. 1nr rooflight and a
     green roof over rear extension. Internal reconfiguration to lower ground floor including removal of 2nr
     chimney breasts.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.     The Council has referred to development plan policies on its decision notice.
       However, the principle of development is established by the Town and Country
       Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) (the
       GPDO) and the provisions of Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the GPDO do not require
       regard to be had to the development plan. Accordingly, I have only had regard to the
       policies of The Southwark Plan 2019-2036 (the Local Plan) in so far as they are
       material considerations relevant to the main issue; however, they are not in
       themselves determinative.
Background and Main Issue
3.     Under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the Town and Country Planning
       (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 as amended (the GPDO),
       planning permission is granted for the enlargement of a dwellinghouse subject to
       limitations and conditions.
4.     Where an application is made for a determination as to whether prior approval is
       required for development which exceeds the limits in paragraph A.1(f) but is allowed
       by paragraph A.1(g) to Part 1, paragraph A.4(3) provides that the local planning
       authority may refuse the application where it considers that the proposed
       development does not comply, or that the developer has provided insufficient
       information to enable the authority to establish whether the proposed development


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012237


       complies with the conditions, limitations or restrictions that are applicable to such
       permitted development.
5.     Paragraph A.4(7) to Part 1 provides that where any owner or occupier of any
       adjoining premises objects to the proposed development, the prior approval of the
       local planning authority (LPA) is required as to the impact of the proposed
       development on the amenity of any adjoining premises. When considering these
       potential impacts, the LPA is required to take into account any representations made
       and consider the amenity of all adjoining premises, not just adjoining premises which
       are the subject of representations.
6.     Neither the Council’s decision notice nor the accompanying officer report contends
       that the appeal scheme fails to comply with the limitations at paragraph A.1. Instead,
       the Council’s concerns are limited to the effect of the development upon the living
       conditions of the occupants of 125 Benhill Road.
7.     The main issue in this appeal is therefore whether prior approval should be granted
       having regard to the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions of the
       occupants of 125 Benhill Road in respect of outlook.
Reasons
8.     The appeal relates to a mid-terraced dwelling located in a predominately residential
       area containing properties of a similar style and appearance. The dwelling contains a
       lower ground/basement level and so from the rear it appears to be 3-storeys in height.
       The northern half of the rear elevation has a three-storey outrigger which adjoins a
       similar projection on the northern adjoining property (No 121) and a single-storey
       lean-to range.
9.     The appeal scheme proposes a single storey parapet flat roof extension off the rear
       elevation of the main body of the dwelling. The extension would infill the gap between
       the side of the three-storey outrigger and the common boundary with 125 Benhill
       Road to the south.
10. No 125 has a three-storey outrigger of similar proportions to the appeal dwelling on
    the southern half of its rear elevation which pitches away from the appeal site. On the
    rear elevation of the main body of No 125, there is one window at lower ground floor
    which is understood to be the only window serving this property’s kitchen/breakfast
    room. Adjacent to this window is the common boundary with the appeal site which is
    formed by a timber fence and planting. The current relationship between this window,
    the common boundary fence and the property’s own three-storey range results in a
    degree of enclosure to this kitchen/breakfast room window.
11. The proposed extension would project approximately 4.85m beyond No 125’s
    kitchen/breakfast room window at a total height of 3m. The plans show the extension
    would sit considerably above the height of the existing boundary treatment and
    exceed the top of No 125’s lower ground floor window. Given the relationship this
    window already has with the property’s own three-storey outrigger, the combined
    height and depth of the proposed extension would have a hemming-in and
    overbearing effect on this window, further restricting outlook and peripheral views of
    the sky. This would result in an adverse sense of enclosure from this habitable room
    to the detriment of the living conditions of the occupants of this dwelling.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012237


12. While there is no dispute between the parties that the appeal scheme would comply
    with the restrictions and limitations under sub-paragraph A.1 of Class A of the GPDO,
    there remains a requirement to consider the impact of the proposed development on
    the amenity of any adjoining premises where representations have been made, which
    is the case in this instance. The fact that the Council has raised no objection in
    relation to the effects on light to No 125 does not alter my above conclusions.
13. The appellant has referred to an extension approved by the Council at 117 Benhill
    Road, which they state is larger than the appeal scheme. However, I have not been
    provided with the specific details of this case or the approved plans and therefore
    cannot be certain that the two cases are comparable or whether the interrelationship
    between neighbouring properties is similar. Nevertheless, given the scope of matters
    for consideration in an application for prior approval, examples of extensions
    elsewhere do not indicate that the proposal, for which I have identified would result in
    harm to the amenity of an adjoining property, would be permitted development.
14. For the above reasons, I conclude that the proposed development would have a
    harmful effect on the living conditions of the occupants of 125 Benhill Road in respect
    of outlook and therefore prior approval should be refused. Insofar as it is of relevance,
    I therefore find that the proposal conflicts with Policy P56 of the Local Plan which
    seeks to protect outlook and that developments do not cause an unacceptable loss of
    amenity to present or future occupiers.
Conclusion
15. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

H Whitfield
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
