 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 14 September 2026
 by P J Staddon BSc, Dip, MBA (Distinction), MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 23 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012164
 155 West Street, Bedminster, Bristol, BS3 3PN
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr David Fitter of Paragon Bristol Developments against the decision of
     Bristol City Council.
 •   The application Ref is 26/11228/F.
 •   The development proposed is ‘change of use of ground floor unit from office to HMO use with
     associated works.’


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for ‘change of use of
   ground floor unit from office to HMO use with associated works.’ at 155 West
   Street, Bedminster, Bristol, BS3 3PN in accordance with the terms of the
   application, Ref 26/11228/F, and the plans submitted with it, subject to the following
   conditions:
     1)      The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
             date of this decision.
     2)      The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
             the following approved plans: 200 Rev P1 - Location and Block Plan; 205 P1
             - Proposed Elevations; 203 Rev P2 - Proposed Ground Floor Plan.
     3)      The house in multiple occupation (HMO) use hereby permitted shall be
             limited to a maximum of 3 persons residing at the property at any time.


Application for costs
2. An application for costs was made by Mr David Fitter of Paragon Bristol
   Developments against Bristol City Council (the Council) and this is the subject of a
   separate Decision.
Main Issues
3. The main issues are the effect of the proposal on:
     •    The housing mix and character of the area.
     •    The living conditions of future occupiers of the proposed accommodation.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012164


Reasons
Housing mix and character
4. The appeal premises comprise a ground floor commercial unit within a large
   modern mixed-use development known as the Malago Scholar Quarter. There are
   residential flats, within the same building, to the rear of the unit and at first floor
   level. The main frontage of the unit faces West Street (the A38), which is a busy
   arterial route containing a variety of residential and commercial uses.
5. The appellant’s submissions indicate that concerted efforts to find a commercial
   use occupier for the unit have been unsuccessful and the appeal proposal is to
   convert the space into a HMO. This would entail subdividing the unit internally to
   create 3 bedrooms, each with an ensuite bathroom, and a communal kitchen/dining
   space; there would also be some external alterations, notably replacing the large
   ground floor glazing with windows of a domestic size and style.
6. Policy BCS18 of the Bristol Development Framework Core Strategy (adopted June
   2011) (CS) requires that new residential development should help to ensure mixed,
   balanced and inclusive communities.
7. Policy DM2 of the Site Allocations and Development Management Policies
   document (adopted July 2014) (SADMP) resists proposals for HMOs where, among
   other criteria, it would create or contribute to a harmful concentration of HMOs
   within the locality. It states that this can result from exacerbating existing harmful
   effects on the character of the area or neighbours’ living conditions, or by reducing
   the choice of homes in the area through changes to the housing mix.
8. Further guidance is contained within the Supplementary Planning Document –
   Managing the Development of Houses in Multiple Occupation (2020) (SPD). The
   SPD seeks to define what is meant by a ‘harmful concentration’ of HMOs within
   development plan policy. It does this via 2 tests: i) the Sandwiching Assessment
   which seeks to avoid existing dwellings having HMO neighbours on both sides, and
   ii) the Threshold Assessment, which generally seeks to limit HMO numbers to not
   exceed 10% of the total dwelling stock within a 100-metre radius of the subject
   property.
9. The Council accepts that the appeal proposal would not result in a self-contained
   dwelling being sandwiched between two HMOs, and that this test is passed.
   However, it asserts that, based on its most recent (March 2024) dataset, there are
   209 properties within a 100-metre radius, and 20 of these are in HMO use,
   equating to 9.57%, and the appeal proposal would increase this to 21 HMOs,
   equating to ‘approximately 10.05%’.
10. Whilst I note the appellant’s submission that different datasets and methodologies
    would result in a lower figure, I have no reason to doubt that the Council’s
    submitted figure has been computed in accordance with the SPD. Although the
    SPD does not have the status of policy, it has been prepared following public
    consultation and sets out a detailed methodology to provide a basis for consistent
    decision-making on HMO proposals. As such, it is an important material
    consideration.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision 6012164


11. However, the SPD is intended to guide, rather than to prescribe for every case. It
    refers to the 10% figure in relation to the dwelling stock as the ‘likely tipping point’,
    beyond which negative impacts to residential amenity and character are likely to be
    experienced and housing choice and community cohesion start to weaken. In this
    case, the exceedance of the 10% figure is extremely marginal indeed, and the SPD
    does not address whether such very small margins should be rounded down, or
    treated as de minimis.
12. I am also mindful that the appeal property is not, and never has been, a dwelling
    and is therefore not part of the ‘dwelling stock’, which the SPD seeks to protect and
    manage, and that the appeal proposal would lead to a positive housing choice
    addition in the locality. Moreover, it is also a material consideration that the specific
    local character context of the appeal site is not that of a primarily residential street
    or neighbourhood, the unit being located within a managed complex of flats and on
    a busy arterial road, containing a wide variety of uses.
13. Taking all of these factors in the round, I am satisfied that the development would
    not result in a harmful concentration of HMOs within the locality, with regard to
    residential amenity, character, community cohesion and housing mix and choice.
    Accordingly, I find no conflict with SADMP policy DM2 or CS policy BCS18.
Living conditions – future occupiers
14. SADMP policies DM2 and DM30, respectively, require residential subdivisions and
    shared housing to provide a good standard of accommodation, and that alterations
    to existing buildings safeguard the amenity of the host property. The SPD includes
    a short section on the expected standard of accommodation and advises that HMO
    proposals should have regard to minimum room standards that are used for HMO
    licensing purposes, and includes those standards as an appendix to the SPD
    document.
15. The Council’s sole concern regarding future living conditions relates to the
    10 square metre size of the shared kitchen room, which it says falls below its
    minimum standard of 13 square metres. However, there does appear to have been
    some ambiguity, and misunderstanding between the main parties, at the application
    stage concerning the operation of the accommodation in terms of future tenancies,
    and its compliance with the respective minimum standards.
16. Based on the information before me through this appeal, I am satisfied that the
    standards would be met, as each bedroom would be large enough to include a
    living element for use by its occupant. Where living space is combined with the
    bedroom, the 13 square metre SPD standard for the kitchen is not applicable, and
    the relevant minimum figure is 5 square metres. Given that the communal
    kitchen/dining area would comfortably exceed this minimum requirement, it would
    comply with the SPD.
17. On this main issue, I conclude that the appeal proposal would provide satisfactory
    living conditions for its 3 future occupiers. It therefore complies with SADMP
    policies DM2 and DM30.
Conditions
18. In addition to the standard time limit condition, it is necessary to include a planning
    condition to confirm the approved plans. As the development description did not


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
 Appeal Decision 6012164


     include the occupancy number (3) of HMO residents, I have added a suitable
     condition to provide precision and certainty.
Conclusion
19. For the reasons stated above, I conclude that the appeal proposal is in accordance
    with the relevant development plan policies and guidance, and should be allowed,
    subject to the conditions I have specified above.

P. Staddon
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     4
