 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 15 September 2026
 by C J Leigh BSc(Hons) MPhil MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 25 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012760
 93 Sandy Hill Road, Woolwich, London, SE18 7BB
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr Shakil Malik against the decision of the Council of The Royal Borough of
     Greenwich.
 •   The application Ref is 26/0508/F.
 •   The development proposed is described as ‘the change of use from a C3 to a C4 for HMO use’.

Procedural matters
1. The Council’s Decision Notice sets out a more precise description of the proposed
   development than on the application form and so I have adopted that wording,
   namely change of use from an existing dwelling (Use Class C3) to a 5-bed, 5-
   person House on Multiple Occupation (Use Class C4) and all other associated
   works.
Decision
2. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for change of use from
   an existing dwelling (Use Class C3) to a 5-bed, 5-person House in Multiple
   Occupation (Use Class C4) and all other associated works at 93 Sandy Hill Road,
   Woolwich, London, SE18 7BB in accordance with the terms of the application ref
   26/0508/F, and subject to the conditions set out in the attached schedule.
Main issue
3. The main issue in this appeal is the effect of the proposed development on the
   living conditions of future and existing occupiers.
Reasons
Effect on living conditions
4. The proposed layout for the House in Multiple Occupation (HMO) sees five
   bedrooms, two of which are on the ground floor. The Council raise objection to the
   rear bedroom due to the window for that room being close to the rear kitchen door,
   and the potential for noise and disturbance to occupants of that room.
5. The door provides access to a passage next to the kitchen and then to the rear
   garden area, which the Council consider sufficient outdoor space for the occupants.
   Although other occupants may use that door to access the garden area, I consider
   it more likely any occupants will walk to the garden area to the rear, rather than
   gather in the narrower space next to the door and window. I note there is a large

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012760


     window to the kitchen area that would provide natural ventilation, further from the
     window to the bedroom, and hence the kitchen door need not be open for
     ventilation purposes.
6. I also saw at my site visit that the relationship between the bedroom window and an
   area where some occupants might walk is little different to the area in which the
   appeal property lies. The front bedroom windows at the property – and many other
   windows in the street – lie close to the front door and set little distance back from
   the footway and road, which I saw is well-used by pedestrians and traffic. Indeed,
   there are a good number of properties in close proximity which have ground and
   first floor windows opening directly onto the street and footway. I am not aware that
   this relationship is a situation causing noise and disturbance that is leading to the
   quality of internal accommodation for those rooms and properties to be at an
   unacceptable level.
7. From what I have read and seen, I consider the relationship between the proposed
   bedroom at the appeal property and the kitchen door/rear garden area to not be
   objectionable, and to not lead to the potential for unreasonable levels of noise and
   disturbance. I am further conscious that that occupiers of that room will know the
   other occupiers of the property and the operator of the HMO. Hence, if there are
   any matters arising front the use there is a reasonable expectation that the occupier
   of the bedroom can liaise with fellow residents and the operator. The Council have
   also set out a requirement for an Operational Management Plan for the HMO.
8. The Council are satisfied that the rooms within the proposed HMO would be of
   adequate size, and accord with their published Standards for Houses in Multiple
   Occupation (2019). I concur with those findings.
9. The occupancy of the proposed HMO would be five persons. This is comparable to
   what might be expected in a family dwelling. Although those occupants would be
   unrelated and have a different pattern of comings and goings, this is unlikely to
   represent a material change in the noise and disturbance given the existing access
   from the street and the wider built-up area which contains many dwellings. The
   internal layout of the property shows bedrooms within the main building area, with
   the communal kitchen area within the rear outrigger.
10. On the main issue it is my conclusion that the proposed development would provide
    a satisfactory standard of accommodation that would not be harmful to the living
    conditions of future or existing occupants. The proposals would therefore be
    consistent with Policy D6 of the London Plan 2021 and Policy H5 of the Royal
    Greenwich Local Plan: Core Strategy with Detailed Policies (2014), and guidance in
    the Royal Borough Greenwich Urban Design Guide Supplementary Planning
    Document (2023) (SPD) and the Standards for Houses in Multiple Occupation,
    whose general objective of all is to seek to ensure new housing development is of
    high quality.
Other considerations
11. No external changes are proposed to the building, and hence there would be no
    effect on the character and appearance of the area.
12. The property is within short walking distance from frequent bus routes and
    Woolwich station. The Council sought provision of a cycle store, to be the subject of
    a planning condition, and I agree that with such a facility the development

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision 6012760


     represents the provision of housing in a suitable location. The Council also require
     the provision of waste storage facilities, to be secured by condition.
Conditions
13. The Council have suggested a number of conditions are attached in the event of
    the appeal being allowed. I have attached details requiring the submission and
    approval of a cycle store and refuse store, to ensure proper provision of those
    facilities. I have attached a condition requiring the submission of a Management
    Plan, to ensure the satisfactory operation of the use. A condition is attached setting
    out the number of occupants to accord with the terms of the application. I have also
    attached a condition specifying the approved drawings and documents as sought,
    in the interests of precision.
14. The Council seek to remove all permitted development rights from the property.
    The National Planning Policy Framework says that the restriction of such rights
    through conditions should not occur unless there is clear justification to do so. The
    reason given by the Council is to allow them to assess the impact of any further
    development in view of the nature of the development being permitted. I do not
    consider that to be a clear justification. The development being allowed in this
    appeal is clear and, with the other suggested conditions, will be sufficiently
    controlled. I see no clear reason to remove widespread permitted development
    rights.
15. I have altered some of the suggested conditions in the interests of precision,
    enforceability and conciseness.
Conclusions
16. Policy H9 of the London Plan sets out that HMOs should be part of the housing
    provision in boroughs. Policy H2 of the Core Strategy provides for a mix of housing
    types and sizes, dependent on the location and character of the area. The SPD
    recognises that HMOs that are of good standard provide lower cost housing, and
    further states that unmanaged conversion of family housing can affect the ability to
    achieve mixed and balanced communities. But I am informed there are no policies
    in the Core Strategy that seek to prevent the change of use of single family
    dwellinghouses to HMOs, or that relate to the concentration of HMOs in a specific
    area.
17. It is therefore evident the proposal is acceptable in principle, subject to other
    material considerations, and that was the view of the Council in determining the
    application. I have assessed those matters above and found no conflict with the
    development plan policies.
18. For the reasons given above I therefore conclude the proposed development is
    consistent with the development plan. The appeal is allowed.

C J Leigh
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
 Appeal Decision 6012760


Schedule of conditions
     1)     The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
            the date of this decision.
     2)     The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
            development hereby permitted shall match those used in the existing
            building.
     3)     The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
            the following approved plans: Site Location Plan, SP1 (OS Location/ Site
            Plan), E1 Rev 001 (Existing Plans), EE1 Rev 001 (Existing Front & Side A
            Elevation), EE2 Rev 001 (Existing Rear & Side B Elevation), ES1 Rev 001
            (Existing Section AA), P1 Rev 001 (Proposed Plans), PE1 Rev 001
            (Proposed Front & Side A Elevation), PE2 Rev 001 (Proposed Rear & Side B
            Elevation), PS1 Rev 001 (Proposed Section AA), Planning Statement, Fire
            Risk Assessment, and Cover Letter.
     4)     Prior to the occupation of the development hereby permitted details of secure
            and dry cycle storage facilities shall be submitted to and approved by the
            local planning authority. The cycle storage facilities shall be completed as in
            accordance with the approved details and retained thereafter.
     5)     Prior to the occupation of the development hereby permitted details of waste
            and recycling storage facilities shall be submitted to and approved by the
            local planning authority. The waste and recycling facilities shall be completed
            as in accordance with the approved details and retained thereafter.
     6)     The House in Multiple Occupancy hereby approved shall provide
            accommodation for a maximum capacity of five persons at any one time.
     7)     Prior to the first occupation of the House in Multiple Occupancy (HMO)
            hereby permitted an HMO Operational Management Plan shall be provided
            to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. Details shall
            include:
                •   Details as to how the property will be managed in order to minimise
                    the impact on the residential amenity of adjoining owner/occupiers;
                •   Details of a 24-hour emergency telephone number to be utilised by
                    residents of neighbouring properties and occupants of the HMO
                    should any concerns from noise nuisance or other nuisance arise;
                •   Details of proposed regular inspections to the HMO use and
                    commitments for the logging of the results of such inspections.
            The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
            details and continued as such for the lifetime of the development.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         4
