Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 10 August 2026
by R C Shrimplin MA(Cantab) DipArch RIBA FRTPI FCIArb MCIL
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date:04 September 2026


Appeal Reference: 6012516
6 Meadow Green, Welwyn Garden City, Hertfordshire AL8 6SS
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr. J. Drucker against the decision of Welwyn Hatfield Council.
•   The application reference is 6/2026/0189/HOUSE.
•   The development proposed is described in the application form as a “first floor side extension and
    alterations to rear window”.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for “first floor side
   extension and alterations to rear window”, at number 6 Meadow Green, Welwyn
   Garden City, Hertfordshire AL8 6SS, in accordance with the terms of the
   application (reference 6/2026/0189/HOUSE), subject to the conditions set out in the
   attached Schedule of Conditions.
Preliminary points
2. The National Planning Policy Framework was revised in August 2026 but, in this
   instance, the issues most relevant to the appeal remain unaffected by the revisions
   that have been made to it. I am therefore satisfied that there is no requirement to
   seek further submissions on the revised Framework, and that no party would be
   disadvantaged by such a course of action. In this appeal, I have had regard to the
   most recent version, of course.
Main issue
3. The main issue to be determined in this appeal is the effect of the proposed
   development on the character and appearance of the host building and its
   surroundings in the Welwyn Garden City Conservation Area.
Reasons
4. Much of Welwyn Garden City is designated as the Welwyn Garden City
   Conservation Area and the area includes a number of listed buildings (although
   none is near to the appeal site). The appeal site lies within a predominantly
   residential area of the Garden City, where an open suburban townscape is
   enhanced by homes in a traditional or Arts & Crafts style, using traditional materials
   and details.
5. Meadow Green is a small loop road off Handside Lane, which is one of the busier
   distributor roads in the locality, and it is focussed on an open green space that is

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision: 6012516


     mainly laid to grass, with some mature trees in the green and a belt of trees and
     bushes along its western edge.
6. Number 6 Meadow Green is one of a number of properties of different designs, that
   are set around the loop road. The group is referred to as the “Daily Mail Model
   Village” and it makes a special contribution to the character of the surroundings as
   a whole, although it does not have a separate designation from (or within) the
   Conservation Area.
7. Number 6 is a semi-detached house, with number 7, on the south-west frontage of
   the road, set back from the road behind its own front garden, where there is also
   space for a car. The house also has a large back garden that is mainly laid to
   grass, with trees and shrubs in the garden, as well as on surrounding land, creating
   a pleasant leafy environment.
8. The existing house is a white rendered building under a series of hipped roofs, the
   main roof being shared with the neighbouring house. There is a single-storey side
   projection at the side of the house. The front part of this forms a distinct element,
   with its own hipped roof, and it matches a similar projection at number 7. Behind
   that, there is a slightly larger flat-roofed element that appears to be a later
   extension to the house. A detached garage is set further back from the road
   frontage. The design of the matching pair is restrained and simple, although there
   is some bolder rectangular detailing to the front porches.
9. It is now proposed to add a first floor side extension above the existing side
   extension (set back from the front elevation), repeating the hipped roof form at an
   upper level. In addition, alterations to an existing rear window would be introduced,
   to create a pair of windows.
10. Provisions in the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
    impose obligations on those considering whether to grant planning permission for
    development that would affect a conservation area. In such cases, decision
    makers are required to pay special attention to the desirability of preserving or
    enhancing the character or appearance of conservation areas affected by
    development proposals. The revised version of the ‘National Planning Policy
    Framework’, like its predecessor, reflects the statutory duty.
11. Policies in the ‘Welwyn Hatfield Borough Council Local Plan 2016-2036’ (dated
    October 2023) also reinforce the statutory duty. Notably, Policies SP15 and
    SADM15 are specifically concerned with heritage assets, while Policy SP9
    addresses design considerations more generally.
12. The Council’s ‘Supplementary Design Guidance’ (dated February 2005) is also
    relevant but it does not have the force of the statutory Development Plan.
    Nevertheless, Section 5 of the guidance is intended to supplement design policy in
    the Development Plan and it identifies some specific criteria that need to be taken
    into account in relation to residential extensions.
13. The proposed extension that is the subject of this appeal would be set back from
    the principal front elevation of the house and from its side boundary, and it would
    be constructed in a style that would complement the original building, using
    matching materials. The new two-storey extension would be set behind the single-
    storey element at the side of the front elevation, which reflects the similar element
    on the attached property. The new extension would be subservient to the existing

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
Appeal Decision: 6012516


     building viewed as a whole and, being significantly set back, it would not undermine
     the architectural quality of the existing front elevation.
14. In my view, the proposed extension would complement and reflect the design and
    character of the original dwelling and the symmetrical composition of the original
    would not be unduly harmed. The extension would be subordinate in scale, not
    domineering or intrusive. Moreover, I am convinced that the character and
    appearance of the Welwyn Garden City Conservation Area would be preserved by
    the proposed development.
15. Evidently, the appeal site lies within an established urban area, which is
    “sustainable” in planning terms, and the proposed extension would be a useful
    addition to the accommodation at 6 Meadow Green. The contribution that the
    appeal scheme would make to the provision of residential accommodation in the
    locality, even though it would be limited, weighs in favour of the appeal, and the
    scheme would not harm the architectural quality of the existing building nor the
    character and appearance of the Conservation Area.
16. I have concluded that the project would not be in conflict with the Development
    Plan, in principle, and I am persuaded that the scheme before me can properly be
    permitted, subject to conditions. Although I have considered all the matters that
    have been raised in the representations, including references to other sites, I have
    considered this proposal on its own merits and have found nothing to cause me to
    alter my decision.
17. I have, however, also considered the need for conditions and I have concluded that
    conditions are necessary, to define the planning permission and to ensure that
    quality is maintained. In that respect, I consider that only the standard condition
    requiring the use of matching materials is necessary in this case (rather than the
    more onerous level of control suggested by the local planning authority).



Roger C. Shrimplin
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
Appeal Decision: 6012516



                                  SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS


     1)    The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
     date of this decision.
     2)     The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
     the following approved drawings:
            drawing number 6133-OS1 (Location Plan);
            drawing number 6133-OS2 (Block Plan);
            drawing number 6133-E01 (Plans and Elevations as Existing);
            drawing number 6133-P01A (Plans and Elevations as Proposed).
     3)    The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
     development hereby permitted shall match those used in the existing building.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        4
