 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 19 August 2026
 by Ian McHugh DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 10 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012228
 1 Pembroke Drive, Carlton in Lindrick, S81 9DW
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Paul Brandon against the decision of Bassetlaw District Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00257/HSE.
 •    The development proposed is the erection of a 1.8m high side fence.

Procedural Matter
1. On 17 August 2026, the Government published the National Planning Policy
   Framework 2026 (NPPF). It does not contain any provisions that raise material
   issues in respect of this appeal and I have not found it necessary to seek
   comments from the main parties. Where relevant, I have made reference to the
   2026 version in my reasoning below.
Decision
2. The appeal is dismissed.
Application for costs
3. An application for costs was made by Mr Paul Brandon against Bassetlaw District
   Council and this is the subject of a separate decision.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the
   streetscene.
Reasons
5. The appeal property is a detached dwelling, which is situated on a prominent
   corner plot at the junction of Pembroke Drive and Windsor Road. As is common
   with corner properties on modern estates, the side garden area is open, with
   fencing to the rear garden set-back from the Windsor Road frontage.
6. The proposal is to reposition the timber fencing close to the side boundary of the
   plot and it would return roughly half way along the side wall of the dwelling. As a
   result, some of the side garden plus the front garden area would remain open. The
   plans show that the fence would be set-back 0.5m from the Windsor Road
   pavement.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012228


7. The Council considers that the proposal would be visually dominant, out of
   character and detract from the open character of the streetscene. It cites a conflict
   with Policy ST33 of the Bassetlaw Local Plan (LP) and with the design objectives of
   the NPPF. Policy ST33 states (amongst other things) that the design of new
   development must be of a high quality and respect the local context.
8. Policy DP3 of the NPPF 2026 states that development proposals should respond to
   their context, so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings. This
   policy is similar to the provisions contained in the 2024 version.
9. The appellant’s detailed statement argues that the proposal reflects the established
   pattern of development in the locality and would preserve the character and
   appearance of the area. My attention has been drawn to numerous examples of
   other fences in the local area, including at properties on Windsor Road. The
   appellant has also provided an extract from the original conveyancing plan, which
   shows that only the front garden area was to remain open. However, a
   conveyancing plan, does not dictate a decision on a planning application.
10. I acknowledge the existence of other fencing in the locality, but I am required to
    consider the appeal proposal on its individual merits and I am not persuaded that
    these other examples should create a precedent for my decision.
11. In this case, the existing open area forms part of the predominantly open character
    and appearance of the frontages along this section of Windsor Road. Although the
    fence would be set-back 0.5m from the pavement and part of the side and the
    whole of the front garden facing Pembroke Drive would remain open, the fence
    would be a highly prominent and a visually disruptive feature within the streetscene,
    because of its height, length and position close to the pavement. This would be
    harmful to the established character and appearance of the area. I therefore
    consider that it would conflict with Policy ST33 of the LP and with the provisions of
    the NPPF, as referred to above.
Conclusion
12. For the reasons given above, it is concluded that the appeal be dismissed.



Ian McHugh
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      2
