Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 September 2026
by Andrew Fulford BSc MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012304
Land at Hillberry, Dalefords Lane, Marton, Winsford, Cheshire West and Chester
CW8 2BW
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Ms M Spann against the decision of Cheshire West and Chester Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01259/FUL.
•    The development is proposed two new dwellings.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published. Those parts of the Framework most relevant to this
       appeal have been amended. As a result, parties have been provided with an
       opportunity to make further submissions. I have referred to the latest version of the
       Framework where relevant in this appeal.
3.     For clarity I have added the words ‘land at’ to the site address in the banner
       heading above. This describes the site address more accurately than on the
       application form. As the site is clearly defined on the location plan, I am satisfied
       that neither party is prejudiced by this change.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are:
           •    whether the site is in a suitable location for the proposed development
                having regard to the spatial strategy of the development plan and
                accessibility to local facilities and sustainable modes of transport.

           •    the impact of the proposal on three existing trees in relation to their future
                preservation;
           •    whether the housing mix meets local housing needs; and

           •    The impact of the proposal on the character and appearance of the
                surrounding area.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012304


Reasons
Site Location
5.     The appeal site is located on a rural lane to the south-east of the settlement of
       Cuddington and Sandiway. Whilst large parts of Dalefords Lane are undeveloped
       there is an area characterised by low density ribbon development consisting of
       large properties situated on spacious plots. The lane has no pedestrian footway
       and has substantial sections with no street lighting.
6.     The appeal site consists of a field which is located to the south of a dwelling known
       as Hillberry and positioned at the end of run of ribbon development. Policy STRAT
       2 of the Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan Part 1: Strategic Policies
       (2015) (LPP1) sets out the settlement hierarchy for the district. The second tier of
       the hierarchy lists a number of key service centres, which includes the nearby
       Cuddington and Sandiway. Given that the appeal site falls outside of any defined
       settlement it is contrary to Policy STRAT 2 of the LPP1.
7.     By virtue of the rural location of the site, Policy STRAT 9 of the LPP1 is relevant.
       This policy sets out the five types of development that are permitted in countryside
       locations. None of the criteria listed are applicable to the appeal proposal. Policy
       DM 19 of the Cheshire West and Chester Council Local Plan Part 2: Land
       Allocations and Detailed Policies (2019) (LPP2) sets out seven circumstances
       where dwellings will be permitted in countryside locations and none of these
       criteria are relevant to the appeal proposal. Consequently, the construction of two
       dwellings would be contrary to Policy STRAT 9 of the LPP1 and Policy DM 19 of
       the LPP2.
8.     Policy STRAT 1 of the LPP1 seeks to locate new housing in areas with good
       accessibility to existing or proposed local shops, community facilities and primary
       schools and areas with good connections to public transport. This broadly aligns
       with the objectives of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework).
9.     There are no facilities or services in the immediate area around the appeal site.
       Consequently, future occupiers would be entirely reliant on the settlement of
       Cuddington and Sandiway which is approximately 1km from the appeal site.
       Dalefords Lane leads directly to this settlement however there is no designated
       footway and significant sections of the route do not contain streetlighting. There is
       a 40mph speed limit along Dalefords Lane meaning there would be relatively fast-
       moving traffic. Taking all these factors account it is considered that this route
       would not be a realistic for many future residents especially a parent with young
       children or those with mobility issues.
10. I am aware that public footpaths are available to reach Cuddington and Sandiway.
    These routes are a similar distance to utilising Dalefords Lane but are unlit and
    undulating. Furthermore, given the lack of built form along the majority of the
    routes, they are quite secluded. It is pertinent that during winter months any
    commuters would be undertaking at least one leg of their journey in total darkness
    along these routes. The absence of lighting combined with the isolated nature of
    the routes would deter regular use by future occupiers of the proposed
    development, especially anyone with limited mobility or travelling alone.
11. Given the proximity of existing dwellings, the appeal site is not isolated. However,
    the proximity of other built form is not a measure of sustainability. There are no

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012304


         facilities within a realistic walking route of the site. Consequently, future occupiers
         would most likely have to rely on the use of private vehicles to access the majority
         of everyday services and employment.
12. It has been suggested that the site is well positioned to access Chester and
    Manchester however, this would most likely only be achieved by car. Whilst
    Cuddington Train Station provides access to both of these large settlements, the
    station is approximately 3.5km from the appeal site and there is no evidence
    before to suggest that the station would be easily accessible by sustainable
    modes.
13. Reference has been made to recent planning approvals1 granted on the adjacent
    plot of land which is currently occupied by a pair of garages. However, as
    conversion schemes the developments would have met one of the criteria listed
    under Policy STRAT 9 of the LPP1. Consequently, these approvals are not
    comparable to the appeal scheme and do not weigh in its favour.
14. For the reasons given, the appeal site would not be a suitable location for
    residential development taking into account the conflict with development plan
    policy and the limited accessibility to local facilities and sustainable modes of
    transport. The development would be contrary to Policies STRAT 1, STRAT 2 and
    STRAT 9 of the LPP1 and Policy DM 19 of the LPP2. Amongst other matters,
    these policies seek to direct development towards the most sustainable locations
    and resist the development of housing on greenfield sites in the countryside except
    in a limited number of circumstances.
Tree Impact
15. Three mature trees are located along the site frontage and provide an attractive
    setting to the appeal site. The trees are positioned within a narrow bank that is
    raised above land levels directly in front and behind the trees. Currently there is a
    single gated access into the appeal site which has no associated hardstanding.
    However, the scheme seeks to remove the existing access and install two new
    accesses with large areas of hardstanding proposed in front of the dwellings.
16. The proposed areas of hardstanding are in close proximity to the trees and would
    almost certainly encroach into the root protection area of these trees. Furthermore,
    given the need to provide a level access quite extensive excavations would be
    required through the raised bank which would almost certainly impact on tree
    roots.
17. The application has not been supported by an arboricultural assessment or any
    other technical evidence to suggest that the proposal would not have an adverse
    impact on the three trees. The extent and depth of the associated roots systems is
    unclear and the depth of the excavation required has not been provided.
    Insufficient information has therefore been provided to demonstrate the
    development would not impact on the longevity of trees. Given the uncertainty over
    the extent of the impact on the trees, it is not possible to deal with this matter
    through conditions requiring tree protection measures and a method statement.
18.       In conclusion, insufficient information has been provided to demonstrate that
         proposal would not have an adverse impact on the health of the existing trees.

1
    Ref’s: 24/00896/FUL & 24/00897/FUL


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
Appeal Decision 6012304


       This would be contrary to Policy DM45 of the LPP2 and Policy 4 of the Whitegate
       and Marton Neighbourhood Plan (WMNP). Amongst other matters, these policies
       set out that a tree survey and arboricultural impact assessment should be
       submitted with planning applications where existing significant trees are likely to be
       affected and developments should maintain and enhance existing trees and
       include replacement trees where appropriate.
Housing Mix
19. Policy 1 of the WMNP sets out new residential development in the Parish should
    meet the needs of the local community and consequently should be between 1
    and 3 bedrooms in size.
20. The appeal scheme proposes two substantial dwellings which would include 4
    ensuite bedrooms. This clearly fails to meet the policy requirement for smaller
    dwellings.
21. It has been highlighted that approximately 46% of the dwellings within the Parish
    contain four or more bedrooms. This is reflective of my observations on my site.
    Whilst, it was not possible to confirm the number of bedrooms within properties
    near to the appeal site, it was clear that the majority were large-detached
    properties. On this basis, and with no compelling evidence to the contrary, it is
    evident that a greater proportion or smaller house types are needed in the local
    housing market.
22. In conclusion, the scheme fails to provide an appropriate mix of housing which
    would be contrary to Policy 1 of the WMNP. Amongst other matters, this policy
    seeks to support dwellings between one and three bedrooms in size.
Character and Appearance
23. Dalefords Lane is a lengthy rural lane but includes a section of ribbon development
    with dwellings located on both sides of the lane. Properties are generally large-
    detached properties with a hipped roof design that sit on spacious plots. Dwellings
    are primarily constructed in red brick although a cream/white render finish is not
    uncommon. The appeal site is located directly adjacent to the ribbon development
    that is prevalent along this section of Dalefords Lane. There is also a dwelling set
    back behind the appeal site which is accessed via a lengthy private driveway.
24. Whilst the construction of two large dwellings would impact adversely on the
    openness of the site, given the close proximity to built form on three sides this
    harm is limited and localised. Furthermore, the proposal would broadly follow the
    building line of the existing ribbon development, including the adjacent garages
    which have consent for residential use. The development would also extend as far
    west as the dwellings on the opposite side of Dalefords Lane effectively rounding
    off the extent of built form.
25. The pair of dwellings would have an identical appearance being large double
    fronted properties with hipped roofs and canopies over the front entrance. Given
    the number of large-detached properties of a similar design in the locality the
    dwellings would fit comfortably within the street scene. A condition could also be
    attached to ensure that the materials utilised are appropriate to the setting.
26. I conclude that the proposal would maintain the character and appearance of the
    area. The development would therefore be in accordance with Policy DM 3 of the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6012304


       LPP2. Amongst other matters, this policy sets out that new development should
       contribute positively to the character of the area and respect and enhance local
       distinctiveness through the use of building layout, design, materials, architectural
       detailing, public realm and boundary treatment.
Other Matters
27. It has been suggested that there is no other realistic use for the parcel of land and
    it will be difficult to maintain the site in the future. In rural locations it is not
    uncommon that the range of uses that may be acceptable on a site are limited.
    Consequently, this does not weigh heavily in favour of the scheme. The future
    maintenance of the site is a matter for the landowner and is not a determinative
    factor in this case. Nonetheless, if the site is mowed less frequently, the harm
    arising from longer grass and weeds would be very limited in this rural setting.
Planning Balance
28. Policy S3 of the Framework applies a presumption in favour of sustainable
    development. For development outside settlements, this means that policy S5 of
    the Framework should be applied.
29. Policy S5 sets out that only certain forms of development should be approved
    outside settlements, these are listed under criteria (a)-(j). In this case criterion (j) is
    relevant as the Council does not currently have a 5-year housing land supply. The
    supply figure is just 1.6 years, which is a substantial shortfall. However, criterion
    (j)(i) goes on to state that developments should be physically well-related to an
    existing settlement. The adjacent ribbon development is not defined as a
    settlement within the development plan and is no more than a scattered group of
    houses outside a predominantly built-up area. Consequently, this does not meet
    the Framework’s definition of a settlement. The nearest defined settlement is
    Cuddington and Sandiway, which is approximately 1km from the appeal site. The
    development would thus not be physically well-related to an existing settlement.
    Accordingly, the proposal is not supported by criterion (j)(i), nor does it fall within
    any of the other listed criteria.
30. Where a development proposal does not fall within one of the categories set out in
    Policy S5, it should only be approved in exceptional circumstances, where the
    benefits of the proposal would substantially outweigh the adverse effects.
31. The proposal would provide additional housing where there is an identified shortfall
    in accordance with Policy HO7 of the Framework, however the positive weight is
    tempered given that there is not an evidenced need for four-bedroom dwellings.
    There would also be economic benefits arising both during the construction and
    occupation of the dwellings. However, given that the scheme would provide just
    two additional dwellings only limited weight is attached to these benefits.
32. The submitted details indicate that the scheme would deliver in excess of a 10%
    biodiversity net gain, however this is on the basis that the three trees at the front of
    the site would be retained and unaffected by the development. Consequently,
    given the potential adverse impact on the trees only very limited weight can be
    placed on this benefit.
33. The site is not located where it can support sustainable patterns of movement and
    would not enable good accessibility for different users and would therefore be


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decision 6012304


       contrary to Policy TR3 of the Framework. It has not been evidenced that the
       scheme would conserve or enhance existing natural features on the site, namely
       three mature trees. This is contrary to Policy N2 of the Framework. Significant
       weight is attached to these conflicts with the Framework. The benefits would
       therefore not substantially outweigh the identified adverse effects and there are
       therefore no exceptional circumstances in this case.
34. Consequently, the proposal does not benefit from the presumption in favour of
    sustainable development set out within Policy S3 of the Framework.
Conclusion
35. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the proposal would conflict with the
    development plan and there are no material considerations that indicate that the
    development should be determined otherwise than in accordance with it.
    Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.



Andrew Fulford
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
