Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 17 September 2026
by Laura Cuthbert BA(Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026.


Appeal Ref: 6012621
Land south of Sandhill, Hermitage, Thatcham RG18 9XU
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant consent, agreement or approval to details required by a condition of a
     planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr R Black against the decision of West Berkshire District Council.
•    The application Ref 25/02283/COND sought approval of details pursuant to conditions Nos 2,3,6 and
     10 of a planning permission Ref 23/00815/FUL, granted on 10 July 2025.
•    The application was refused by notice dated 9 July 2026.
•    The development proposed is Change of use of land for the formation of 5 Gypsy/Traveller pitches
     comprising of 1 mobile home, 1 touring caravan, and 1 utility building per pitch.
•    The details for which approval is sought are: Application for approval of details reserved by condition
     2 'The Site Development Scheme', 3 'Land Contamination Assessment', 6 'LEMP / Biodiversity
     Method Statement / Biodiversity Improvements' and 10 'Arboricultural Method Statement'.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed, and the details submitted pursuant to criteria (x) and (xi) of
       condition No 2 attached to planning permission Ref 23/00815/FUL, approved
       under appeal ref APP/W0340/W/24/3356688, granted on 10 July 2025 in
       accordance with the application dated 3 October 2025 and the details submitted
       with it, namely the document titled ‘Land South Of Sandhill Drainage Strategy’, Job
       No 1518, Revision 4, prepared by Flume Consulting Engineers, are approved.
Background and Main Issue
2.     The appeal relates to the Council's partial refusal to discharge Condition 2
       attached to planning permission ref 23/00815/FUL, for the part-retrospective
       change of use of land to provide 5 Gypsy/Traveller pitches. The application before
       the Council sought approval of details pursuant to Conditions 2, 3, 6 and 10. By its
       decision dated 9 July 2026, the Council approved the details submitted in respect
       of Conditions 3, 6 and 10 but refused to discharge Condition 2 insofar as it relates
       to criteria 2(a)(x) and 2 (a)(xi).
3.     Criterion (x) requires a scheme of surface water drainage for the site and its
       maintenance, incorporating sustainable drainage principles, whilst criterion (xi)
       requires a foul drainage system for the site and its maintenance.
4.     Accordingly, the main issue before me is whether the details submitted pursuant to
       Condition 2 are sufficient to satisfy the requirements of criteria 2(a)(x) and 2(a)(xi).
Reasons
5.     The appeal site relates to a Gypsy and Traveller site for 5 pitches, which are
       already in situ. My site visit confirmed that the site consists predominantly of

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012621


       hardstanding and is relatively flat, albeit the site access slopes slightly down
       towards the highway which runs to the west. The site lies wholly in Flood Zone 1.
6.     The Council's position is that the submitted drainage scheme lacks sufficient
       technical detail to enable its performance and compliance with the National
       Standards for Sustainable Drainage Systems to be verified. It identifies
       shortcomings including the absence of adequate levels information, insufficient
       detail regarding exceedance flows and contributing catchments, uncertainty
       regarding the relationship between the foul and surface water drainage systems,
       and a lack of information necessary to verify the proposed SuDS design and
       associated calculations.
7.     I acknowledge those concerns. However, the appeal before me is confined to
       whether the details submitted satisfy the requirements of criteria 2(a)(x) and
       2(a)(xi) of Condition 2. Those criteria require the submission of a scheme of
       surface water drainage and its maintenance incorporating sustainable drainage
       principles, and a foul drainage system and its maintenance. Whilst sufficient
       information must be provided to demonstrate compliance with those requirements,
       the condition does not prescribe the extent of supporting information required, nor
       does it expressly require the detailed design information sought by the Council.
8.     The submitted drainage strategy sets out the proposed surface water and foul
       drainage arrangements, together with supporting calculations, maintenance
       information and infiltration testing. Furthermore, the Council accepts that the
       additional evidence submitted addresses its earlier concerns regarding the
       suitability of infiltration as a means of surface water disposal.
9.     I observed that the appeal site is relatively flat. Consequently, whilst detailed levels
       information may have assisted in the assessment of the proposals, I am not
       persuaded that its absence materially undermines an understanding of how the
       drainage strategy would operate in practice. Nor have I seen persuasive evidence
       that the site's topography would give rise to drainage difficulties requiring more
       detailed level design before compliance with the condition could be established.
10. Whilst the Council maintains that insufficient information has been provided to
    verify the detailed operation of the scheme, I have not been provided with
    persuasive evidence demonstrating that the proposed drainage strategy would fail
    to function as intended. In particular, no substantive evidence has been presented
    to show that the proposed storage capacity is inadequate, that the infiltration rates
    relied upon are inappropriate, that the system would fail during the relevant design
    events, or that exceedance flows would result in identifiable harm.
11. The Council also argues that insufficient information has been provided to
    demonstrate compliance with the National Standards for Sustainable Drainage
    Systems. However, whilst reference is made to the absence of levels information,
    exceedance routing, catchment plans and other supporting details, I have not been
    provided with persuasive evidence demonstrating that the submitted drainage
    strategy would be incapable of satisfying those standards in practice.
12. The Council raises concerns regarding the relationship between the proposed foul
    drainage system and the surface water drainage strategy, including the positioning
    of foul drainage within or near infiltrating features. However, I have not been
    directed to substantive evidence demonstrating that the proposed arrangement
    would result in contamination, ingress or system failure. Whilst the Council

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012621


       expresses concern regarding the proximity and interaction of the respective
       systems, I am not persuaded that it has been shown that either the foul or surface
       water drainage systems would be incapable of operating as intended.
13. Similarly, whilst the Council contends that insufficient information has been
    provided to demonstrate exceedance flow paths, I have not been presented with
    persuasive evidence that exceedance flows would result in flooding on or off the
    site or otherwise cause identifiable harm. The Council's concern appears to be that
    exceedance routing has not been fully demonstrated, rather than that an
    unacceptable exceedance risk has been identified.
14. I note the Council's concern that details of site and pipe levels would be confirmed
    prior to construction rather than being fixed at this stage. Nevertheless, having
    regard to the relatively flat nature of the appeal site and the drainage information
    submitted, I have not been presented with persuasive evidence that the absence
    of finalised level details prevents the submitted scheme from satisfying the
    requirements of criteria 2(a)(x) and 2(a)(xi), or demonstrates that the scheme
    would be incapable of operating satisfactorily.
15. Taken together, these matters lead me to conclude that the Council's objections
    relate principally to the extent of information submitted. Whilst I acknowledge the
    Council's desire for additional detail, criteria 2(a)(x) and 2(a)(xi) require the
    submission of a scheme of surface water drainage and a foul drainage system,
    together with their maintenance, rather than the detailed design information sought
    by the Council. Having regard to the submitted drainage strategy, supporting
    calculations, maintenance information and infiltration testing, I am satisfied that the
    details submitted are sufficient to satisfy the requirements of those criteria.
16. Therefore, for the reasons set out above, I conclude that the details submitted
    pursuant to criteria 2(a)(x) and 2(a)(xi) satisfy the requirements of Condition 2.
Other Matters
17. I have considered the concerns raised by a local resident regarding the discharge
    of Conditions 2, 3, 6 and 10, including allegations that works have been undertaken
    before approval of the relevant details. As set out above, the Council approved the
    details submitted pursuant to Conditions 3, 6 and 10, and those conditions are
    therefore not before me for determination. For the reasons given above, I am
    satisfied that the submitted details satisfy the disputed requirements of Condition
    2(a)(x) and 2(a)(xi). Accordingly, these representations do not lead me to a different
    conclusion.
Conclusion
18. Based on the evidence before me, and for the reasons set out above, I am satisfied
    that the details submitted in relation to the surface water drainage scheme and foul
    drainage system, pursuant to criteria 2(a)(x) and 2(a)(xi) of Condition 2 attached to
    planning permission ref 23/00815/FUL, are acceptable. Accordingly, the appeal is
    allowed and Condition 2 can be discharged insofar as it relates to those criteria.

Laura Cuthbert
INSPECTOR



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6012621




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
