 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 7 August 2026
 by B J Sims BSc (Hons) CEng MICE MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date:19 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012058
 Aldermans House, 124 Aldermans Hill, Southgate, N13 4PT
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mrs Ranie Datoo against the decision of Enfield London Borough Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00238/HOU.
 •    The development proposed is the erection of side extension to both sides of the front entrance porch
      containing security accommodation and storage.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the erection of side
     extension to both sides of the front entrance porch containing security accommodation and
     storage at Aldermans House, 124 Aldermans Hill, Southgate, N13 4PT, in accordance
     with the terms of the application, Ref 26/00238/HOU, and subject to the following
     conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby approved shall be carried out only in accordance
              with the following approved drawings:
                   Block Plan 105,
                   020 Rev P01, 021 Rev P01, 025 Rev P01
                   026 Rev P01, 027 Rev P01, 010 Rev P01
                   011 Rev P01, 030 Rev P01, 031 Rev P01
                   125 Rev P03, 110 Rev P03, 111 Rev P02
                   130 Rev P01, 131 Rev P02, 126 Rev P03
                   127 Rev P02, 120 Rev P03, 121 Rev P03
     3)       The finishing materials to the built development hereby approved shall match
              those of the existing house.
Procedural Matter
2. The Appellant offers to simplify the stucco surrounds and surmounting balustrades
   to the proposed windows at the front of the extensions, if required. However, these
   would constitute material alterations to the proposals which have not been formally
   considered by the Council. This appeal must proceed on the basis of the detailed
   application refused.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012058


Main Issue
3. The main issue is the effect the proposed extensions would have on the character
   and appearance of the existing dwelling and of the local area, adjacent to the Lakes
   Estate Conservation Area (CA).
Reasons
Character and Appearance
4. Aldermans House, at No 124 Aldermans Hill, is at a prominent corner plot at the
   junction with Ulleswater Road. From the opposite side of Ulleswater Road to the
   east, and beyond the appeal site to the north, is the boundary of the Lakes Estate
   CA. Within the CA there are regular rows of terraced dwellings. In contrast, the
   frontage properties to Aldermans Hill exhibit a less even visual rhythm and
   Aldermans House itself stands out as quite dissimilar in style and finish from any of
   its neighbours.
5. Originally Victorian, the appeal property has visually undergone a number of
   subsequent alterations and additions, including a rectilinear, central front porch and
   a side extension at the Ulleswater Road flank frontage. Despite these departures
   from the original typical Victorian appearance, the main elevation facing Aldermans
   Hill has retained its essential symmetry and proportion, including in the dimensions
   of its fenestration.
6. Notably, several previous proposals for front extensions have been rejected,
   including two at appeal, largely on grounds of loss of symmetry and proportion. The
   Council objects to the present scheme on similar grounds, citing departures from
   the original Victorian architecture.
7. However, I find that the original Victorian style of the house has already been
   disrupted by previous alterations, to the extent that it is no longer strongly typical of
   the Victorian era. Moreover, the building is neither Listed nor within the boundary of
   any CA and is not subject to the constraints of such protective designations, save
   that the setting of the Lakes Estate CA should be safeguarded.
8. The proposals now in dispute, in contrast with those previously refused and
   dismissed, would maintain symmetry within the front elevation. The extensions to
   the side of the prominent square porch would be a little set back and would contain
   windows matching in style but slightly taller than those on the first floor. This would
   provide an appropriate visual hierarchy in the fenestration, despite the insertion of
   faux balcony features between the ground and first floor windows.
9. Overall, I do not consider that the built development proposed in this appeal would
   unacceptably harm the character or appearance of Aldermans House itself, nor of
   the surrounding area, including that part the neighbouring street scene within the
   Lakes Estate CA, such that the setting of the CA would be visually preserved.
10. For these reasons, I find that the proposed development would comply with the
    requirements of the relevant development plan policies, namely Enfield Core
    Strategy Policy 30, London Plan Policy D3 and Policies 8 and 37 of the Enfield
    Development Management Document, all seeking high-quality design in the public
    realm, consistent with national planning policy.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
 Appeal Decision 6012058


Other Matters
11. The stated purpose of the extensions includes replacing an existing security
    building within the front garden and to improve security overall in the face of
    perceived threats from criminal activity. These would be material planning benefits
    weighing further in favour of the appeal.
12. Whilst I have judged the proposed built extensions as they would appear from
    within the appeal site boundary, in common with many local frontage properties,
    there is substantial boundary screen fencing to partly obscure the development
    from public view, softening its visual impact. This also counts in favour of approval.
Conclusion
13. For the reasons stated, I consider the development proposed in this appeal to be
    compliant overall with the statutory development plan.
14. I therefore, conclude that this appeal should be allowed and the permission sought
    granted, subject only to the standard conditions set out above.



B J Sims
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
