Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026
by N Bromley BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 02 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012828
32 Broadway West, Walsall WS1 4DZ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission under section 73 of the Town and Country Planning
     Act 1990 (as amended) for the development of land without complying with conditions subject to
     which a previous planning permission was granted.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Masuk Miah against the decision of Walsall Metropolitan Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/1344.
•    The application sought planning permission for full planning application for a 1 metre high wall with
     1.2 metre columns without complying with a condition attached to planning permission Ref 25/0214
     dated 25 September 2025.
•    The condition in dispute is No 2 which states that: The development hereby permitted shall not be
     carried out otherwise than in accordance with the following approved plans details and documents:
     Planning Permission (Sheet Number. 06 Rev 06) received 01/09/25.
•    The reason given for the condition is: To ensure that the development undertaken under this
     permission shall not be otherwise than in accordance with the terms of the application on the basis of
     which planning permission is granted, (except in so far as other conditions may so require).

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
       August 2026. As the policy approach relevant to this appeal has not fundamentally
       changed, it has not been necessary for me to consult the main parties on it. I have
       had regard to the Framework in reaching my decision.
Background and Main Issue
3.     Planning permission was granted in September 2025 (the original planning
       permission) for a 1 metre high wall, with 1.2 metre high columns (the approved
       wall), on the front boundary of the appeal site. The proposal now seeks the
       variation of Condition 2 of the original planning permission to substitute the
       approved plan with an amended plan, which proposes a 1.8 metre high wall with 2
       metre high columns.
4.     Accordingly, the main issue in this appeal is the effect that the variation of
       Condition 2 would have on the character and appearance of the area.
Reasons
5.     32 Broadway West is a semi-detached house located along a busy road within an
       urban residential environment. Houses along the road are a mix of two storey
       semi-detached dwellings and small blocks of terrace properties. Many of the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012828


       houses, including the appeal property, have front gardens and / or parking areas,
       set behind low level, front boundary walls.
6.     Despite the street scene being dominated by frontage car parking, the road, with a
       wide carriageway, has an open, spacious character. The low-level boundary walls
       contribute to the open character of the road. Mature street trees along the road, as
       well as a small number of garden hedges, ensure that the street scene is
       attractive.
7.     Compared to the existing front boundary wall, and the previously approved wall,
       the proposal would be taller. Located next to existing low-level walls to either side,
       the proposed wall, with a height of 1.8 metres and 2-metre high columns, would be
       a more noticeable and dominant structure, emphasised by its appearance and use
       of light-coloured render and dark grey slatted panels.
8.     While no concerns are raised with the use of light-coloured render which, to some
       degree, is used on other walls and buildings locally, due to its height, the proposed
       wall would not sit comfortably alongside the existing low-level walls to either side
       and those other walls within this part of the street scene. Therefore, even though
       similar facing materials would still be used, due to its increased height and
       dominance, the proposed wall would be incongruous.
9.     The proposal would also be markedly more harmful than a garden hedge on the
       site frontage, which would have a softer, and verdant appearance, even with a
       greater height.
10. Furthermore, although there are other walls and boundary treatments in the wider
    area, as documented by the appellant, some with a similar scale and appearance
    to the proposed wall, including a large wall on Alexander Road, they are located in
    areas that have a different character compared to the appeal site. Given this,
    these examples do not add weight in favour of the development. In any event,
    whilst I acknowledge that consistency of decision making is important to ensure
    public confidence, I am not bound by previous decisions of the Council, and I have
    exercised my own judgement on the appeal proposal.
11. Consequently, for the above reasons, the variation of Condition 2 would harm the
    character and appearance of the area. Therefore, the proposal would be contrary
    to Policies GP2 and ENV32 of the Walsall Unitary Development Plan 2005, and
    Policies CSP4, ENV2 and ENV3 of the Black Country Core Strategy 2011, which
    together and amongst other things, expect all development to make a positive
    contribution to the quality of the environment and seek to resist poorly designed
    developments. There would also be a similar conflict with the aims of Policy DW3
    of the Designing Walsall Supplementary Planning Document.
Other Matters
12. I acknowledge the appellants desire to have a taller front boundary wall, which
    would provide improved security and privacy benefits. There could also be
    enhanced long-term maintenance benefits, as well as safety and visibility
    improvements for the occupants of the property. However, there is no substantive
    evidence which demonstrates that a wall with a lower height would not secure
    similar purposes and benefits. Therefore, although no objections are raised in
    respect of highway safety, access and materials, the benefits of the proposal


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012828


       would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects of the development on
       the character and appearance of the area.
Conclusion
13. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations
    do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it.
    Therefore, for the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.



N Bromley
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
