Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 16 September 2026
by Eleni Marshall BSc (hons) MSc FRICS FAAV MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012575
72 Wolds Rise, Matlock, Derbyshire, DE4 3HJ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
    to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Amelia Goodall against Derbyshire Dales District Council.
•   The application Ref is 25/01190/FUL.
•   The development proposed is erection of 1.8m perimeter fence (retrospective).

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. Since the determination of this application the Government issued the new revised
   version of the National Planning Policy Framework 2026. On this occasion I do not
   consider there any need to revert to the main parties regarding this change. The
   new policies for decision making do not substantially alter matters relating to the
   main issues which are the subject of this appeal.
3. I have utilised the Council’s description of the proposal as it describes the proposal
   more concisely than that on the original application form.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the impact of the proposal upon the surrounding area with regard
   to height, scale, form and design.
Reasons
5. The appeal site is a two storey, detached, dwelling which stands on a corner plot at
   the junction of Wolds Rise and Pinewood Road. The proposal seeks retrospective
   planning permission for the erection of a wooden fence, which has a height in the
   region of 1.8 metres, situated on both the elevation fronting Wolds Rise as well as
   the side elevation fronting Pinewood Road, respectively. The adopted Derbyshire
   Dales Local Plan 2017 (LP) Policy S3 sets out the criteria for development within
   defined settlement boundaries and based upon this, the principle of a fence could
   be acceptable, but this is subject to consideration as to the impact upon the appeal
   site and the surrounding area in terms of character and appearance.
6. The immediate locality is defined by frontages and boundaries, which contribute to
   a general sense openness around properties within the street scene as result of a
   variety of factors including, for example, set back from the pavement, lower height
   and shorter length which allows general views into and through properties within
   the locality. Whilst there are evidently examples of separation between public and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012575


     private space, many of the taller examples are, comparably, provided by hedging.
     This, softer, boundary treatment contributes to a more verdant character and
     appearance versus solid fencing at in the region of 1.8 metres and for a notable
     length (in the region of 14 metres) along one elevation of the property in the street
     scene.
7. I acknowledge some higher boundary features, noted by the appellant, but these
   are generally created by hedging as opposed to fencing of the nature at the appeal
   site. The appellant has submitted images, with their statement of case, however,
   each case should be considered on its own merits, and I do not find that the
   examples provided are comparable to the overall length, height and proximity to the
   back of the pavement as the proposal that is before me. The proposal looks
   uncharacteristically solid, and visually aggressive, within the immediate locality.
8. The proposal would retain some open frontage to the front elevation (as a result of
   the fencing being positioned level with the front elevation and set back from the
   road), however, the height, scale and design of the fencing as constructed along
   Pinewood Road is not in keeping with the appeal site or its wider location. The
   utilisation of shiplap fencing, at in the region of 1.8m, is not in keeping with the
   surrounding area. Whilst I acknowledge some utilisation of timber fencing similar
   (in terms of materials) to the appeal proposal I do not find these comparable to the
   appeal proposal in terms of justifying the appeal proposal which is before me.
9. The appellant has also included photographs of the property prior to installation of
   the fencing. It is acknowledged that existing fencing was present at the appeal site,
   however, its movement to up to the edge of the pavement, on the boundary, and
   the loss of the soft landscaping, which was to the front of the original fencing, does
   not result in a positive contribution to the appeal site or the surrounding area. I do
   not find that planting stated to have become overgrown, and visually untidy, over
   time is sufficient justification. Vegetation can reasonably be maintained to improve
   the appearance of the site if desired. There is limited evidence before me to
   support that the proposal is/was required as a result of antisocial behaviour or that
   it is more at risk than typical residential plots within the immediate locality.
10. The proposal is acknowledged to not result in any issues with regard to
    neighbouring residential amenity and whilst a lack of objection from neighbouring
    properties is acknowledged, a lack of objection is a neutral consideration. I
    acknowledge comments with regard to increased usability of outdoor space for
    occupants of the appeal site; however, I have no evidence before me to suggest
    that the existing garden space, which appears characteristic of typical garden plot
    size within the locality, is not suitable for occupants of the host dwelling. Based
    upon the evidence before me, I do not find that there are clear and material
    planning benefits that would justify the proposal in the context of the issues which I
    have identified above. Overall, I do not find that the boundary treatment would
    improve the visual definition of the corner plot nor that it would result in clear visual
    benefit to the site if it were to be retained.
11. The appellant’s offer of a more muted colour finish, which could potentially be
    secured by condition, has been taken into account, however, character and
    appearance, are separate matters and I do not find on this occasion that an
    alternative colour finish to the timber fencing would overcome the unsuitability of
    the proposal in terms of height, scale and form in the context of the immediate
    locality. Regardless of colour the proposal would remain uncharacteristic. Due to

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         2
Appeal Decision 6012575


     the proposal’s siting, immediately up to the rear of the pavement, there would also
     be very limited opportunity to introduce soft landscaping or planting as potentially
     suggested by the appellant taking into account the previous situation prior to
     relocation of the fencing as shown.
12. The proposal would be contrary to LP Policy S3 that requires proposals to be of a
    scale and design that is compatible with the character, appearance and amenity of
    the part of the settlement in which it would be located as well as not conflicting with
    any other relevant policy within the LP. The proposal would also be contrary to LP
    Policy PD1 which requires development to be of high-quality design which respects
    the character, identity and context of the townscape and LP Policy HC10 which, as
    an overarching objective, seeks to ensure that the height, scale, form and design of
    proposals are in keeping with the scale and character of the site’s wider setting and
    location.
Other Matters
13. I note an objection from Matlock Town Council. I have dealt with the matters raised
    within those comments within the main issues above.
Conclusion
14. For the reasons outlined above, and taking into account all other matters raised, I
    conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

Eleni Marshall
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
