 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 17 August 2026
 by K Winnard LL.B Hons Solicitor
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 28 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012503
 Hall Farm, High Street, Marton, Warwickshire CV23 9RR
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Neil Phillips-Gore against the decision of Rugby Borough Council.
 •   The application Ref is R26/0027
 •   The development is described as Boundary fence, access gates and associated soft landscaping.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. There have been changes to the National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) since the determination of the planning application. Having reviewed
   them I am satisfied that as far as their substance relates to the main issue in this
   appeal, further consultation with the main parties would not be necessary since
   they have not materially affected or prejudiced the cases of the parties.
3. The works, the subject of the appeal proposal have already been completed. The
   appeal application now seeks to regularise this development in addition to including
   amended access gates. Given this I have removed the word ‘retrospective’ from the
   banner heading above as this is not an act of development.
Main Issues
4. The main issue in the appeal is the effect of the development on the character and
   appearance of the host building and the area.
Reasons
5. The appeal property is a large detached dwelling located on a prominent corner
   plot at the junction of High Street and Louisa Ward Close in a rural village setting.
   The area where the appeal property is sited is diverse in character and appearance
   with a variety of dwelling styles, age and design. Whilst there is also a variety of
   boundary treatments the general character in this area is one of open or low front
   boundary treatments. This together with planting at many front boundaries provides
   for a notably green and spacious character reflective of the rural location.
6. The development is a high continuous boundary treatment which extends along
   High Street and around the corner onto Louisa Ward Close to enclose the relatively
   large garden of the appeal property. Coupled with its slightly elevated position to
   the footway, it is a solid feature which does not relate well to the open frontages,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012503


    walls and soft landscaping found generally in this area. By virtue of its height,
    length and modern anthracite grey finish it is not sympathetic to its surroundings
    and detracts from the prevailing character and appearance of the area. As a result
    due to its overall extent, height and prominence it is an incongruous and
    uncharacteristic feature within this setting.
7. Whilst shrubs and trees have been planted behind the fence, they have yet to
   mature and the development appears as an alien harsh urban enclosure within a
   wider environment notable for its green rural qualities. Despite the planting already
   undertaken and the additional planting now proposed by the appellant, I consider it
   highly unlikely that given its positioning behind the fence this would sufficiently
   reduce the adverse visual impact or provide effective screening in views from the
   road.
8. I am advised that the fence is in the same position and lower than a stone wall and
   wooden fence that was previously in place for many years and which were
   removed. Whilst the appeal site may have been enclosed previously, on the
   information before me the combination of the wall and timber boarded fence of a
   lighter colour and a style more reflective of an open rural area was less prominent
   than the fence the subject of this appeal. As such the historic arrangement present
   at the appeal site does not justify the harm caused by the present development.
9. There are examples of high boarded fencing within the village which I noted during
   my site visit. In the main, whilst close boarded fences, they were of a more natural
   coloured rural style with a softer visual appearance. Further they were of a lesser
   scale than the fencing found at the appeal property. As such I do not find these
   examples to be comparable so as to justify the development before me.
10. For the above reasons I conclude that the boundary fencing is out of keeping with
    the character and appearance of the host dwelling and the area. Accordingly, the
    development is in conflict with Policy SDC1 of the Rugby Borough Council Local
    Plan 2011-2031 which seeks to ensure that new development is of a design that
    responds to the character of the surrounding area in which it is situated. I also find
    it to be in conflict with the aims and objectives of the Framework which requires
    development to be sympathetic to local character.
11. I accordingly dismiss the appeal.


K Winnard
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
