 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 24 August 2026
 by John D Allan BA(Hons) BTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 15 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012808
 92 Grimsdyke Road, Hatch End, Harrow, HA5 4PW
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Henry Holden against the decision of the Council of the London Borough
      of Harrow.
 •    The application Ref is PL/0860/26.
 •    The development proposed is the installation of 2m high fence to side boundary.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. The banner heading above uses the description given by the Council on their
   decision notice and which was repeated by the appellant on the appeal form. This
   gives a clear and concise description of the proposal compared with that which was
   included on the application form.
3. During the course of the appeal, the revised National Planning Policy Framework
   2026 (the Framework 2026) was published. Both parties were invited to comment
   about the relevance of the Framework 2026 to their case.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the proposal upon the character and appearance of
   the area.
Reasons
5. Grimsdyke Road runs east to west and for the most part comprises suburban
   detached and semi-detached homes dating from the early to mid parts of the 20th
   century. Despite front gardens being relatively shallow, the streetscape is wide and
   spacious with grass verges to the kerb edges and pavements adjacent to the
   properties’ front boundaries, which are open plan or else demarcated by a
   combination of either low level hedgerow, flower borders or low solid walls or
   fences. The appeal property is part of a group of dwellings that appear to date from
   the second half of the last century located towards the west end of Grimsdyke
   Road. At this juncture the road turns sharply northwards before terminating as a
   cul-de-sac with Wessex Drive continuing in a southerly direction.
6. No 92 is one of four dwellings (Nos 92-98 even) in a staggered arrangement and
   which are aligned perpendicular to those along the majority length of Grimsdyke

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012808


     Road. These have similar open plan gardens or low boundary enclosures to their
     frontages which are reflective of the wider character and appearance of the
     surroundings.
7. The appeal property occupies a corner location and has a pocket of open green
   space to the side between the pavement and the dwelling’s two-storey side gable.
   The proposal is to enclose this area with a 2m high close-boarded fence which
   would project sideways from the front corner of the house and would then follow the
   site’s boundary at the back edge of the pavement before returning back to the rear
   corner of the existing enclosed garden along the irregular alignment of its common
   boundary with the open plan frontage of No 90 to the east.
8. I recognise that the land to the side of No 92 is unique to the property itself along
   Grimsdyke Road due to its unusual corner position. However, in my judgement the
   introduction of a tall and solid boundary enclosure at this point immediately
   adjacent to the public highway would appear jarring and visually intrusive,
   significantly out of keeping with the prevailing use of soft verdant and low
   enclosures to the roadside within the area. The vistas looking both east and west
   along Grimsdyke Road towards and beyond the appeal site would become
   noticeably constrained and atypically more enclosed. Contrary to the appellant’s
   view, I find that the proposal would markedly alter the established pattern of
   development and by so doing would fail to harmonise with the distinctive open
   character and appearance of the street scene.
9. I acknowledge the appellant’s desire to provide improved security, privacy and land
   management for their property and the justifiable aim of distinguishing between the
   public and private realm. However, I am not persuaded that the proposed means of
   enclosure would be the only way to achieve this.
10. The appellant has pointed to other solid boundary enclosures in the area, including
    to the side of properties on the opposing side of the road to No 92, which I
    observed for myself. The side boundary at 75 Grimsdyke Road is set behind a
    wedge-shaped grass verge which itself contributes to the open and verdant
    character of the street scene. The side boundary to 41 Wessex Drive is an
    undeniably prominent feature at the back edge of the pavement. However, it sits
    within a considerably different context where the vista along Wessex Drive looking
    both north and south is far more constrained to each side of the road compared
    with the open and spacious character of Grimsdyke Road. I accept the adjacent
    electricity pylon to the side of 73 Grimsdyke Road is an imposing structure that is
    surrounded by a close boarded fence but it too benefits from a spacious setting
    being set away from the roadside and behind a pocket of green open space.
11. Overall, through a combination of its height, position and form, the proposed fence
    would be harmful to the character and appearance of the area. As such, there
    would be conflict with Policy GR1 of the Harrow Local Plan (2021-2041) which,
    amongst other things, seeks to secure a high standard of development that
    respects the character and context of the locality. For these same reasons there
    would be conflict with the Framework 2026’s decision-making policies for achieving
    well-designed places.
Conclusion
12. For the reasons given above, the appeal is dismissed.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
 Appeal Decision 6012808



John D Allan
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
