Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 21 September 2026
by T Bennett MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6012281
Pavement at East Road, Cambridge CB1 1BH
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Safia Rana-Jaswal against the decision of Cambridge City Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/01378/ADV.
•    The advertisement proposed is ‘The installation of 1no. BT Street Hub and removal of associated BT
     payphones.’

Appeal B Ref: 6012279
Pavement at East Road, Cambridge CB1 1BH
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Safia Rana-Jaswal against the decision of Cambridge City Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/01377/FUL.
•    The development proposed is ‘The installation of 1no. BT Street Hub and removal of associated BT
     payphones.’

Decisions
1.     Appeal A is dismissed.
2.     Appeal B is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
3.     There are two appeals on this site. They differ only in that Appeal A relates to
       express advertisement consent for the digital display on its two faces and Appeal
       B to planning permission for the street hub. Although considered on their own
       merits, the appeals have been dealt with in a single decision letter because they
       raise similar issues.
4.     Regulation 3(1) of the Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements)
       (England) Regulations 2007 (the Regulations) requires advertisement proposals to
       be assessed in the interests of amenity and public safety, taking into account the
       provisions of the development plan, in so far as they are material, and any other
       relevant factors. Accordingly, while the development plan policies referred to by
       the Council are not determinative in Appeal A, I have taken them into account as a
       material consideration.
5.     In relation to Appeal A, the Council has raised no concerns in relation to public
       safety. Based on the evidence provided, and from what I have seen during my
       visit, I have no reason to disagree. Therefore, the proposal under Appeal A has
       been assessed solely in relation to amenity.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6012281 and 6012279


6.     The appeal site is within the Kite Conservation Area and, in accordance with
       section 72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
       (the Act) I have a statutory duty to pay special attention to the desirability of
       preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of the conservation area.
       This duty applies in respect of the consideration of whether to grant planning
       permission (Appeal B), and to advertisement applications and appeals (Appeal A)
       insofar as it relates to the consideration of amenity.
7.     The appeal site is also close to several listed buildings. For Appeal B, I therefore
       also have a statutory duty under section 66(1) of the Act to have special regard to
       the desirability of preserving the listed buildings or their setting or any features of
       special architectural or historic interest which they possess. That statutory duty
       does not apply in respect of Appeal A, though I have nevertheless taken the
       presence of the listed buildings into account as a material consideration in my
       assessment of the effect of the proposed advertisement.
8.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
       August 2026. Having reviewed the changes, I am satisfied that it does not affect
       the substantive matters before me and that proceeding without further consultation
       with the main parties would not prejudice their respective cases.
Main Issues
9.     For Appeal A, the main issue is the effect of the proposed advertisements on the
       visual amenity of the area.
10. For Appeal B, the main issue is the effect of the street hub on the character and
    appearance of the area.
Reasons
Character & appearance and visual amenity
11. The appeal site relates to a wide section of pavement on the north west side of
    East Road within the Kite Conservation Area (CA), opposite Petersfield, an area of
    open green space.
12. The significance of the CA is derived, in part, from the historic terraced properties
    on narrow streets that form a cohesive townscape and the areas of open green
    space located within the CA and their relationship with the historic buildings.
13. Although the appeal site is located away from the majority of the rows of terraced
    properties, it is located opposite Petersfield. The appeal site is in an open gap
    between the canopy of the mature trees on this part of East Road and allows for
    pleasant views towards Petersfield which I note is defined as an important positive
    view within the CA Appraisal. It thus makes a positive contribution. There are also
    views towards the Grade II listed Zion Chapel and Nos 1-10 Petersfield, a Grade II
    listed row of Georgian townhouses. I consider the significance and special interest
    of these buildings are derived from their historical interest and architectural
    composition and relationship with the open space.
14. The pavement in the vicinity of where the proposed street hub would be sited has
    several mature trees within the pavement. I also observed a variety of street
    furniture which includes, bollards, street cabinets, a large number of cycle stands
    which were in heavy use and a bus shelter. Taken together, and notwithstanding

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6012281 and 6012279


       that the appeal site is located in a busy urban environment, the vicinity of the
       appeal site has a visually cluttered appearance.
15. Other than the dual sided illuminated advertisement located within the bus shelter,
    there is a notable absence of advertisements on the commercial properties which
    front this part of East Street. This contributes positively to the character and
    appearance of this part of East Road and the CA.
16. The proposed street hub would be sited in the large gap between two of the
    mature trees. It would only occupy a small footprint and would allow ample space
    for pedestrians either side. However, the cumulative effect of the proposed street
    hub which would be a tall structure, in this already visually cluttered part of the
    pavement would be to further exacerbate the physical clutter.
17. In the above context, the illuminated digital advertisement displays would add to
    the street hub’s prominence and visual dominance within the street scene, unduly
    drawing the eye to the structure and further contributing to the sense of clutter.
    The hub and advertisements would therefore detract from the appearance and
    visual amenity of the wider street scene and would be highly visible in peripheral
    views towards Petersfield and the forementioned listed buildings, intruding on an
    important positive view identified within the CA appraisal.
18. The proposal would thus neither preserve or enhance the character or appearance
    of the CA, resulting in harm to the significance of the heritage asset and would
    also fail to preserve the setting of the listed buildings. Given the small scale of the
    proposal, the level of harm would be limited and at the lower end of a spectrum of
    harm.
19. Notwithstanding the level of harm, Policy HE6 of the Framework states that any
    harm to a designated heritage asset will be a matter of considerable importance
    and weight, and that where a development proposal would harm the significance
    of a designated heritage asset, the effect on the asset and its significance should
    be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the proposal.
20. The proposal would support improved digital connectivity by providing a range of
    services, including free ultrafast Wi-Fi and calls, 5G capability, and USB charging.
    As such, the facility would support the Government’s aim of improving digital
    infrastructure. These public benefits are afforded substantial weight in line with
    Policy CO1 of the Framework which recognises the benefits of maintaining and
    improving network coverage, capacity, reliability and resilience.
21. The proposal would also provide other public benefits, including emergency
    communication facilities, public information displays and the ability to monitor air,
    light and sound. However, given the small scale of the development any benefits in
    this regard would be limited. Moreover, whilst acknowledging that Policy CO1 also
    states that decision makers should not question the need for the expansion or
    upgrading of telecommunications networks, there is limited evidence before me
    that these telecommunication benefits in the form of the street hub, could not be
    provided in a less harmful location, whilst still delivering the same benefits.
22. Overall, when taken together, I find that the public benefits do not outweigh the
    considerable importance and weight I must attach to the harm to the significance
    of the designated heritage asset.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6012281 and 6012279


23. The Council has also drawn my attention to the Grade I listed Church of Our Lady
    And The English Martyrs. This church is located a considerable distance from the
    appeal site. Although its spire is visible when approaching the appeal site from the
    north east, given the modest scale of the proposal, it would not be a discernible
    feature in long range views towards the church. I therefore find that the proposal
    would preserve the setting of this heritage asset and there would cause no harm to
    it.
24. Whilst the advertisements would be located close to an existing dual-sided
    illuminated advertisement integrated within the bus stop, those advertisements are
    not overly prominent due to the bus shelter canopy on one side and a mature tree
    located in close proximity on the other, which obscures views of it. By contrast, the
    proposed street hub and advertisements would be set further away from the trees
    and would be more visually prominent. Consequently, the presence of the existing
    advertisements in the bus shelter does not alter my conclusion above.
25. Although conditions could be imposed on the advertisements to control the levels
    of luminance, frequency of image change, and the use of static images only, these
    measures would not sufficiently mitigate the harm identified above.
26. For the reasons above, I conclude that in terms of Appeal A the advertisement
    would have a harmful effect on the visual amenity of the area. Insofar as it is
    material, the advertisement would conflict with policies 55 and 65 of the
    Cambridge Local Plan (2018) (LP). Together these seek to ensure proposals
    respond positively to their context and do not have an adverse impact on the
    character of the area and its visual amenity and are in keeping with their setting. In
    so far as relevant to visual amenity, it would also conflict with Policy 61 of the LP,
    which seeks to ensure that proposals preserve or enhance the significance of
    heritage assets, including views within Conservation Areas.
27. With regards to Appeal B, the proposal would harm the character and appearance
    of the area, failing to preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the CA.
    As a result, the proposal would fail to accord with policies 55, 61 and 65 of the LP.
    The aims of which I have previously set out.
28. Policy 64 of the LP has been cited on the decision notice in relation to Appeal A.
    However, as this policy relates to shop fronts it has not been determinative in this
    appeal. Policies 57 and 59 of the LP have been cited on the decision notice in
    relation to Appeal B. As these policies relate respectively to new buildings and
    landscape proposals, I have not found them to be determinative in this case.
    Policy 23 of the LP has also been cited on the decision notice; however it relates
    to the Eastern Gate Opportunity Area, which lies outside the appeal site. As such,
    it has not been determinative in this appeal.
Other Matters
29. The appellant sets out that telephone kiosks at three separate locations within the
    local area would be removed, two on Gonville Place and one on Emmanuel Street.
    However, these are located some distance from the appeal site. Their removal
    would not directly affect the character, appearance and visual amenity of the
    immediate vicinity of the appeal site on East Street and would not therefore
    mitigate the harm that would arise in this location. Moreover, as the kiosks fall
    outside of the red line shown on the site location plan, I have no substantive
    evidence before me demonstrating how their removal would be secured as part of

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decisions 6012281 and 6012279


       the appeal scheme. As such, I afford minimal weight to the proposed removal of
       these kiosks.
30. In support of the street hub, the appellant has referred to similar installations found
    in other urban locations. However, I have not been provided the details of those
    locations and therefore cannot ascertain how their siting compares with the appeal
    proposal. This therefore carries very limited weight.
Planning Balance
31. Policy S4 of the Framework sets out that development proposals within
    settlements should be approved, unless the benefits of doing so would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    national decision-making policies in the Framework.
32. I have found that the proposed development and advertisements would harm
    visual amenity and the character and appearance of the area as well as failing to
    preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the CA. The proposed
    development would conflict with Policies 55, 61 and 65 of the LP.
33. Annex A of the Framework sets out development plan policies which are materially
    inconsistent with national decision-making policies within the Framework should be
    given very limited weight. Policies 55 and 65 are consistent with section 14 of the
    Framework in seeking to achieve well-designed places, in particular Policy DP3.
    Policy 61 is also consistent with section 20 of the Framework which seeks to
    conserve and enhance the historic environment, in particular Policy HE6. On this
    basis I afford the conflict identified with the forementioned policies significant
    weight against the development and I find that the proposal would conflict with the
    development plan as a whole.
34. The proposal would conflict with Policy HE6 of the Framework. It would also
    conflict with Policy DP3 of the Framework by failing to respond, integrate with or
    enhance the surroundings. In particular, this requires that substantial weight
    should be given to compliance with relevant development plan policies when
    assessing the design quality of proposals.
35. Furthermore, Policy CO1 of the Framework states that proposals for
    telecommunications infrastructure should be sited and designed to minimise its
    visual impact, especially in situations where a new site or structure is proposed, so
    as far as practical taking into account its operational requirements. I have found
    harm would arise in respect of the character and appearance of the area and
    visual amenity. Therefore, the street hub would not be sited so as to minimise the
    visual impact of the new structure and it has not been shown that there are any
    operational requirements which would prevent the proposal being located in a less
    harmful location.
36. Although no harm has been identified to highway safety or to the living conditions
    of nearby occupiers with regard to lighting and noise, an absence of harm is of
    neutral weight, weighing neither for nor against the proposal.
37. Overall, the identified benefits of the proposal would be substantially outweighed
    by the adverse effects when assessed against the national decision-making
    policies of the Framework.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decisions 6012281 and 6012279


Conclusion
38. Appeal A: For the reasons given, I conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.
39. Appeal B: The proposed development would conflict with the development plan as
    a whole and there are no material considerations which indicate that the decision
    should be made other than in accordance with it. Therefore, I conclude that the
    appeal should be dismissed.

T Bennett
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
