Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 September 2026
by N Teasdale BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012627
2 Dilston West Cottages, Corbridge, Northumberland, NE45 5RL
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant full planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Jonathan Hill against the decision of Northumberland County Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00534/FUL.
•    The development proposed is rear extension, internal alterations, stairwell extension, raised decking
     and veranda, two additional rooflights and 8 solar panels (as amended 23/3/26).

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The description of development in the above banner heading has been taken from
       the Council’s decision notice as this provides an accurate description of the
       proposed development. From the evidence before me, I understand this
       description has also been agreed with the appellant.
3.     The Government published a revised version of the National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework) on 17 August 2026. I have considered its
       amendments against the December 2024 version. Although there have been
       significant amendments made, the changes relevant to this appeal are not
       substantive or determinative to the outcome of my decision. I have determined the
       appeal accordingly.
Main Issues
4.     The main issues are:
           •    Whether the proposal would be inappropriate development in the Green
                Belt having regard to the Framework and any relevant development plan
                policies;
           •     The effect of the proposal on the openness of the Green Belt;
           •    The effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance
                of the site and surrounding area; and
           •    Whether any harm by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm, be
                clearly outweighed by other considerations, so as to amount to the very
                special circumstances necessary to justify the proposal.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012627


Reasons
Whether inappropriate development
5.     The appeal site relates to a semi-detached residential dwelling located to the
       southwest of Corbridge. The property is a traditional stone built cottage with slate
       roof and timber windows and doors. Planning permission is sought for works to the
       residential property in the form of a rear extension, internal alterations, stairwell
       extension, raised decking and veranda, two additional rooflights and 8 solar
       panels.
6.     The proposed extension would extend approximately 4.63 metres from the rear
       elevation of the property, be 5.9 metres in width and approximately 3.67 metres in
       height. The new stairwell would add a further extension which would project
       approximately 2.51 metres from the north elevation and would measure
       approximately 2.51 metres in width with a height of 4.38 metres. The extension is
       proposed to be finished with stained black larch cladding, a slate roof and timber
       windows and doors. The plans also show an area of decking and a veranda that
       wraps around the extension. Eight solar PV cells are proposed to the roof, to the
       south of the ridge. A stove flue is also proposed to the west of these panels. Two
       black heritage rooflights are also proposed, one on the eastern side of the principal
       elevation and the other on the southern elevation of the proposed rear extension.
7.     The site is located in the Green Belt. Policy STP 7 of the Northumberland Local
       Plan 2016-2036, 2022 (NLP) relates to the strategic approach to the Green Belt
       protecting such areas as defined. Policy STP 8 specifically relates to development
       in the Green Belt. Amongst other matters, it explains that in assessing
       development proposals within the Green Belt, development that is inappropriate in
       the Green Belt, in accordance with national planning policy, will not be supported
       except in very special circumstances where other considerations clearly outweigh
       the potential harm to the Green Belt, and any other harm resulting from the
       proposal. It then goes on to state that development, which is not inappropriate in
       the Green Belt, as defined in national planning policy, will be supported.
8.     Policy GB6 of the Framework explains that development in the Green Belt is
       inappropriate unless it falls within one of the categories in Policy GB7. Amongst
       others, Policy GB7 includes the reuse, extension, alteration or replacement of an
       existing building, provided that the existing building is of permanent and
       substantial construction, is lawful in planning terms, and any extension or
       alteration will not result in a disproportionate increase in size compared to the
       original building.
9.     Footnote 40 of the Framework defines the original building as the building that
       existed on 1 July 1948 or, if constructed after 1 July 1948, as it was built originally.
10. It is my understanding from the evidence before me that the dwelling has
    undergone a rear extension, permitted in 2004. The Council carried out an
    assessment of the volume of the existing property, in terms of what is original and
    what is not. The Council considered that the proposal would result in an increased
    volume of over 152% beyond the original volume. This figure is disputed by the
    appellant where it is claimed that the additions comprise an increase of 105% of
    the original dwelling volume. The Framework does not define what constitutes a
    disproportionate increase in size. However, even based on the appellant’s figures,
    the cumulative additions at the site would be double the volume of the original

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012627


       dwelling. Such a significant increase would clearly constitute a disproportionate
       increase in size compared to the original building. I have had due regard to the
       materials and form of the previous extension as well as the veranda element, but
       this would not alter my findings as the test is clear in that it relates to the size of
       the original building. The appellant explains that, if the veranda element were
       discounted from the extension volume, the increase in volume would be reduced
       to 90% of the original dwelling. I have no compelling reason to discount the
       veranda element from the calculation as it clearly forms part of the extension and
       alteration works at the site. Notwithstanding, a 90% increase would still be
       disproportionate. Reference has been made to a single storey lean-to element to
       the rear that was demolished to make way for the previous two-storey element. I
       have limited details of this to be able to consider it further and its impact on any
       calculations. Matters relating to openness and character and appearance are
       discussed separately below.
11. The appellant refers to the neighbouring property where the rear and wrap around
    side extensions are claimed to be of comparable scale. I have limited details
    relating to that scheme and how the works were assessed. I am therefore unable
    to consider this matter further and I have determined this appeal based on its own
    merits and site-specific circumstances.
12. For the above reasons, the proposed development would result in a
    disproportionate increase in size compared to the original building. It would
    therefore fail to meet the exception test of Policy GB7 (1) (b) of the Framework. I
    conclude on this issue that, for the purposes of the Framework, the proposed
    development would be inappropriate development in the Green Belt which would
    by definition be harmful to the Green Belt and should not be approved except in
    very special circumstances as set out at Policy GB6 (2) of the Framework. For the
    same reasons, the proposed development would also be contrary to Policies STP
    1, STP 7 and STP 8 of the NLP which relate to the spatial strategy, strategic
    approach and development in the Green Belt. The Council refer to Policy QOP 2 of
    the NLP within the reason for refusal relating to Green Belt matters. However,
    Policy QOP 2 relates to good design and amenity which is assessed further below.
Effect on openness
13. Chapter 13 of the Framework explains that the objective of Green Belt policy is to
    prevent urban sprawl by keeping land permanently open. It sets out that the
    government attaches great importance to Green Belts, the essential features of
    which are their openness and permanence. Openness of the Green Belt has a
    spatial aspect as well as a visual aspect and thus both aspects need to be
    considered.
14. The overall size and scale of the proposed development would result in additional
    bulk and mass being added to this site where a previous extension has already
    been carried out. The area of land in question is currently free from built form and
    provides for a level of openness/spaciousness to the site which would be reduced
    as a result of the proposed development. The combined extension is not
    considered to be a subordinate addition to the original property. In both spatial and
    visual terms, the additional footprint and mass would inevitably result in a loss of
    openness of the Green Belt. The existing screening would do little to mitigate this
    harm, as the site is clearly visible from the highway and surrounding area and is
    viewed in an open/spacious context which would be significantly altered by the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6012627


       development leading to a harmful and permanent change to the Green Belt. It
       would not just be visible from vehicles passing at speed as it would be visible to
       other users of the road i.e. cyclists, walkers and from nearby properties including
       from their windows and garden areas.
Character and appearance
15. The proposed development would, by reason of its size and scale, fail to appear
    subservient to the original dwelling particularly considering the previous extension.
    It would be finished with materials that are not in keeping with the main dwelling
    and thus would appear incongruous within this setting jarring with the architectural
    style of the main property. This would cause a considerable alteration to the
    character, form and external appearance of the property. The prominent location of
    the site, adjacent to the road, means that the proposed development would detract
    from the established street scene, introducing a form and scale that fails to respect
    the prevailing character of the dwelling and wider area. It would therefore have an
    adverse impact on the visual amenity of the dwellinghouse and wider street scene.
    In coming to such findings, I have had due regard to the overall height in
    comparison to the dwelling, roof forms and site levels, but the proposed
    development would still read as a disproportionate and visually overbearing
    addition particularly when considering the extension work already carried out on
    site. To this end, I am not convinced that the previous extension reads as part of
    the main dwelling. It is set at a lower height and in from the sides and whilst
    materials mirror the main property, it still reads as an extension element later
    added to the property.
16. At my site visit, I observed some timber elements in the area such as the detached
    outbuildings on site although these were largely hidden from view, set down at a
    lower part of the site and well screened. There was a small strip on the
    neighbouring property to the rear of its extension, but this was a minor
    architectural feature as opposed to a large expanse and was also not clearly
    visible within the wider area. Such examples would not be sufficient to justify the
    material choice where it would be discordant and highly visible in the area. There
    may be a culture of timber-clad buildings in the wider area of Northumberland, but
    I found the immediate area to be one where the use of such a building material
    was not commonplace which would exacerbate the properties visual impact. The
    historical and former use of the adjacent site as a sawmill would not alter this nor
    make the scheme acceptable.
17. For the above reasons, the proposed development would unacceptably harm the
    character and appearance of the site and surrounding area. It would therefore be
    contrary to Policies STP 1, QOP 1 and QOP 2 of the NLP which together, amongst
    other matters, requires the physical presence and design of development to
    preserve the character of the area. For the same reasons, the proposed
    development would also be contrary with chapter 14 of the Framework relating to
    achieving well-designed places.
Other considerations
18. The proposed development would allow the appellant to extend and adapt their
    home to meet their growing needs as well as improving levels of outlook/daylight
    and general living space at the property. It would also improve energy efficiency,
    although I have no substantive evidence to indicate that similar energy efficiency


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6012627


       measures could not be implemented within the existing dwelling. Overall, I attribute
       limited weight to such factors.
19. A lack of objection from consultees or public responses does not mean that the
    development would not be harmful. I give this limited weight.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
20. Policy GB6 (2) of the Framework explains that inappropriate development is, by
    definition, harmful to the Green Belt and should not be approved except in very
    special circumstances. Such circumstances will not exist unless the potential harm
    to the Green Belt by reason of inappropriateness and any other harm resulting
    from the proposed development, is clearly outweighed by other considerations. In
    making this assessment, substantial weight should be given to the harm to the
    Green Belt which would be caused, including harm to its openness.
21. The proposed development would constitute inappropriate development in the
    Green Belt, resulting in a loss of openness. It would also unacceptably harm the
    character and appearance of the site and surrounding area. I attach substantial
    weight to these harms.
22. Whilst I acknowledge the other considerations put forward by the appellant as set
    out above, I find that they do not carry sufficient weight to clearly outweigh the
    identified harm. Consequently, the very special circumstances necessary to justify
    the development do not exist.
23. As the proposal fails to comply with the policies as identified above, it cannot be
    said to accord with the development plan when read as a whole. Furthermore,
    there are insufficient material considerations to justify a decision other than in
    accordance with the development plan.
24. For the reasons given above, the appeal is dismissed.

N Teasdale
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
