Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 9 September 2026
by B Pattison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012162
Oakwood House, School Lane, West Kingsdown, Kent TN15 6AW
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr P Hill against the decision of Sevenoaks District Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00681/HOUSE.
•    The development proposed is erection of detached outbuilding.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for erection of a
       detached outbuilding at Oakwood House, School Lane, West Kingsdown, Kent
       TN15 6AW in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 26/00681/HOUSE,
       subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matter
2.     On 17 August 2026, Government published a revised National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework). This included revisions to policies that are pertinent
       to the appeal, such as those relating to development in the Green Belt. During the
       appeal the main parties were invited to comment on the relevance of the revised
       Framework to the appeal proposal. In my decision, I have had regard to the written
       responses.
Main Issue
3.     The main issue is whether or not the proposal would be inappropriate development
       within the Green Belt having regard to the Framework and any relevant
       development plan policies and its effect on the openness of the Green Belt.
Reasons
4.     The appeal site is a large dwelling set in expansive grounds, accessed via a very
       long driveway. The garden area around the dwelling is laid to lawn, whilst other
       areas of the appeal site are woodland. The dwelling has two existing outbuildings.
5.     Chapter 13 of the Framework outlines that the objective of Green Belt policy is to
       prevent urban sprawl by keeping land permanently open. The government
       attaches great importance to Green Belts, the essential features of which are their
       openness and permanence.
6.     The proposal would be positioned more than 5 metres from the dwelling. In such
       circumstances, Policy GB3 of the Sevenoaks Allocations and Development
       Management Plan (2015) (SADMP) outlines that outbuildings will be permitted
       where the building, including the cumulative impact of other outbuildings and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012162


         extension within the curtilage of the dwelling, would be ancillary to the main
         dwelling in terms of function and design and would not materially harm the
         openness of the Green Belt through excessive bulk or visual intrusion.
7.       Policy GB7 of the Framework sets out certain exceptions where development in
         the Green Belt is not inappropriate development. The appellant argues GB7.1.e. of
         the Framework is of relevance to the appeal. This identifies the redevelopment of
         previously developed land which would not cause substantial harm to the
         openness of the Green Belt, as an exception which would not be inappropriate
         development.
8.       The Framework defines previously developed land as that which has been lawfully
         developed and is or was occupied by a permanent structure and any fixed surface
         infrastructure associated with it, including the curtilage of the developed land
         (although it should not be assumed that the whole of the curtilage should be
         developed). It excludes land in built-up areas such as residential gardens. In this
         respect, a court judgement1 found that residential gardens that are not in built-up
         areas are not excluded from the general definition of previously developed land.
9.       The main parties agree that the appeal proposal would be within the dwelling’s
         residential curtilage, and I observed that it would be positioned on land that is
         clearly part of the garden associated with the dwelling. This part of School Lane
         has a rural character typified by areas of woodland, open countryside and a loose
         scattering of dwellings, often in large plots. Consequently, based on the evidence
         before me and my own observations of the site, I consider that the appeal site is
         not in a built-up area and therefore represents previously developed land.
10. The Framework requires under policy GB7.1.e. that the harm to openness must be
    substantial for the development to be considered inappropriate development in the
    Green Belt. However, Policy GB3 of the SADMP requires that proposals for
    outbuildings do not materially harm the openness of the Green Belt through
    excessive bulk or visual intrusion. The wording used in Policy GB3, in relation to
    the impact on openness, is therefore not strictly consistent with the Framework, in
    specific scenarios which involve proposals on previously developed land.
11. Openness is an essential characteristic of the Green Belt and is capable of having
    both spatial and visual aspects. The proposal would result in the addition of a
    single storey outbuilding with a hipped roof and a significant footprint. This would
    introduce new built form into an area of the appeal site that is currently
    undeveloped garden, thereby reducing the openness of the site. However, when
    seen in the context of the very large host dwelling and appeal site, the proposal
    would result in a moderate reduction in spatial openness.
12. Due to the size of the expansive grounds, the outbuilding would be located
    approximately 180 metres from School Lane. As a result of this distance from the
    highway, together with the filtering of views by intervening trees within the appeal
    site, the outbuilding would not be readily perceptible from School Lane. The
    remaining site boundaries are well screened by a mix of wood panel fencing,
    mature trees and vegetation which, combined with the site's secluded location,
    would significantly restrict public views of the outbuilding.



1
    Dartford BC v SSCLG [2017] EWCA Civ 141


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      2
Appeal Decision 6012162


13. Given the substantial screening of the proposal, its effect on the visual openness
    of the Green Belt as a whole would be very minimal. When considered alongside
    the moderate effect on spatial openness, it is my planning judgement that the
    overall impact on the openness of the Green Belt would be limited.
14. Policy GB3 of the SADMP requires that the outbuilding is ancillary to the main
    dwelling in terms of function and design. The outbuilding would be used for
    storage and workshop facilities in connection with the house and the management
    of the woodland. It would be associated with a very large dwelling, which is both
    significantly taller, has a much greater footprint, and is more than double the width
    of the proposed outbuilding. It would be designed in a traditional style, using
    traditional materials, reflective of the main dwelling. For these reasons, the
    outbuilding would be ancillary and subservient to the main dwelling and would not
    visually compete with it.
15. The garage would exceed the footprint area of 40 square metres that is given in
    the Sevenoaks Green Belt Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) as guidance.
    The guidance is not advanced as a strict rule, and the SPD confirms that its
    intention is to minimise the impact of outbuildings on the openness of the Green
    Belt. Given my findings in relation to the proposal’s limited effect on the openness
    of the Green Belt, I do not find harm as a result of the outbuilding’s large footprint.
16. Overall, the proposal would result in some conflict with Policy GB3 of the SADMP
    as the outbuilding would have a greater impact on the openness of the Green Belt.
    However, paragraph 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004
    requires a planning application to be determined in accordance with the
    development plan unless material considerations indicate otherwise. Furthermore,
    Annex A of the Framework confirms that development plan policies (or parts of
    those policies) which are materially inconsistent with national decision-making
    policies in the Framework should be given very limited weight. As the 2026
    Framework contains relevant and up to date national planning policy, I attach
    greater weight to the provisions of the Framework.
17. The outbuilding would not cause substantial harm to the openness of the Green
    Belt, and therefore it meets the exception in GB7.1.e. of the Framework. The
    outbuilding would therefore not be inappropriate development as defined by the
    Framework.
Conditions
18. I have had regard to the planning conditions that have been suggested. I have
    considered them against the tests in the Framework and the advice in the Planning
    Practice Guidance (PPG). I have made such amendments as necessary to comply
    with those documents and for clarity and consistency.
19. I have imposed standard conditions relating to the commencement of
    development. I have also imposed an approved plans condition in the interests of
    certainty.
20. Conditions relating to materials and tree protection are necesarry in the interests of
    character and appearance.
21. Policy DM6 of the Framework is clear that conditions should not be used to restrict
    national permitted development rights unless there is clear justification to do so.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6012162


       For this reason, I have not been provided with sufficient evidence as to why it
       would be necessary to restrict the construction of two buildings which the Council
       have previously confirmed could be constructed utilising permitted development
       rights.
Conclusion
22. For the reasons given above I conclude that the appeal should be allowed.

B Pattison
INSPECTOR



SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS

    1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
       the date of this decision.

    2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
       drawings: 4549.01; 4549.02; 4549.03; 4549.04; 4549.05 and 4549.06.
    3) No development shall take place, nor any demolition works or site clearance,
       until there has been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
       authority details of a scheme for the protection of trees shown to be retained
       within the Arboricultural Report Ref: GRS.6.24. The approved scheme shall be
       carried out during the demolition of the buildings and throughout the course of
       the development.
    4) The external surfaces of the building shall be constructed of the materials
       specified on plan 4549.05.
    END OF SCHEDULE




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
