 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 11 September 2026
 by Jonathan Price BA(Hons) DipTP DMS MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 16 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012017
 290 Prince Avenue, Westcliff-on-sea, Essex SS0 0NF
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission, including under section 73 of the Town and Country
      Planning Act 1990 for the development of land without complying with conditions subject to which a
      previous planning permission was granted.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Gowsihan Nallathambi against the decision of Southend-on-Sea City
      Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00269/FUL.
 •    The development proposed is resubmission for external roller shutters and amendment to opening
      hours, seeking for the change of use from sui generis (motorcycles sales shop) to class E(a)
      convenience store (part retrospective) without complying with a condition attached to planning
      permission Ref 25/00332/FUL, dated 13 June 2025.
 •    The condition in dispute is No 5 which states that: The use hereby approved shall only be open for
      customers during the following hours: 8am to 10pm Monday to Sunday (including Bank and Public
      Holidays) and at no other times.
 •    The reason given for the condition is: In order to protect the amenities of surrounding occupiers in
      accordance with Policies KP2 and CP4 of the Core Strategy (2007) and Policies DM1 and DM3 of
      the Development Management Document (2015).

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed insofar as it relates to the external roller shutters. The
   appeal is otherwise allowed and planning permission is granted for the change of
   use from sui generis (motorcycles sales shop) to class E(a) convenience store (part
   retrospective) at 290 Prince Avenue, Westcliff-on-sea, Essex SS0 0NF in
   accordance with the application Ref 26/00269/FUL, without compliance with
   condition number 5 previously imposed on planning permission Ref 25/00332/FUL,
   dated 13 June 2025 and subject to the conditions set out in the Schedule attached
   to this decision.
Preliminary Matters
2. The Government published the revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) on 17 August 2026, after this appeal was made. Although this makes
   substantial amendments, its policies over design and noise remain generally
   consistent with the previous version. With regard to the issues in this appeal, it has
   not been found necessary to seek the further views of parties over this recently
   published Framework.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012017


Background and Main Issues
3. Two recent appeal decisions relate to this proposal. On 31 January 2026, an
   appeal1 was dismissed over the Council’s refusal to extend the shop opening times
   to 0600 to 2300 each day, due to a failure to demonstrate this would not harm the
   living conditions of neighbouring occupants, with regard to disturbance. This
   proposal seeks to extend the opening hours to a reduced period of 0700 to 2230
   Monday to Saturday and 0800 to 2230 on Sundays
4. On 7 October 2025, an appeal2 was dismissed over the Council’s refusal of
   external roller shutters then in place on the shop fronts facing Prince Avenue and
   Rochester Drive. The Inspector considered these shutters had a harmful effect on
   the character and appearance of the site, the street scene and the wider area
   because they are incongruous additions to the host building and create dead
   frontages when closed. At the time of my visit, the external shutters facing Prince
   Avenue were no longer present. The two roller shutters and their housings on the
   shop front onto Rochester Drive remain in place and the proposal includes seeking
   retrospective permission for these.
Main Issues
5. The effects of the proposal on
    •   the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers, with particular regard to
        additional noise and disturbance, and
    •   the character and appearance of the area.
Reasons
Living conditions
6. The previous appeal decisions are material considerations of significant weight.
   In that over opening hours, the Inspector’s concerns related to disturbing comings
   and goings of staff and customers for three additional hours each day within a
   residential area. This was despite the background noise from passing traffic on the
   A127.
7. This proposal would involve the shop opening an hour earlier at 0700 on Saturdays
   and weekdays and closing half an hour later at 2230. Sunday opening would
   remain at 0800, but it is proposed the store would close at the same time as
   weekdays at 2230. The opening times are significantly less than previously
   proposed. At 0700 there would already be background noise and disturbance in
   terms of human activity, including vehicular traffic. In the evening, an opening of
   this store to 2230 would generate somewhat later activity but not that extending into
   unsociable hours of the night.
8. The expanded opening hours would support the viability of a convenience store
   operation, which in turn provides benefits to the residents of this locality. Making an
   assessment in this regard, these benefits would tip the balance in favour of the
   proposed opening times, which would avoid significantly detrimental impacts on the
   living conditions of neighbouring residents, with regard to additional noise and

1 APP/D1590/W/25/3374767
2 APP/D1590/W/25/3369669




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
 Appeal Decision 6012017


     disturbance. On this basis, the proposed opening hours would satisfy policies KP2
     and CP4 of the Southend-on-Sea Core Strategy 2007 (CS) and DM1 and DM3 of
     the Council’s Development Management Document 2015 (DMD).
Character and appearance
9. In relation to the shutters, the Inspector noted that local planning policy seeks to
   ensure that new development is designed so that it adds to the overall quality of the
   area and respects the character of the site, its local context and surroundings. In
   particular, the Southend-on-Sea Design and Townscape Guide (2009) (DTG)
   states that solid and micro perforation shutters will not be considered acceptable
   because they have a detrimental effect on the townscape, creating dead frontages,
   attracting graffiti and preventing internal surveillance of the building.
10. In the previous appeal, the Inspector found the solid roller shutters and the
    associated shutter boxes to have a harmful effect on the character and appearance
    of the area. The decision did not indicate that the two shutters facing Rochester
    Road were any less harmful than those fronting Prince Avenue or that the proposal
    might have been acceptable if only the latter had been omitted. There has been no
    intervening change to development plan policy. Therefore, giving appropriate
    weight to the previous appeal decision, the two shutters for which retrospective
    permission is sought remain in conflict with CS policies KP2, DMD policies DM1
    and DM3 and the DTG, which together seek high-quality development that makes a
    positive contribution to the character of the original building and respects the
    character of the existing neighbourhood.
Conclusion
11. The two shutters facing Rochester Road have an unacceptably adverse effect on
    the character and appearance of the area, whereas the amended opening hours
    would cause no material harm to neighbouring living conditions, subject to a
    condition controlling this. Other than those that have evidently been discharged, the
    other conditions on the original convenience store consent need to be re-applied.
    Subject to these, and for the reasons given, I conclude that the appeal be allowed
    in respect of the amendment to opening hours but dismissed in respect of the
    external roller shutters.

Jonathan Price
INSPECTOR
Schedule of Conditions
     1) The use hereby approved shall only be open for customers during the following
        hours: 0700 to 2230 Monday to Saturday and 0800 to 2230 on Sundays, Bank
        and Public Holidays and at no other times.
     2) The development hereby approved shall solely be used for purposes falling
        within Use Class E(a) of the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order
        1987, as amended and shall be used for no other purposes including any
        change of use permitted under the Town and Country Planning (General
        Permitted Development) Order 2015 (as amended) or any revocation,
        amendment or re-enactment of that order.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
 Appeal Decision 6012017


     3) With reference to British Standard BS4142:2014+A-2019 or any similar up to
        date standard, noise from any plant and equipment used in association with the
        development hereby approved (including internal refrigeration units) shall be at
        least 10 dB(A) below the background noise levels as measured at 1m from the
        facades of the nearest noise sensitive premises and expressed as a
        LA90,15minutes.
     4) Before any external lighting is installed in association with the development
        hereby approved, details of its location, design and specification shall have
        been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority
        pursuant to this condition. The lighting shall be installed and operated solely in
        accordance with the approved details.
     5) Before any plant and/or equipment installed in association with the
        development hereby approved, details of its location, design and specification
        shall have been submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning
        authority pursuant to this condition. The plant and/or equipment shall be
        installed and operated solely in accordance with the approved details.
                                            ----




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     4
