 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 3 September 2026
 by K E Down MA(Oxon) MSc MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date:11 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012591
 Lukes, Radley Green Road, Willingale, Ongar, CM5 0QT
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr R & Mrs J Owen against the decision of Epping Forest District Council.
 •   The application Ref is EPF/0385/26.
 •   The development proposed is the erection of a single storey detached garage and ancillary domestic
     store, front and rear extensions to existing attached garage and conversion to additional living
     accommodation. Relocation of existing vehicular access.



Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2. Since the application was determined and the appeal made, a revised National
   Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) has been published in August 2026. Although
   changes have been made, including to Green Belt policy, those that are relevant to
   this decision have not materially changed. I am therefore satisfied that no party will
   be prejudiced by my having regard to the latest version of the NPPF in reaching my
   decision.
Main Issues
3. The main issues are:
         •    Whether the proposed development amounts to inappropriate development
              in the Green Belt, having regard to the NPPF, August 2026, and any
              relevant development plan policies;
         •    The effect on the openness of the Green Belt;
         •    The effect of the proposed development on the character and appearance of
              the host dwelling, the street scene and the surrounding area;
         •    If the proposed development amounts to inappropriate development in the
              Green Belt, whether the harm by reason of inappropriateness and any other
              harm is clearly outweighed by other considerations, so as to amount to the
              very special circumstances necessary to justify the development.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision Ref: 6012591


Reasons
Whether inappropriate development in the Green Belt
4. The appeal dwelling is an older, traditional double fronted house on an extensive
   plot in open countryside. There is open agricultural land to the rear, one side and to
   the front on the opposite side of the public highway, a quiet country road. On the
   other side of the appeal site is a dwelling, one of a small, isolated cluster set
   around a road junction. The appeal dwelling is clearly visible from the public
   highway.
5. The NPPF identifies that the objective of Green Belt policy is to prevent urban
   sprawl by keeping land permanently open. The government attaches great
   importance to Green Belts, the essential features of which are their openness and
   permanence. The NPPF goes on to state, in Policy GB6, that development in the
   Green Belt is inappropriate unless it falls within one of the categories set out in
   Policy GB7. Inappropriate development is, by definition, harmful to the Green Belt
   and should not be approved except in very special circumstances. Policy GB7 sets
   out that the reuse, extension, alteration or replacement of an existing building is not
   inappropriate provided that, in the case of extensions, it will not result in a
   disproportionate increase in the size, compared to the original building. In the case
   of the appeal building, this is defined in the NPPF as the dwelling as it existed on 1
   July 1948. Policy DM4 of the Epping Forest District Local Plan 2011-2033 (LP),
   adopted 2023, accords with the NPPF in applying national Green Belt policy.
6. The existing dwelling has undergone extension in the past, including a porch,
   attached garage with loft store and further single storey store and a rear single
   storey extension. The rear elevation has a long catslide roof. The proposed two
   storey side extension would project forward of the existing garage, which would be
   incorporated into it, and have a front elevation on the same building line as the
   existing dwelling. It would be about half the width of the dwelling and its roof would
   have a ridge at the same height as the existing main ridge. The extension would
   project noticeably beyond the rear of the dwelling at two storeys. The proposed
   extension would overwhelm the existing dwelling, particularly when seen from the
   side and rear. Overall, it would appear as a very large and incongruous addition.
   Taking into account that the existing garage extension would be incorporated into
   the new extension, I nevertheless find that the proposed extension would result in a
   disproportionate increase in size, compared with the original building.
7. The Council suggests that the proposed extensions might amount to the
   redevelopment of previously developed land which is a category of development
   set out in Policy GB7 of the NPPF as potentially not inappropriate in the Green Belt.
   However, I agree with the Council that the detrimental effect on the openness of the
   Green Belt would be sufficient that this category would not apply.
8. The appellant suggests that compared with the size of the overall plot, which would
   remain mostly undeveloped, the increase in built development would be minor.
   However, the extension must be judged against the size of the original dwelling as
   it existed on 1 July 1948.
9. Turning to the proposed outbuilding, this would be set some distance from the
   dwelling and close to the side boundary of the plot with the open countryside which
   is marked by a hedge. Although single storey it would have a very extensive


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
 Appeal Decision Ref: 6012591


     footprint. Outbuildings may be considered as extensions where they would amount
     to a normal domestic adjunct to the dwelling. However, owing to the distance of
     separation from the host dwelling, the scale of the building and its proposed use
     which would be to accommodate machinery needed to operate a smallholding as
     well as for domestic storage and garaging, it would lack the degree of physical and
     functional association with and subordination to the host dwelling to be considered
     as an extension. The outbuilding would thus be a new building in the Green Belt
     which would not fall within any of the categories set out under policy GB7. It would
     therefore amount to inappropriate development.
10. I conclude that both the proposed extension and the proposed outbuilding would be
    inappropriate development in the Green Belt.
Openness of the Green Belt
11. As set out in the NPPF, openness is one of the essential characteristics of Green
    Belts. Openness has a spatial and visual aspect and its assessment is a matter of
    planning judgement. The front and side elevations of the proposed extension would
    be clearly visible from the public highway and would occupy currently open space
    in front of, above and to the rear of the existing garage. From the rear, the
    extension would be visible mainly from the extensive plot associated with the host
    dwelling. Nevertheless, its occupation of a substantial amount of space at the side
    and rear of the dwelling, including at first floor, would result in a substantial loss of
    openness.
12. Likewise, the proposed outbuilding would occupy land that is currently open and
    undeveloped. Whilst the proposed location is currently well screened from the
    public highway, the proposed new access which would be set close to the
    proposed outbuilding, whilst not in itself a matter of contention, would result in the
    outbuilding becoming much more visible from the highway.
13. Overall, the proposed development would therefore result in significant harm to
    both the spatial and visual openness of the Green Belt.
Character and appearance
14. The design of the proposed extension with no set down or set back from the front
    elevation of the existing dwelling and with the introduction of brick abutting the
    existing painted render would appear as a bulky and incongruous addition to the
    host dwelling. It would detract from the pleasant symmetry of the front elevation
    and visually replace the existing sympathetic and subservient garage and store.
    When seen from the side it would present as a significant expanse of brickwork,
    overwhelming the original side of the dwelling. From the rear the height and depth
    of the extension would make it a dominant and overbearing feature and the shallow
    pitched gable at first floor would be unsympathetic in the context of the steeper
    gables of the eastern flank elevation and existing rear dormer.
15. The proposed single storey outbuilding would be of a sympathetic design,
    incorporating open bays and barn doors and a timber clad finish. Nevertheless, its
    sheer scale and in particular its length would make it a dominant and incongruous
    feature in the landscape and in the context of the modest host dwelling. Although
    the existing hedge to the rear of the building could be enhanced to provide a dense
    visual screen, the building would be clearly visible from the public highway through
    the proposed access.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
 Appeal Decision Ref: 6012591


16. For these reasons, I conclude that both the proposed extension and the proposed
    outbuilding would have a materially detrimental effect on the character and
    appearance of the host dwelling, the street scene and the surrounding area. In
    consequence, they would conflict with LP Policy DM9 which, amongst other things,
    expects new development to be of a high quality design that contributes to the
    distinctive character of the local area and relates positively to its context in terms of
    height, form, scale, massing, detailing and materials. In particular, extensions
    should respect and/or complement the form, setting, period and detailing of the
    original building.
Other considerations
17. The appellants have explained that there is a need to provide additional living
    space for their family, including space for working from home and space potentially
    needed to accommodate older family members in the future. In addition, a large
    secure building is needed to store vehicles, equipment and valuable items,
    including those associated with operating a smallholding, with a recent burglary
    from an existing outbuilding further from the dwelling, cited as increasing the need.
18. However, it is not explained why so much additional living space is necessary.
    Moreover, whilst more living space may be needed in the future, I can only attach
    limited weight to this since the need may not occur. Secondly, it is not explained
    why such a large outbuilding is needed for domestic storage nor why the existing
    outbuilding could not be made more secure or a similar secure replacement
    provided in its place, to house equipment connected with the smallholding. Overall,
    I can therefore attach only modest weight to the appellants’ need for more space as
    a consideration in favour of granting permission.
19. Conversely, I have found that the extensions and separate outbuilding would be
    inappropriate development in the Green Belt and that they would result in additional
    harm to the openness of the Green Belt. The NPPF makes clear that any harm to
    the Green Belt carries substantial weight. The development would also result in
    significant harm to the character and appearance of the host dwelling, the street
    scene and the surrounding area. Accordingly, the other considerations indicated
    above do not clearly outweigh the harm to the Green Belt and the other harms that
    I have found, and the very special circumstances needed to justify the development
    therefore do not exist. Overall, this would conflict with LP Policy DM4 and with
    national policy set out in Policies GB6 and GB7 of the NPPF, 2026.
20. For the reasons set out above, I conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.


K E Down
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         4
