 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 14 August 2026
 by Mrs Chris Pipe BA(Hons), DipTP, MTP, MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 28 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012139
 Common Botton Farm, Thorganby, North Yorkshire YO19 6DN
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Chris Greenall against the decision of North Yorkshire Council.
 •    The application Ref is ZG2026/0122/HPA.
 •    The development proposed is described as First floor infill extension over existing entrance hall, rear
      single storey infill extension with lantern roof, rear roof modifications to form roof terrace with parapet
      and mansard. Juliet balcony to principle elevation. Conversion of garage into habitable space with
      three dormers added. Oak frame loggia connecting house to converted garage. Remodelling
      internally.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issue
2. The main issue in this appeal is the effect of the development on the character and
   appearance of the host property and area in general.
Reasons
3. The appeal property is a farmhouse set within an extensive rural plot and
   associated with a group of buildings that has altered and expanded over time. Its
   present form reflects successive phases of adaptation, and the existing buildings
   now comprise a more complex composition than the original farmhouse alone.
4. Policy H14 of the Selby District Local Plan (2005) (the Local Plan) seeks to ensure
   developments are not visually intrusive in the landscape, would not result in a
   disproportionate addition over and above the size of the original dwelling, would not
   over dominate and to ensure the design and materials would be in keeping with the
   character and appearance of the dwelling.
5. Policy H14 does not impose a fixed numerical threshold, rather what constitutes a
   disproportionate addition is a matter of planning judgement. Volume calculations
   are not determinative in themselves. Nevertheless, they are relevant to
   understanding the cumulative scale of development alongside the proposal’s form,
   massing, relationship to the original building and visual effect.
6. The proposed development would add substantial built form within an already
   enlarged farmstead complex. Both parties agree that the proposed development
   would result in a cumulative increase of approximately 67.4% over the original
   farmstead.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012139


7. The proposed development would erode the established visual hierarchy of the
   farmstead. While the original farmhouse would remain physically present, its visual
   primacy would be diminished by the cumulative massing and architectural
   emphasis of the proposed additions. In particular, the oak-framed glazed loggia
   and first-floor infills, by reason of their scale and lack of subservience, would create
   a bulky and visually prominent entrance to the property that would be at odds with
   the simple character of the original farmhouse. These elements, together with the
   roof terrace, would draw the eye away from the original building and add visual
   weight to the elevations. The dormers associated with the garage conversion
   would create an unbalanced and top-heavy roof form, while the ground-floor infills
   would add to the cumulative sense of bulk. Consequently, the proposal would
   overwhelm the original farmhouse and undermine its established character and
   visual appearance.
8. The existing buildings form a coherent cluster, with repeating materials of course
   brick under pantile roofs. Contemporary materials can be appropriate in rural
   locations where they are used sensitivity. Timber, glass and modern detailing are
   not objectionable as a matter of principle. However, the substantial oak framed
   loggia and roof terrace treatment would introduce a contemporary character which
   due to the positioning and lack of subservience would compete with the traditional
   farmhouse and associated rural buildings.
9. The contained nature of the site and its separation from public vantage points
   reduce the extent of wider landscape visibility. Nonetheless, harm to character and
   appearance is not confined to long public views. The scale, massing and design of
   the proposed development would result in harm to the character of the host
   property and would disrupt the established composition and visual hierarchy of the
   immediate farmstead. I therefore find that the proposal would represent a
   disproportionate and visually intrusive addition to the existing building group.
10. I have had regard to the appellant’s submissions concerning the historic evolution
    of farmsteads and the absence of a uniform architectural pattern in the surrounding
    area. Nevertheless, I find that the proposed development would not be
    sympathetic to the design and form of the existing farmstead.
11. I conclude that the development would harm the character and appearance of the
    host property and area in general. There is conflict with Policies SP1, SP2 and
    SP19 of the Selby District Core Strategy Local Plan (2013) and Policies H14 and
    ENV1 of the Local Plan which seek amongst other things to ensure developments
    are of high quality design having regard to the local character, identity and context
    of its surroundings.
Conclusion
12. For the above reasons I conclude that this appeal should be dismissed.

Chris Pipe
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
