Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 22 September 2026
by B Astley-Serougi BA (Hons) LLM MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 02 October 2026
Appeal Ref: 6012181
137 Holden Avenue, Oxley Park, Milton Keynes MK4 4HS
    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    The appeal is made by Mrs Ioana Sandu against the decision of Milton Keynes Council.
    The application Ref is PLN/2026/0683.
    The development proposed is described as retrospective application for conversion of existing
     detached garage.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was issued on
      17 August 2026. It has introduced policy lettering and numbers and separated
      plan-making policies from decision-making policies. Having considered the
      revisions and in light of the principles of natural justice, in this instance I do not
      consider it necessary to invite any submissions from the parties on the revised
      Framework.
3.    The Council refers to the emerging Milton Keynes City Plan in its Officer Report.
      The plan has been submitted for independent examination. However, I have
      little information to suggest when the plan is likely to be adopted, if any policies
      need to be modified, or if there are any unresolved objections. It therefore
      carries very limited weight.
4.    The application form states that the appeal scheme was completed in August
      2025. Based on the evidence before me, including my site visit, I have assessed
      the appeal on the basis that the development has been completed.
Main Issue
5.    The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on parking provision.
Reasons
6.    137 Holden Avenue (No 137) is a two storey, semi-detached dwelling in a
      predominantly residential area of Oxley Park. It benefits from a car port located
      to the rear of the dwelling. Permitted Development rights have been removed
      for the internal and external alterations to car ports of No 137 and the wider



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012181



       estate. The appeal scheme has converted the existing detached car port into an
       enclosed family room and includes the addition of windows and doors.
7.    Policy CT10 of the Milton Keynes Council Plan:MK 2016-2031 (Plan:MK)
      outlines, amongst other things, that all development should meet the Council’s
      full parking standards, unless mitigating circumstances dictate otherwise. The
      appeal site is located within Zone 4 as referenced in the Council’s Parking
      Standards Supplementary Planning Document 2023 (the SPD). Accordingly,
      within this zone, residential dwellings of 2 or more bedrooms are required to
      provide at least 2 on-plot parking spaces.
8.    The converted car port provided the required 2 spaces although the Council
      does acknowledge that it was not open on all sides as required by the SPD.
      Nevertheless, this would not stop the car port from providing the required
      spaces given they were of satisfactory size. The appeal scheme therefore
      results in the loss of these spaces and based on the evidence before me there
      is no proposed adequate alternative for the spaces to be provided on the plot.
      Consequently, the appeal scheme does not accord with the requirements of the
      SPD in this respect.
9.    Therefore, it is likely that any parking demand associated with the appeal
      scheme is displaced onto the surrounding highway network. I acknowledge that
      the Council accept that the local highway network is capable of absorbing a
      degree of overspill parking, that there are no formal restrictions in nearby roads
      and there are visitor parking bays present within the surrounding estate.
      However, it remains that the appeal scheme likely results in competition for
      these spaces, particularly given that visitor spaces are intended for short stays
      and occasional parking needs. Accordingly, to my mind, it is likely that any
      parking demand associated with the appeal scheme is unacceptably displaced
      onto the surrounding highway network.
10. I acknowledge that the appeal scheme does not increase the number of
    bedrooms and therefore an increase in demand above the existing
    circumstances does not necessarily occur. Nevertheless, the loss of the car port
    does remove the on-plot parking provision and the demand associated with No
    137 remains. I am mindful of the Framework with regard to assessing transport
    impacts. Given all of the above, there is limited substantive evidence before me
    to adequately demonstrate that no significant material planning harm has
    occurred because of the appeal scheme on parking provision in the surrounding
    area.
11. In conclusion, based on the evidence before me, the appeal scheme results in
    the loss of on-plot parking provision and thus unacceptable harm to parking
    provision. It therefore conflicts with Policy CT10 of the Plan:MK insofar as it
    seeks to ensure that developments meet the Council’s full parking standards. It
    is for the same reason that it fails to accord with the SPD.
Other Matters
12. There is reference in the evidence before me to the Grade II listed Old Windmill.
    Mindful of the statutory duty set out in Section 66(1) of the Planning (Listed
    Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act), I have had special regard
    to the desirability of preserving its setting. Based on the evidence before me it is

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012181



       located a significant distance from the appeal site. Accordingly, given the extent
       of the development and the distance between the two, I consider that the appeal
       scheme preserves the setting of the Old Windmill. Nevertheless, a lack of harm
       in this respect does not alter my overall conclusion on the main issue in this
       case.
Conclusion
13. The development conflicts with the development plan and the material
    considerations do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in
    accordance with it. For the reasons given above the appeal should be
    dismissed.

B Astley-Serougi
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
