Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 August 2026
by Andrew Fuller BSc (Hons), Dip TP, MA, MRTPI, IHBC
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 04 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012069
20 Pitbank Drive, Collingtree, Northampton NN4 0AQ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Harpreet Kaur against the decision of West Northamptonshire Council.
•    The application Ref is 2026/1791/FULL.
•    The development proposed is for a single storey rear extension and erection of rear box dormer.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed insofar as it relates to the erection of a rear box dormer.
       The appeal is allowed insofar as it relates to the single storey rear extension at 20
       Pitbank Drive, Collingtree, Northampton NN4 0AQ in accordance with the terms of
       the application Ref 2026/1791/FULL, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: AD-OS (OS Map) and AD-01-01 (Proposed
              Drawings) except in respect of the rear box dormer.
     3)       The external materials of the extension hereby permitted shall match those
              used in the existing dwelling.
Preliminary Matters
2.     The reason for refusal cites the addition of rooflights. Within the Delegated Report
       these are described as ‘three front rooflights’. The only rooflights present on the
       submitted plans are positioned within the roof of the proposed single storey rear
       extension. As the Council considers the single storey extension to be acceptable, I
       have considered them with that part of the proposal and therefore made my
       decision on that basis.
3.     A new emerging local plan for the whole of West Northamptonshire was published
       for consultation between 8 April and 2 June 2024. The local plan is still in the early
       stages of preparation, whilst its policies are a material consideration, I afford them
       limited weight at this stage.
4.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published on 17 August 2026. The changes to the Framework do not affect the
       merits of this case in a material way and I, therefore, have not consulted the
       parties with regard to these changes.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012069


Main Issue
5.     The Council’s reason for refusal relates to the rear box dormer and the roof lights
       only and it is clear from its submissions that the Council does not have any
       concerns about the single storey rear extension. I have no reason to disagree with
       those findings. On this basis, the main issue is the effect of the proposed rear box
       dormer and the rooflights on the character and appearance of the property and
       surrounding area.
Reasons
6.     The appeal site is situated within a modern housing estate where properties
       predominantly have gabled roofs pitched at various angles. A limited number of
       houses have within their roof slopes, either gable features over half-storey attic
       room windows or small flat or gabled dormer windows.
7.     The appeal site occupies a corner plot, with Churchfield Way to the side. As such,
       neighbouring properties in this street are positioned to the rear of the appeal
       property. Moreover, they are set back sufficiently from the street so as to allow a
       relatively clear view of the rear first floor and roof form of the appeal site along
       Churchfield Way.
8.     The proposed development seeks to introduce a dormer structure across a
       significant portion of the rear roof slope of the appeal property. This would be sat
       close to the eaves and side gables and set only slightly down from the ridge where
       a flat roof would be formed over it. The proposed development would be highly
       visible in Churchfield Way, in particular along the approach from Watermill Way. Its
       proportions, along with its extensive flat roof, would not reduce its visual
       prominence and it would be uncharacteristic when seen in conjunction with the
       established pitched roofs across the surrounding area.
9.     In making my decision, I have had regard to the Council’s Residential Extensions
       and Alterations Design Guide: Supplementary Planning Document (2011) (Design
       Guide SPD). It requires dormers to be proportionate to the roof so as not to be
       dominant, incorporate a pitched roof, and reflect the window design of others in the
       building. Despite being set down from the ridge and set in from the side elevations
       the dormer is not subordinate or modest in scale.
10. On my site visit, and as highlighted by the appellant, I saw that a number of nearby
    houses have dormers, including at No 133 and 135 Watermill Way. However, the
    design and scale of these dormers is such that they generally respect the
    characteristic roof form of properties by being subordinate to the roof slope in
    which they sit. This is in marked contrast with the appeal proposal. Ultimately, the
    existence of those other dormers across the estate has not led me to an
    alternative conclusion on this main issue.
11. I note that the estate is relatively new and as such no new roof dormers were
    evident to me on my site visit. Nevertheless, the absence of other rear dormers in
    the area weighs neither for nor against the appeal scheme.
12. As I have already found that the proposed rooflights form part of the single storey
    extension and as I am dismissing the proposed dormer, in my judgement the
    rooflights would not cause visual clutter.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012069


13. Overall, although I find the single storey rear extension and roof lights to be
    acceptable, I conclude that the proposed rear box dormer would harm the
    character and appearance of the property and surrounding area. As such, it
    conflicts with Policy S10 of the West Northamptonshire Joint Core Strategy Local
    Plan (Part 1) (2014), and Policy Q1 of the Northampton Local Plan Part 2 2011-
    2029 (2023). Together these policies, amongst other things, seek development to
    contribute to good placemaking through high quality, beautiful and sustainable
    design which encourages the creation of a strong, locally distinctive sense of
    place.
Other Matters
14. I understand the wishes of the appellant to respond to their changing needs at the
    property. However, I consider that the additional living accommodation in the roof
    space would not provide sufficient justification to outweigh the harm I have
    identified from the proposal.
15. The reasons pertaining to the removal of permitted development rights across the
    estate are not before me in evidence. Accordingly, the proposed development
    must be assessed having regard to the current circumstances of the site and its
    surroundings and considered on its own planning merits.
16. For the reasons set out above, I have found harm in relation to the rear box
    dormer. However, the proposed single storey rear extension is clearly severable
    from the rear box dormer extension being both physically and functionally
    independent. Therefore, in this case, under section 79(1)(b) of the Town and
    Country Planning Act 1990, I am able to issue a split decision and grant planning
    permission for the rear extension. This is how I shall proceed.
Conditions
17. The Council has suggested a set of conditions in the event that the appeal is
    allowed. In imposing conditions, I have had regard to the tests within the
    Framework, the Planning Practice Guidance, and the relevant statutes.
18. In addition to the standard time condition (1), I have imposed a condition
    identifying the relevant drawings to provide certainty, although I have also clarified
    that the approval of plans only relate to the single storey rear extension (2). Finally,
    a condition requiring materials to match those used on the existing house to
    maintain the character and appearance of the local area is imposed (3).
Conclusion
19. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be allowed,
    subject to the conditions listed, insofar as it relates to the single storey rear
    extension but dismissed insofar as it relates to the rear box dormer.

Andrew Fuller
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
