Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 21 September 2026
by T Bennett MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6012225
Pavement o/s 160 Newmarket Road, Cambridge CB5 8AX
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Safia Rana-Jaswal c/o BT Telecommunications PLC against the decision of
     Cambridge City Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/01382/ADV.
•    The advertisement proposed is for the installation of 1no. BT Street Hub and removal of associated
     BT payphones.


Appeal B Ref: 6012222
Pavement o/s 160 Newmarket Road, Cambridge CB5 8AX
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Safia Rana-Jaswal c/o BT Telecommunications PLC against the decision of
     Cambridge City Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/01381/FUL.
•    The development proposed is for the installation of 1no. BT Street Hub and removal of associated
     BT payphones.


Decision
1.     Appeal A is allowed and express consent is granted for the installation of 2no.
       digital 75" LCD display screens, one on each side of the Street Hub unit at
       pavement outside 160 Newmarket Road, Cambridge CB5 8AX in accordance with
       the terms of the application Ref 26/01382/ADV, subject to the five standard
       conditions set out in Schedule 2 of the Regulations and the following additional
       conditions set out in the attached schedule.
2.     Appeal B is allowed and planning permission is granted for the installation of new
       BT Street Hub at pavement outside 160 Newmarket Road, Cambridge CB5 8AX in
       accordance with the terms of the application Ref 26/01381/FUL and subject to the
       conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
3.     There are two appeals on this site. They differ only in that Appeal A relates to
       express advertisement consent for the digital display on its two faces and Appeal
       B to planning permission for the street hub. Although considered on their own
       merits, the appeals have been dealt with in a single decision letter because they
       raise similar issues.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6012225 and 6012222


4.     The description of development used in the formal decision for the advertisement
       consent (Appeal A) has been taken from the decision notice as this more
       accurately describes the proposal.
5.     For Appeal B, the description of development includes the removal of associated
       BT payphones. However, the payphone identified in the appellant’s submissions
       lies outside the appeal site boundary, and I have not been provided with a
       mechanism that would secure its removal. As the payphone is not located within
       the immediate vicinity of the appeal site, its removal would not be determinative to
       the appeals. I have also removed reference to its removal from the description of
       development used in my formal decision.
6.     Regulation 3(1) of the Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements)
       (England) Regulations 2007 (the Regulations) requires advertisement proposals to
       be assessed in the interests of amenity and public safety, taking into account the
       provisions of the development plan, in so far as they are material, and any other
       relevant factors. Accordingly, while the development plan policies referred to by
       the Council are not determinative in Appeal A, I have taken them into account as a
       material consideration.
7.     A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
       August 2026. Having reviewed the changes, I am satisfied that it does not affect
       the substantive matters before me and that proceeding without further consultation
       with the main parties would not prejudice their respective cases.
Main Issues
8.     For Appeal A, the main issue is the effect of the proposed advertisements on the
       visual amenity of the area.
9.     For Appeal B, the main issue is the effect of the street hub on the character and
       appearance of the area.
Reasons
Character & appearance and visual amenity
10. The appeal site is located on a wide footpath along the southern side of
    Newmarket Road, a busy dual carriageway. The road is lined by a mix of
    commercial and residential properties, with commercial premises displaying a
    range of illuminated and non-illuminated fascia signage.
11. The pavement at this part of Newmarket Road is wide and contains a variety of
    street furniture, including street lights, cycle racks, bollards and a bus stop with a
    dual sided illuminated advertisement. However, the generous spacing and
    consistent alignment of these features ensure that the pavement does not appear
    visually cluttered.
12. The proposed street hub would be slim, occupying a modest footprint. Although it
    would be tall it would be well-aligned with the lighting columns and the bus stop
    which would assist in breaking up longer range views of the street hub and
    advertisements such that it would not appear overly dominant. The street hub
    would also be sufficiently spaced from the bus stop and other street furniture,
    including the bollards and cycle rack, which are set back from the pavement. The
    street hub would therefore not harmfully add to a sense of visual clutter and, along

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6012225 and 6012222


       with its slender form, would not impede the free-flow of pedestrians along the
       pavement at this part of Newmarket Road, including those with mobility, visual or
       cognitive impairments.
13. Given the presence of multiple other advertisements nearby, the digital
    advertisements would not appear incongruous or unduly prominent when viewed
    in this busy urban location. I am satisfied that suitable conditions could be imposed
    controlling luminance levels, the speed of image changes and restriction on
    moving images, ensuring that the displays would not appear overly stark or result
    in adverse light spill. For this reason, I am satisfied that occupiers of the nearby
    residential properties would not experience any adverse residential amenity
    impacts. I note that the Environmental Health Officer raised no concerns on this
    issue.
14. In conclusion, with regard to Appeal A, the advertisements would not harm the
    visual amenity of the area, it would therefore accord with policies 55 and 65 of the
    Cambridge Local Plan (2018) (LP). Together, amongst other matters, these seek
    to ensure that proposals respond positively to their context, do not adversely affect
    the character and setting of the area or its visual amenity, and do not impede
    pedestrian movements.
15. With regards to Appeal B, the street hub would not harm the character and
    appearance of the area. Consequently, the proposal would accord with policies 23,
    55, 59 and 65 of the LP. Together these seek to ensure proposals respond
    positively to their context and do not have an adverse impact on the character of
    the area and its visual amenity and are in keeping with their setting. It would also
    not undermine the objectives of the Eastern Gate Opportunity area.
16. Policy 57 of the LP has been cited on the decision notice in relation to Appeal B
    and Policy 64 in relation to Appeal A. However, as these respectively relate to
    designing new buildings and shop fronts they have not been determinative in my
    decision.
Other Matters
17. The appellant has indicated that the proposal would result in the removal of an
    existing kiosk at the junction of Emmanuel Road and Parker Street. However, I am
    not satisfied that the removal of the kiosk could reasonably be secured as part of a
    condition attached to any approval. In any case, the scheme is acceptable on its
    own merits.
18. The appeal site is located on the opposite side of the road from the Riverside
    Conservation Area (CA). Its significance is derived, in part, from the River Cam
    and its bridges, the 19th century terraced housing and large open spaces which
    form an important green wedge within the city. The Council found that there would
    be no harm to the setting of the CA. Based on the evidence before me and my
    own observations on site, I see no reason to reach a different conclusion.
    Therefore, I find that the proposal would preserve the setting of the CA and would
    neither harm its significance nor undermine its special architectural or historic
    interest.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6012225 and 6012222


19. The Highways Authority are satisfied that the proposed advertisements, subject to
    appropriate conditions would not raise any highway safety concerns. Based on the
    evidence provided, and from what I have seen during my visit, I have no reason to
    disagree.
20. Interested parties have raised concerns that the street hub would be sited directly
    outside the entrance to the residential block of flats. However, the site plan shows
    the street hub would be located away from building’s entrance. I am therefore
    satisfied that its siting would not hinder access to the flats.
Conditions
21. I have considered the suggested conditions from the parties against the tests set
    out in the Framework and Planning Practice Guidance. Where appropriate, I have
    adjusted the wording in the interests of precision and enforceability.
22. For Appeal A, in addition to the five standard conditions set out in Schedule 2 of
    the 2007 Regulations, it is necessary to impose conditions relating to the
    frequency and method with which the displays change, control of moving images
    and requirement of a blank or frozen screen in the event of a malfunction in the
    interests of visual amenity and highway safety.
23. In the interests of highway safety, it is necessary to impose a condition ensuring
    advertisements do not resemble traffic signs.
24. A condition is necessary to restrict the luminance of the advertisements in the
    interests of residential amenity and highway safety. Although the appellant
    suggested a luminance limit of 600 cd/m2, this would not reflect the guidance in
    PLG 05/23) 'Brightness of Illuminated Advertisements including Digital Displays'. I
    have therefore imposed a lower limit consisted with the guidance.
25. The five year time period is set out in the formal decision and is the time period set
    out in the regulations; thus, a separate condition is not necessary.
26. It is not necessary to attach a condition listing the approved plans, as my decision
    relating to Appeal A grants express consent, not planning permission.
27. For Appeal B, there is a need for the standard time limit and a list of approved
    plans in the interests of certainty. A condition requiring compliance with the noise
    management plan is necessary to ensure no harm to neighbouring living
    conditions.
Conclusion
28. For the reasons given, I conclude that appeal A and B should be allowed.

T Bennett
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decisions 6012225 and 6012222


                                           Schedule of Conditions
Appeal A
    1) The minimum display time for each advertisement shall be 10 seconds, and the
       advertisement display panels shall display static images only. The interval
       between successive advertisements shall be no greater than 1 second and the
       complete display shall change without effect.

    2) The advertisement digital display screens shall include a mechanism to default
       to a frozen advertisement or a blank or black screen in the event of any
       malfunction.

    3) No content on the digital display screens shall resemble traffic signs, as defined
       in Section 64 of the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984.

    4) In the hours of darkness, the advertisement display luminance shall be no
       greater than 300cd/m2 in accordance with the recommended maximum night
       time luminance values set out in Table 10.4 within the Institution of Lighting
       Professionals - Professional Lighting Guide (PLG 05/23) 'Brightness of
       Illuminated Advertisements including Digital Displays' (or its equivalent in a
       replacement guide) in cd/m2.


Appeal B
       1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
          the date of this decision.
       2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
          following plans: 001 Site Location (REV B), 002 Site Plan, and 003 Existing
          and Proposed Elevations (REV A).


       3) The noise mitigation and management commitments contained within the
          planning statement submitted (Reference: BT Street Hub Project Full Planning
          and Advertising Application CMB-19 Pavement o/s 160 Newmarket Road,
          Cambridge, CB5 8AX (E546399, N258907), prepared by Mitie Telecoms and
          dated 1st April 2026) shall be fully implemented, maintained and not altered.


                                                **End of Conditions**




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         5
