 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 21 August 2026
 by Victor Callister BA(Hons) PGC(Oxon) DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 4 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012695
 205 Kidbrooke Park Road, Kidbrooke, Greenwich SE3 9PP
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Prudence Chibuye against the decision of the Royal Borough of Greenwich
      Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/0923/HD.
 •    The development proposed is extension to the current dropped kerb/residential crossover and
      associated works.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for extension to the
   current dropped kerb/residential crossover and associated works at 205 Kidbrooke
   Park Road, Kidbrooke Greenwich SE3 9PP in accordance with the terms of the
   application, Ref 26/0923/HD, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: 205.01 Rev A, 205.02 Rev A and 205.03.
Procedural Matters
2. As the description of development varies between documents submitted, I have
   used that from the Council’s decision notice as this is a concise and accurate
   description that has also been used by the appellant for their statement.
3. Subsequent to the decision made by the Council on the application to which this
   appeal relates, the Government published a revised National Planning Policy
   Framework (August 2026) (the Framework). I consider that there have been no
   major changes relevant to the main issues in this appeal. It will therefore not
   prejudice any party by making my decision with regard to the revised Framework.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect on highway and public safety.
Reasons
5. The appeal dwelling is a two storey semi-detached house located in a cul-de-sac
   off of Kidbrooke Park Road. To the front of the property is an existing dopped kerb


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012695


     crossover that forms part of a more extensive single crossover that also serves the
     neighbouring house at 207 Kidbrooke Park Road. The provision of a single longer
     dropped kerb crossover is also used for vehicle access for 2 neighbouring
     properties, which is the predominant form of access evident elsewhere in the cul-
     de-sac.
6. Within the narrower neck of the cul-de-sac, on street parking is allowed with a
   restriction allowing parking for permit holders only from 10 am to 12:30 pm,
   Monday to Friday on the side within which the appeal dwelling sits. The other side
   of the street having a double yellow line parking restriction.
7. The front garden of the appeal dwelling has recently been entirely paved to provide
   hard standing for car parking. This appears to be without a planning permission,
   but this does not form part of the proposal that is the subject of this appeal.
8. The proposal is to extend the length of the existing crossover in front of the appeal
   dwelling to 6 Metres. This would be 0.6 metres longer than the maximum set out in
   the Royal Borough of Greenwich Residential Domestic Vehicle Crossover Policy
   (2019) (Crossover Policy Document). This is a highways policy document rather
   than adopted planning policy and is a material consideration to which I have given
   significant weight in my considerations.
9. The appellant has photographically documented an ongoing issue of cars parking
   in front of the existing length of dropped kerb crossover in front of their property.
   Such sloppy parking in front of part or all of a dropped kerb crossover is a
   common fact of life in many streets with off street parking access via crossovers.
   However, the length and curved nature of that in front of the appeal dwelling, due
   to it also serving a neighbouring property with a dwarf wall between the two
   separate driveways, results in a particular and more regular problem. This
   consistent issue poor parking causes a significant risk to highway and public
   safety, to which I have given substantial weight in my considerations.
10. Given the nature of the existing shared longer crossovers in the cul-de-sac, which
    by its nature is a quiet street with little pedestrian or vehicular traffic. The extension
    of the existing crossover would not result in any significant additional risk to either
    pedestrians or other road users. Rather the proposal would go some way to
    resolving the existing parking related safety issue documented by the appellant.
11. Although the proposal would reduce the length of on street parking in the cul-de-
    sac, from the photographs of parking in the cul-de-sac submitted by the appellant,
    it is not evident that this would be a full single parking space much of the time.
    However, the loss of a single parking space would be a minor loss within the
    context of the wider area and would not result in any significant highway or public
    safety issues.
12. Whilst the proposal would be 0.6m longer than the maximum set out in the
    Crossover Policy Document, this is a relatively small additional length, which would
    result in it covering more frontage of the appeal dwelling and allowing a car to
    access/exit the hardstanding in front of the appeal dwelling whilst another is
    parked. This is similar to shared dropped kerbs to other properties in the cul-de-
    sac. Given the benefits of the proposal with regard to resolving an ongoing unsafe
    parking issue that I have identified, I find that this is a justifiable additional length in
    this instance.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
 Appeal Decision 6012695


Other Matters
13. The appellant has raised concerns about communication with and from the Council
    related to the original application. These are not matters for me to consider as part
    of this appeal, as there are separate Council procedures available for such
    matters.
14. For the reasons given above, I find that the proposal accords with Policies DH1
    IM(a), IM(b) and IM(c) of the Royal Greenwich Local Plan (2014), Policies T2 and
    T4 of the London Plan (2021) and Policies TR3 and TR4 of the Framework.
    Collectively these seek development that is of high quality design, improve street
    safety, have regard to road hierarchy, taking account of patterns of movement
    particularly for pedestrians and cyclists and their safety and not increase road
    danger.
Conditions
15. Along with the standard condition on the timing of implementation and in the
    interests of good design I have attached a condition requiring compliance with
    approved plans.
Conclusion
16. The appeal is allowed.



Victor Callister
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
