 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 7 August 2026
 by B J Sims BSc (Hons) CEng MICE MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date:19 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012214
 11 Beverley Gardens, Wembley, HA9 9RD
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Stuart Mann against the decision of Brent London Borough Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/0211.
 •    The development proposed is the demolition of existing side garage and erection of single-storey
      side extension, front porch extension, single-storey outbuilding in rear garden and alterations to
      forecourt and boundary treatment to dwellinghouse.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for demolition of existing
   side garage and erection of single-storey side extension, front porch extension,
   single-storey outbuilding in rear garden and alterations to forecourt and boundary
   treatment to dwellinghouse at 11 Beverley Gardens, Wembley, HA9 9RD, in
   accordance with the terms of the application, Ref 26/0211, and subject to the
   following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out only in accordance
              with the following approved drawings:
                   A1537 01            SITE and LOCATION PLANS
                   A1537 02            EXISTING GROUND and FIRST FLOOR PLANS
                   A1537 03            EXISTING ELEVATIONS
                   A1537 04            PROPOSED GROUND and FIRST FLOOR PLANS
                   A1537 05A           PROPOSED HOUSE ELEVATIONS
                   A1537 06            EXISTING and PROPOSED ROOF PLANS
                   A1537 06A           EXISTING and PROPOSED ROOF PLANS
                   A1537 07            PROPOSED BOUNDARY TREATMENT
                   A1537 07A           PROPOSED BOUNDARY TREATMENT
                   A1537 08A           EXISTING BOUNDARY TREATMENT
     3)       The external finishing materials to the single-storey side extension and front
              porch extension hereby permitted shall match those of the existing house.
Main Issues
2. The Council raises no objections to the proposed office outbuilding in the rear
   garden of the appeal property or to the proposed alterations to the forecourt and
   front boundary treatment. I agree that those elements of the works would not result
   in any planning harm.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6010571


3. I consider the main issue in the appeal to be the effects the proposed extensions to
   the front of the dwelling would have on the character and appearance of No11
   Beverley Gardens itself and on the local street scene in the context of the Barn Hill
   Conservation Area (CA) within which the appeal site is situated.
Reasons
Character and Appearance
4. Policy DMP1 of the adopted Brent Local Plan (BLP) generally requires new
   development to provide high levels of external amenity, complementary to the
   locality, and to conserve the significance of heritage assets, such as conservation
   areas where Policy BHC1 of the BLP, as well as established planning the law,
   requires their character or appearance to be preserved or enhanced.
5. Supplementary guidance states that original front doors and porches are best
   retained but, where replaced, the new construction should match the original in
   style and materials.
6. The proposed porch and side extensions would together stand a little forward of the
   main elevation under a mono-pitch roof uncharacteristic of the original form of the
   house. However, the arched doorway feature shared with neighbouring dwellings
   would be retained, as would the overall visual primacy of the main elevation, such
   that the extensions would appear duly subordinate.
7. Other similar properties in the local street scene have undergone comparable front
   alterations. I note the evidence of the Council that those alterations were made
   without formal approval. However, enforcement against unauthorised development
   remains a matter of discretion for the Council, subject to relevant timescales, and I
   have been shown no evidence of any such action being taken in respect of the
   properties named. Realistically, there seems little prospect that the alterations to
   the properties concerned will be reversed.
8. In the circumstances, I find that the extensions proposed to No11 would cause no
   harm to the character or appearance either of the host dwelling itself or to that of
   the local street scene, as it now exists, or to that of the Barn Hill CA as a whole,
   which would accordingly be preserved as required.
9. Therefore, I consider all the appeal proposals to be compliant with the relevant
   policies referenced above and with the development plan as whole.
Other Matters
10. I have paid due regard to every other matter raised in the written representations,
    including neighbouring amenity, but find no other consideration to affect my
    decision.
Conclusion
11. For the reasons explained, I conclude that this appeal should be allowed and the
    permission sought approved, subject only to the standard conditions set out above.

B J Sims
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
