 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 10 August 2026
 by Rebecca McAndrew, BA Hons, MSc, PG Dip Urban Design, MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 27 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012250
 89 Bookerhill Road, High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire HP12 4EY
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr Gregory Thomas against the decision of Buckinghamshire Council.
 •   The application Ref is PL/26/02333/FA.
 •   The development proposed is a dropped kerb and parking area.


Decision
1.   The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a dropped kerb and parking
     area at 89 Bookerhill Road, High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire HP12 4EY in accordance
     with the terms of the application, Ref PL/26/02333/FA, subject to the following conditions:
     1)      The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the date
             of this decision.
     2)      The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
             following approved plans: 89BR-001, 89BR-002 and site location plan
     3)      Prior to the first use of the approved area, a scheme to restrict its use to parking for
             a single vehicle shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the Local Planning
             Authority. The scheme shall include details of any physical measures necessary to
             prevent vehicles from parking on the shorter section of hardstanding and
             overhanging the adjacent footway. The approved measures shall be installed before
             the parking area is first brought into use and shall thereafter be retained.
Preliminary Matters
2.   During the course of this appeal, the updated National Planning Policy Framework (2026)
     was published. I am satisfied that this does not alter my assessment, as the relevant
     provisions remain materially the same in respect of the main issue of this appeal.
3.   I have taken the description of development in the banner above from the Council’s
     decision notice as it is more concise than that included on the planning application form.
Main Issue
4.   The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on highway and pedestrian
     safety.
Reasons
5.   Taken together, Policy DM33 of the Wycombe District Local Plan (2019) (LP),
     Buckinghamshire’s Local Transport Plan 4 (2016) (TP), Buckinghamshire Council
     Buckinghamshire Countywide Parking Guidance Policy (2015) (PG), Highways
     Development Management Guidance (2018) (HDMG) and the National Planning Policy
     Framework (2026) (‘the Framework’) require parking arrangements to be safe,
     appropriately designed, and capable of accommodating vehicles wholly within the site
     without causing obstruction or harm to pedestrian or highway safety.
6.   The appellant’s statement confirms that he would be satisfied to park only a single vehicle
     within his front garden. However, the proposals include a shorter section of hardstanding
     adjacent to the proposed parking space, directly in front of the porch, which could also be
     used for parking. This could result in a vehicle overhanging the footway, which would be
     detrimental to pedestrian and highway safety.
7.   Nonetheless, this matter can be satisfactorily addressed through the imposition of a
     planning condition. The appellant’s statement confirms he would be willing to provide
     physical stops or other measures to prevent overhang. In my view, pedestrian and highway
     safety could be safeguarded by a fixed physical barrier or bollard being installed along the
     frontage of the hardstanding in question. This would restrict access and maintain the
     approved parking arrangement, providing a simple and effective means of eliminating the
     identified risk. As such, subject to such a condition, the proposal would not result in harm
     to highway safety.
8.   Taking all of the above into account, and subject to proposed condition, the development
     would not unacceptably harm highway or pedestrian safety. Therefore, there is no conflict
     with LP Policy DM33 or the provisions of the TP, PG, HDMG and the Framework.
Conditions
9.   I attach conditions which are necessary to provide certainty over commencement and to
     ensure the development proceeds strictly in accordance with the approved plans.
10. I attach a condition requiring a scheme to be submitted, approved and implemented prior
    to the use of the area for parking, to ensure that the parking area hereby approved is
    restricted to one vehicle, in the interests of pedestrian and highway safety.
11. I have not attached the Council’s suggested condition requiring the hardstanding to be
    retained solely for parking, as this restriction is not necessary to make the development
    acceptable. The scheme is for a single parking space, and the use of the remaining
    hardstanding for other domestic purposes would be unlikely to have any bearing on
    highway safety. The suggested condition also seeks to secure permeable surfacing or
    appropriate drainage; however, these details are already provided within the submitted
    drawings, and a further condition is therefore unnecessary. Similarly, I have not attached
    the suggested condition relating to the construction of the access, as sufficient detail to
    secure its layout has been provided, and this requirement is not necessary to make the
    development acceptable.
Conclusion
12. For the reasons given above and having had regard to all other matters raised, I conclude
    that the appeal should be allowed.




INSPECTOR
