    Appeal Decision
    Site visit made on 31 August 2026

    by S Hartley BA (Hons) Dist.TP (Manc) DMS MRTPI MRICS
    an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State

    Decision date: 7 September 2026



Appeal Ref: 6012025
43 Endcliffe Rise Road, Sheffield, S11 8RU
•      The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal to
       grant planning permission.
•      The appeal is made by Mr. Sameer Khan against the decision of Sheffield City Councill.
•      The application is reference 26/00417/FUL.
•      The development proposed is the erection of 2 dormer windows to the side of the dwellinghouse.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.

Procedural Matter

2. The applicant describes the proposed development as for ‘2 dormer windows on
   the existing floor space meet 40m2 regulation’. I have used the local planning
   authorities description (LPA) in the banner and in the decision as it is more precise.

3. On 17 August 2026, the Government published a revised National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework). This is a relevant material planning consideration of
   ‘critical importance’ from a decision-making point of view. However, as the revisions
   do not significantly change the assessment of the main issues in this appeal, it has
   not been necessary for me to consult the main parties upon it.

4. The appeal appears to be made retrospectively for development already
   constructed.
Main Issue

5. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development upon the character and
   appearance of the building.

    Reasons

6. The appeal property is in a residential area of mainly two storey terraced dwellings,
   especially along Endcliffe Rise Road but also along Brocco Bank. On my site visit, I
   was able to observe that several properties have small, front facing dormer
   windows, again along both roads. In the main, these are characterised as small
   scale additions in terms of their widths, heights and their extensions from the
   original roof planes. They do not appear as dominant features in the appearance of
   the area.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision Appeal Ref: 6012025


7. The appeal property is a substantial, prominent, stone built building attached to a
   residential property of a similar age and distinction. It is sited at the junction of
   Endcliffe Rise Road and Brocco Bank. It includes a number of double height, white
   coloured bays on its eastern elevation facing onto Brocco Bank which also includes
   a number of dormer windows which align with windows below them. The building is
   divided into two apartments.

8. The appeal development is for two dormer windows, one of which is sited on the
   eastern elevation at the very point of the highway junction described above and
   facing Brocco Bank.

9. Unlike the other dormers on this elevation there are no bay windows below it, While
   the symmetry of the other dormers in this regards is not followed, the presence of a
   high hedge in front of it helps to hide this difference, though it may be more obvious
   in the winter months when the hedge is likely to be less of a screen.

10. The dormers to the elevation which pre-date the appeal proposal have a slightly
    arched top and the glazing to them take up most of the frontages to the dormers.
    There is a similarity to their design which adds positively and distinctively to the
    character and appearance of the building.

11. However, the appealed dormer has a flat top to it and has a much reduced amount
    of glazing, with the frontage containing much more cladding that the other dormers.
    The essential design features of the latter are not carried forward into the appealed
    dormer with the result that it has an adverse, incongruous effect upon the
    character and appearance of the building.

12. The appeal includes a second dormer window to the west facing elevation along
    Endcliffe Rise Road and to which it is set at an angle running away from the road.

13. Unlike the other small scale dormers which exist along the road, the appeal
    proposal is for a dormer with a much greater width, with a floor to ceiling window
    height and which extends outwards from the original roof pitch to the very edge of
    the external wall. It has an adversely bulky, incongruous and dominating impact
    upon the building.

    14. Therefore, I conclude that the development conflicts with policies BE5 and H14
        of the adopted Sheffield Unitary Development Plan 1998, policy CS74 of the
        Sheffield Development Framework Core Strategy 2009, Guidelines 1, 2 and 3 of
        the Supplementary Planning Guidance on Designing House Extensions 1996
        and DP3 of the Framework, all of which require good design.
Conclusion

    15. There are no material planning considerations that indicate that the application
        should be determined other than in accordance with the development plan.
        Therefore, the appeal should be dismissed.
 INSPECTOR

 S. Hartley


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
