 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 14 August 2026
 by Jonathan Price BA(Hons) DipTP DMS MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 25 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012179
 30 Slade Road, Holland on Sea, Essex CO15 5EH
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Tracey Harrendence against the decision of Tendring District Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00481/FULHH.
 •    The development proposed is new rear and side extension with flat roof and new enclosed entrance
      porch with mono pitched roof (revised application following earlier refused application
      25/00937/FULHH).

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2. On 17 August 2026 the Government published the revised National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework). This does not alter the requirement in planning law
   that appeals be determined in accordance with the development plan, unless
   material considerations indicate otherwise. Because the relevant development plan
   policies in this case are not materially inconsistent with those of the new
   Framework, I have not deemed it necessary to seek the further views of the parties.
Main Issue
3. The effects of this proposal on the living conditions at the neighbouring dwelling at
   28 Slade Road, with particular regard to outlook.
Reasons
4. The semi-detached house at No 30 forms part of a frontage of modestly-scaled and
   closely spaced residential development which observes an even building line. The
   proposal amends an earlier scheme which had been dismissed on appeal1, seeking
   to address the Inspector’s concerns. These had related just to the side and rear
   extension and so the separate entrance porch remains unchanged.
5. As previously, the extension would wrap around the rear corner of the dwelling,
   adjacent to the corresponding part of the semi-detached house at No 28. Like the
   previous Inspector, I did not observe ground levels at No 28 to be significantly
   lower as to exacerbate the impact of the proposed extensions. The previous
   Inspector had found the height and depth of the proposed development extending
   towards the shared boundary and rising above the boundary fence to be

1 Appeal ref: 6001311 dismissed on 10 February 2026.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012179


     overbearing and materially harmful to the outlook for the occupiers of No 28,
     particularly from their ground floor rear facing windows and rear garden.
6. This proposal changes the previously hipped roof to a flat one. This would remove
   any aspect of a pitch rising away from No 28, and the view instead would be of the
   closest edge of the flat roof. This would be at a slightly greater height than the
   eaves to the hipped roof proposed previously. Compared to this earlier proposal,
   the width towards the neighbours’ side and the depth into the garden would be
   reduced slightly.
7. Giving appropriate weight to the previous Inspector’s findings, the flat roof and
   slightly reduced extent of the extension would be insufficient for me to reach a
   different conclusion. Notwithstanding the changes made, the side and rear
   extension proposed would still have quite an overbearing impact on the outlook
   from the rear windows and adjacent area of back garden at No 28, causing material
   harm to the living conditions of these neighbouring occupiers. This brings the
   proposal into conflict with Policy SP7 of the Section 1 Tendring Local Plan, which
   applies place shaping principles including to protect the amenity of existing and
   future residents from overbearing new developments. There would also be conflict
   with Policy SPL3 of the Section 2 Tendring Local Plan, which applies criteria
   including that buildings be designed and orientated to ensure adequate outlook for
   future and existing residents.
Other Matters
8. The appellant has provided detailed plans of how No 30 might be extended at the
   side and rear by virtue of the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted
   Development) (England) Order 2015. This is a realistic fallback scenario and is
   given appropriate weight as such. The taller and longer extension facing onto the
   side of No 28 would be harmful to these occupiers’ living conditions. Crucially
   however, such an extension would not have such an overbearing impact on outlook
   from the main rear facing windows of ground floor habitable rooms or the adjacent
   parts of the back garden. On this basis, the existence of such a fallback option
   would fail to outweigh the harm found from the proposal under consideration.
Conclusion
9. Material considerations would not indicate this appeal be decided otherwise than in
   accordance with the development plan, with which there would as a whole be
   conflict. Consequently, I conclude the appeal fails.

Jonathan Price
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
