Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 September 2026
by J Hills MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012985
Road from Frost Cross to Oldborough Cross, Morchard Bishop, Devon EX17 6SF
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant permission in principle.
•    The appeal is made by Neil Vogwill against the decision of Mid Devon District Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00300/PIP.
•    The development proposed is permission in principle (PIP) for 1no. new dwelling at land at Morchard
     Bishop.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary matters
2.     The proposal is for permission in principle. The Planning Practice Guidance
       advises that this is an alternative way of obtaining planning permission for
       housing-led development. The permission in principle consent route has 2 stages:
       the first stage (or permission in principle stage) establishes whether a site is
       suitable in-principle and the second (‘technical details consent’) stage is when the
       detailed development proposals are assessed. This appeal relates to the first of
       these 2 stages.
3.     The scope of the considerations for permission in principle is limited to location,
       land use and the amount of development permitted. All other matters are
       considered as part of a subsequent technical details consent application if
       permission in principle is granted. The Council is concerned with the location, and I
       have determined the appeal accordingly.
4.     An applicant can apply for permission in principle for a range of dwellings by
       expressing a minimum and maximum number of dwellings as part of the
       application. In this instance, permission has been sought for a maximum of 1
       dwelling.
5.     On 17 August 2026, the Government published a new National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework). Both parties have had the opportunity to comment
       on its implications for their respective cases. I have considered the new
       Framework in my determination of the appeal.
Main issue
6.     The main issue is whether the site is suitable for residential development, having
       regard to its location, the proposed land use, and the amount of development.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012985


Reasons
7.      Policy S1 of the Mid Devon Local Plan (LP) sets out the Council’s development
        priorities which include focusing new housing towards towns and villages, as well
        as reducing the need to travel by car. LP Policy S3 is concerned with meeting
        housing needs and notes that outside settlements there is some support for
        self-build dwellings meeting local community needs. These are assessed under
        DM6. Amongst other things, this policy requires that the site adjoins a settlement.
        Land outside settlements is defined as being in the countryside for the purposes of
        LP Policy S14. Here, development is limited to certain circumstances, and its
        supporting text highlights how isolated homes, which are defined as those outside
        settlements, will be avoided unless there are special circumstances. This definition
        of isolated is consistent with the Framework. LP Policy S13 allows for small scale
        housing within settlements such as Morchard Bishop.
8.      The eligibility restrictions put in place on self-build proposals within DM6 part a)
        are noted. The appellant makes the case that more recent definitions of self-build
        would allow for open market housing to come forward for this house type. I find no
        reason to disagree and give any conflict with this part of the policy little weight.
        Unlike the submitted appeal example1, It would not be possible to attach a
        condition to a permission in principle. Even so, it is conceivable that self-build
        housing for this single dwelling could be secured with a technical details consent
        application.
9.      Be that as it may, the appeal site is said to be about 400m away from Morchard
        Bishop, which is the nearest defined settlement. While near a scattered group of
        dwellings that extends in a linear form away from the settlement, there are notable
        verdant gaps along this route. These are most pronounced at the bottom of the hill
        leading to Morchard Bishop. Such characteristics lead to a physical separation
        between the appeal site and nearest settlement.
10. Although properties line the lane adjacent to the appeal site, there are no nearby
    houses either side of it. Therefore, a new dwelling here could not reasonably be
    considered a natural infilling. It is nevertheless acknowledged that the proximity of
    other nearby properties means that there is no overriding sense of isolation. That
    is not to say however that the appeal site is not isolated from Morchard Bishop in
    the terms set out in the LP and Framework.
11. With the above in mind, the Council is concerned that there would not be
    reasonable access to services and facilities. There is a bus stop at a mid-point
    along the connecting lane between appeal site and settlement that I am told
    provides a service every other hour. Even though this may be typical of services
    found in such rural areas, future occupiers would still need to navigate a narrow
    lane that lacks any pavement. During my visit I had to move to the grass verge on
    several occasions to avoid passing vehicles. I did observe some street lighting,
    though the route would not be appealing for all road users, especially in times of
    unfavourable weather.
12. It took me over 10 minutes to walk from the appeal site to the village pub. Having
    had regard to the referenced extract from the National Design Guide, walking or
    cycling to Morchard Bishop with its limited range of facilities would, given the steep
    hill, be a challenge for some, including those with young children, or the elderly,
1
    6001094


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012985


       even on an occasional basis. It is acknowledged that rural living differs from urban
       areas, though the physical and functional separation means the appeal site is not
       well-related to Morchard Bishop. Moreover, even with the presence of a school
       and community shop, the proposal would be unlikely to reduce the need to travel
       by car.
13. I therefore conclude that the site is unsuitable for residential development, having
    regard to its location, the proposed land use, and the amount of development. As
    such, there would be conflict with LP policies S1, S3, S14, and DM6.
Other matters
14. The conservation area and some listed buildings are nearby. Sections 66(1) and
    72(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (The
    Act) require me to have special regard to the desirability of preserving the
    buildings or their setting or any features of special architectural or historic interest
    which they possess. As I am dismissing the appeal, I have not pursued this matter
    any further.
15. The appellant has referred to a permission in principle approximately 1.18km north
    of the appeal site. Even if outside the settlement boundary, the available evidence
    indicates a close relationship with the village. It is in a different location and cannot
    be compared in the same light as this appeal. Moreover, I am not bound by
    decisions of the Council. I give this matter little weight.
Planning balance
16. The proposal would conflict with the Council’s overarching strategies to direct
    housing to the most sustainable locations, whilst reducing the need to travel by
    car. There would be conflict with the development plan as a whole.
17. However, it is undisputed that the Council cannot demonstrate a five-year supply
    of deliverable housing sites. In these circumstances, the Framework’s approach to
    determining proposals for development outside settlements, as set out at
    Policy S5 is an important consideration. This policy advises that residential
    development of limited infilling within groups of houses, or that which is physically
    well-related to an existing settlement, should be approved, unless the benefits of
    doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
18. I have however found above that the proposal would not meet either of these tests.
    Additionally, none of the circumstances permitted under Framework Policy HO11
    would apply. Part 4 of S5 says that proposals that do not fall into such categories
    should only be approved in exceptional circumstances. The benefits of a proposal
    must substantially outweigh the adverse effects including promoting sustainable
    patterns of movement. I attach substantial weight to the harm identified in respect
    of patterns of movement.
19. Set against this harm, there would be benefits associated with the development. It
    would support the Framework’s objective of delivering a substantial increase in the
    supply of homes. In view of the current evidenced unmet need for housing,
    Framework Policy HO7 requires that substantial weight should be given to this
    benefit.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6012985


20. The benefits of securing self-build housing would be dealt with at a later stage and
    cannot be relied upon here as a strong reason to support the proposal. I attach
    moderate weight to any such benefits. Additionally, EV charging points could bring
    with them some environmental benefits.
21. There would also be economic benefits associated with the development, through
    the creation of jobs during the construction phase. Thereafter, residents would
    contribute to the local economy through ongoing spending and support for local
    services. The very small scale of the development means that these benefits carry
    limited weight.
22. When assessed against the policies in the Framework, taken as a whole, the
    benefits of the proposal do not substantially outweigh the adverse effects.
    Therefore, this conflict means that permission in principle should not be granted.
Conclusion
23. The proposal would conflict with the development plan as a whole and there are
    no other considerations, including the provisions of the Framework, which
    outweigh this finding. Therefore, for the reasons given, the appeal should not
    succeed.




J Hills
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
