Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by David Troy BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 October 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6012112
369 Fulham Road, London, SW10 9TR
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Patrick Thomas of JOLT Charge Limited against the decision of Royal
     Borough of Kensington and Chelsea.
•    The application Ref is PP/26/00148.
•    The development proposed is the installation of one JOLT Unit (Electric Vehicle Charge Point, with
     integral double-sided LCD screen) and associated electrical connection works.

Appeal B Ref: 6012114
369 Fulham Road, London, SW10 9TR
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Patrick Thomas of JOLT Charge Limited against the decision of Royal
     Borough of Kensington and Chelsea.
•    The application Ref is CA/26/00149.
•    The advertisement proposed is the installation of one JOLT Unit (Electric Vehicle Charge Point, with
     integral double-sided LCD screen) and associated electrical connection works.

Decisions
1.     Appeals A and B are dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     Appeal A concerns the refusal of planning permission to erect a JOLT Unit (JOLT).
       Appeal B concerns the refusal of express consent to display advertisements on the
       JOLT. I have considered each on its individual merits, however, as they raise
       similar issues I have combined both decisions into a single decision letter.
3.     With respect to Appeal B, Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements)
       (England) Regulations 2007 (the Regulations) specify that decisions must be
       based solely on considerations of amenity and public safety. Therefore, while I
       have taken the development plan policies referred to by the Council into account,
       they have not been determinative in respect of Appeal B.
4.     The appellant’s appeal submission includes an amended plan (ref. JLT.002-
       Proposed Layout Rev B) showing the relocation of the proposed JOLT onto the
       footpath adjacent to the dedicated pick up and drop off taxi area outside Chelsea
       and Westminster Hospital at No. 369 Fulham Road. As the amendments shown
       would not involve a substantial change to the application and all parties have been
       consulted and provided with an opportunity to comment on this change as part of


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6012112 and 6012114


       the appeal, I consider that there would be no prejudice to any party by considering
       the amended plan. I have determined the appeal on this basis accordingly.
5.     Since the determination of the application an updated and revised National
       Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026.
       The main parties have been consulted and provided with an opportunity to provide
       comments on it in relation to these appeals. I have therefore considered the
       development against the relevant policies in the Framework.
Main Issues
6.     The main issues in relation to Appeal A are the effect of the proposed
       development on the character and appearance of the area, including the setting of
       the Boltons Conservation Area (CA), and highway safety.
7.     The main issues in relation to Appeal B are the effect of the proposed
       advertisement on amenity and public safety.
Reasons
Appeals A and B - Character and Appearance/Amenity
8.     The appeal site comprises of a footpath outside the modern and substantial
       Chelsea and Westminster Hospital building fronting onto the busy Fulham Road. A
       row of commercial units is situated at ground floor level either side of the main
       entrance to the hospital. It is located within the Fulham Road District Centre
       (Secondary Frontage), surrounded by a range of retail and commercial uses that
       provides a busy and vibrant commercial character to the area.
9.     The public realm in the vicinity of the appeal site is defined by the wide and broad
       nature of the footway occupied by a wide array of street furniture and other
       features, including street trees, bins, utility cabinets, lamp posts and a post box. A
       series of substantial metal posts are also positioned at regular intervals along the
       footpath, supporting the high overhead canopy running across the front of the
       hospital. As such, the footway is already cluttered in terms of these various
       structures and features.
10. The proposed JOLT would be positioned in a prominent location set back a short
    distance from the edge of the pavement and would be clearly visible to passing
    pedestrians and motorists. Due to its height, width and overall solidity it would be a
    prominent feature within its immediate setting. Thus, despite the commercial
    district centre location, due to its overall size and visibility, it would add
    unfavourably to the existing features, resulting in an overly cluttered and visually
    incongruous street scene, which I consider would adversely harm rather than
    positively contribute to the character and appearance of the area.
11. The predominant form of advertisement are modestly sized fascia signage and
    projecting signs that are proportionate to the scale of the shops and other
    commercial premises. While this is a district centre location, the double-sided
    illuminated advertisement display screens integrated with the JOLT would draw
    particular attention to the juxtaposition of the free standing JOLT with the existing
    street furniture and as such would contribute to the visually cluttered appearance
    of the street scene in this location. The fact that the illumination levels would be
    limited and the frequency of image changes could be controlled by planning


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6012112 and 6012114


       conditions would not be sufficient measures to overcome the harm I have found to
       the visual amenity of the area.
12. The CA boundary lies approximately 70m to the north east and approximately
    100m to the south west of the appeal site along the Fulham Road, respectively.
    The CA also covers a number of the nearby streets. Given the location of the
    appeal site within the setting of the CA, special attention must be paid to
    considering the impact of the development on the significance of the designated
    heritage assets and to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or
    appearance of the CA. The historic and architectural significance of the CA with its
    older more traditional buildings with large brick and stucco fronted Victorian
    terraced houses along the nearby streets can be readily appreciated within the
    immediate vicinity of the site. The proposed JOLT, however, would be located
    some distance from the CA and would be separated by the number of intervening
    buildings/structures. Consequently, I do not find harm in relation to this aspect and
    the setting of the CA would be preserved.
13. Accordingly, for these reasons, I conclude for Appeal A that the proposed
    development would have an unacceptably harmful effect on the character and
    appearance of the area. It would therefore be contrary to Policies CD1, CD2,
    CD15 and TR4 of the Kensington and Chelsea Local Plan 2024 (KCLP), which,
    amongst other things, seek to ensure that developments are designed and sited so
    as to respect the local character and protect views that contribute to the character
    and quality of the area.
14. With regard to Appeal B, I conclude the proposed advertisements would have an
    unacceptable harmful effect on visual amenity. Though not determinative, I have
    taken account of Policies CD1, CD2, CD15 and TR4 of the KCLP, which in
    addition to above, seeks to resist advertising that harm amenity and contributes to
    street clutter in the streetscape.
Appeals A and B - Highway Safety/Public Safety
15. The proposed JOLT would be positioned close to the edge of the wide pavement
    and adjacent to a dedicated taxi pick up and drop off area outside the Chelsea and
    Westminster Hospital. Fulham Road is a principal commercial shopping street
    within the town centre, and it was apparent from my site visit on a weekday that
    the footpath and pick up and drop off area outside the Hospital was busy. Although
    this was just a snapshot in time, I am mindful of the Transport for London and
    Council’s highway comments regarding the busy pick up and drop off area outside
    the Hospital and the high footfall in this location, that it is likely to be materially
    greater, particularly at peak times.
16. I note the appellant’s comments that the proposals shown on the amended plan
    (ref. JLT.002-Proposed Layout Rev B) would accord with the Transport for London
    Streetscape Guidance 2022 on pedestrian flow, where unobstructed footway
    should not fall below 2000mm in width, leaving around 5700mm of unobstructed
    footpath width available in front of the adjacent commercial units at the front of the
    hospital building and about 450mm to the road kerbside edge. The residual
    footway width in this location would also excess the 3m minimum clear footway
    width required by the Council’s Transport and Streets Supplementary Planning
    Document 2016. However, this does not take into account the footfall, and wide
    array of street furniture that already constrain the width of the footpath, including


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6012112 and 6012114


         the freestanding A frame advertising boards positioned outside the adjacent
         commercial units.
17. I observed during my site visit that many pedestrians naturally moved to the
    central area of the pavement to avoid the existing street furniture and other
    features and walk close to the position of the proposed JOLT, which formed a
    natural desire line for pedestrians in this location, particularly when accessing and
    alighting from vehicles using the drop off and pick up area.
18. In addition, I also observed the high frequency and indiscriminate use of the
    dedicated taxi pick up/drop off point by a wide range of motor vehicles, not just
    taxis, for manoeuvring, picking up and dropping off people in front of the hospital,
    including along the footpath edge in front of the proposed position of the JOLT in
    this location. I note the appellant’s comment that a taxi using the proposed JOLT
    would be parked in the same position as any taxi waiting for a fare. However, I
    noticed the waiting time for taxis was relatively short and the use of the JOLT in
    this position is likely to intensify the activity in this area. Any vehicle statutory whilst
    using the JOLT, even if for a short period, is likely to further exacerbate the
    situation and impede the free flow of traffic in this already busy location.
19. Consequently, given the use of the space available on the footpath, potential high
    footfall and the frequency of the use of the drop off and pick up area in this busy
    location, I consider, in my view, that the proposed JOLT, by virtue of its siting and
    design, would cause an undue obstruction to pedestrians and impede the free flow
    of pedestrian along the footpath, as well as vehicular traffic movements within the
    adjacent drop off and pick up area. As the proposed advertisements would be
    integral to the JOLT’s structure, it follows that this would also result in a harmful
    obstruction that would compromise the free and safe movement of pedestrians
    and vehicular traffic.
20. Therefore, for the reasons given, I conclude with regard to Appeal A that the
    proposed JOLT would have a harmful effect on highway safety with particular
    regard to the free and safe movement of pedestrians and vehicular traffic.
    Consequently, the proposal would be contrary to Policy TR6 of the KCLP and
    Policy T4 of the London Plan 2021 (LP) insofar as they relate to ensuring
    development protects the safety and free flow of the transport network; does not
    reduce access to, or the attractiveness of existing footways and maintains a high
    quality, safe and accessible pedestrian environment where the transport impacts
    are appropriately mitigated.
21. For Appeal B, I conclude that the proposed advertisements would cause harm to
    public safety. Though not determinative, I have taken into account Policy TR6 (f) of
    the KCLP and Policy T4 of the LP as outlined above.
Other Matters
22. I have noted the other development in the area drawn to my attention by the
    appellant. However, the New World Payphone granted outside No. 365 Fulham
    Road1 and existing BT InLink Kiosk outside No. 369 Fulham Road have different
    development characteristics to the appeal scheme and involved the replacement
    of an existing Kiosk at No. 365. As a consequence, whilst I have taken this into
    account, it does not materially alter my conclusions on the appeal proposals.

1
    Ref. PP/21/04641


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decisions 6012112 and 6012114


23. In support of the appeals, the appellant has included references to similar JOLT
    structures installed across London. However, I have not been provided the full
    details of these to know how directly comparable they are to the current proposals,
    which in turn limits their relevance. In any event I have determined the appeals
    before me on their own merits.
24. The appellant states that the proposals would contribute towards improving
    publicly available on-street electric vehicle infrastructure in line with the policies in
    the Framework and the Government’s EV Infrastructure Strategy. I have
    considered the various public benefits put forward by the appellant including the
    inclusive design to ensure usability by all drivers, including those with mobility
    impairments, delivery of publicly accessible and affordable competitively priced on-
    street charging facility powered by renewable energy, including a free daily 7kWh
    allowance to all users funded through advertising revenue and serving the high
    proportion of residents lacking off-street parking in the Borough.
25. The appellant has also highlighted the higher utilisation rates of the JOLT as
    compared to other public charging facilities and potential wider benefits associated
    with the increased footfall and expenditure in local businesses whilst vehicles are
    being charged as well as supporting the national and local policy objectives for
    decarbonisation, air quality improvements and transition to zero and low emission
    vehicles.
26. Nonetheless, given the limited scale of the proposals, these benefits would be
    modest and there is no indication that they could not be achieved in a less harmful
    manner than proposed. Therefore, the above combined benefits would not be
    sufficient to outweigh the harm I have identified in this case.
Conclusion
27. With regard to Appeal A, having regard to all other matters raised, I conclude that
    the proposed development is not in accordance with the development plan when
    read as a whole and Appeal A should be dismissed.
28. For the reasons given above, I conclude Appeal B should be dismissed.

David Troy
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
