 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 18 August 2026
 by Chris Couper BA (Hons) Dip TP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 24 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012587
 48 Golden Riddy, Linslade, Central Bedfordshire LU7 2RJ
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Ms Paula Michel against the decision of Central Bedfordshire Council.
 •    The application Ref is CB/26/00524/FULL.
 •    The development proposed is described as ‘two storey rear and single storey side extensions with
      loft conversion’.



Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for two storey rear and
   single storey side extensions with loft conversion at 48 Golden Riddy, Linslade,
   Central Bedfordshire LU7 2RJ in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref
   CB/26/00524/FULL, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plan: DD 25/094.1.
     3)       The external materials of the extension hereby permitted shall match those
              used in the existing building.
     4)       Prior to the development being brought into use, the parking layout shown on
              plan: DD 25/094.1 shall be implemented, and it shall thereafter be retained.
Procedural Matter
2. The revised National Planning Policy Framework was published in August 2026
   (‘the Framework’). Having regard to the submitted evidence, including the
   Council’s decision and its delegated report, and the main issue in this case, I am
   satisfied that its relevant policies are not substantially different from those that were
   in place at the time of the Council’s decision. It is that new version of the
   Framework that I refer to in my decision.
Main Issue
3. The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the
   host property and the area.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision: 6012587


Reasons
     Character and appearance
4. The properties on Golden Riddy are laid out in a cohesive pattern of predominantly
   single storey semi-detached pairs, with matching hipped roofed front projections.
   In these regards, the host property and its attached neighbour at No 50 are typical
   of the streetscene.
5. However, within that broad theme there is some variety in terms of the buildings’
   form and proportions as a result of extensions and alterations, as illustrated by the
   photographs at paragraph 2.6 of the appellant’s statement. Those alterations
   include side extensions and loft conversions with front facing dormers, along with
   more substantial alterations to the rear, including rectilinear dormers at Nos 40 and
   42, and a large roof level projection at No 56, all of which are visible from the rear
   garden of No 48. The rear elevations of the buildings are therefore much less
   consistent compared to their front faces.
6. The proposal would include a side extension, which would replace the host’s
   attached garage. In contrast to the garage, that extension would be set in from the
   side boundary, and although its ridge would not be set down compared to the host,
   it would have a similar hipped roof form, along with a narrow front face, and it would
   be faced with matching materials.
7. Whilst the host’s bay window would be replaced by a door, the general form and
   proportions of its locally distinctive hipped roof front projection would be retained.
   Consequently, in streetscene views, the proposal would respect the form and
   appearance of the host and other buildings in Golden Riddy.
8. The proposed alterations to the rear would be more extensive, with an extension
   whose eaves and ridgeline would match the host, but which would include
   accommodation in the roofspace. However, as I have noted, the rear elevations of
   the properties in this part of Golden Riddy are much less cohesive than their front
   elevations. In the diverse context of the area, including roof level alterations to
   nearby houses, the depth, proportions and form of this extension would not appear
   out of place.
9. For these reasons, irrespective of the claimed fallback of works that could be
   carried out under permitted development rights, the scheme would not harm the
   character and appearance of the host property or the area. It would not therefore
   conflict with Policy HQ1 of the Central Bedfordshire Local Plan 2015 - 2035 (2021)
   which sets out a requirement for high quality design that responds positively to its
   context, and enhances or reinforces local distinctiveness, having regard to matters
   including size, scale, massing, materials and appearance.
10. Whilst not fully subservient to the host property, the extensions would assimilate
    reasonably well with it, and they would not appear incongruous. Consequently, the
    scheme would accord with the broad thrust of the advice at paragraph11.21.1 of
    the Central Bedfordshire Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document (2023)
    that successful extensions are informed by their relationship with the existing
    property and should not dominate it.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
 Appeal Decision: 6012587


11. Neither would it conflict with the Framework’s stance in Section 14 for proposals to
    respond to their context, and to create visually attractive, distinctive and
    characterful development which maintains a strong sense of place.
     Other matters
12. Structural matters relating to the construction of the proposed extensions, and party
    wall agreements, would ordinarily be covered under separate legal rights and
    legislation.
Planning Conditions and Conclusion
13. Having regard to the Framework’s tests, as well as the standard time limit, in the
    interests of certainty, I have imposed a condition requiring that the development be
    carried out in accordance with the approved plan. In the interests of good design,
    and in order to respect the character and appearance of the host property and the
    area, a condition is also necessary requiring that the extensions are faced with
    matching materials.
14. In the interests of the safety and convenience of highway users, and to ensure
    appropriate off-road parking, I have imposed the Council’s suggested condition
    requiring the provision of the parking facilities as depicted on the approved plan.
15. Finally, as structural matters and party wall agreements would ordinarily be
    covered under separate legal rights and legislation, conditions relating to them
    would not pass the Framework’s tests.
16. Having regard to all other matters raised, including representations by interested
    parties, the appeal is therefore allowed.

Chris Couper
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
