Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 1 September 2026
by Richard Gilbert BA (Hons) MSc MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012633
8 Godley Gardens, Halifax, Calderdale HX3 6XH
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Miss Sarah Smith against the decision of Calderdale Metropolitan Borough
     Council.
•    The application reference is 26/00274/HSE.
•    The development proposed is build a garden room at the bottom of the front garden.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     At over 330 words, the description of development proposed on the application
       form is extremely lengthy and includes detail and narrative that does not relate to
       the operative part of the development. As a result, I have shortened the description
       to that used in the banner header above and I shall use this description in the
       determination of the appeal.
3.     During the course of the appeal a new National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) was published on the 17 August 2026. Whilst the format has altered,
       any considerations that are material to this decision have not fundamentally
       changed. I am satisfied that this has not prejudiced any party and I have had
       regard to the latest version in reaching my decision.
Main Issue
4.     The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
       appearance of the appeal property and the surrounding area.
Reasons
5.     The appeal property is a stone-built terraced dwelling sat penultimately within its
       row. Its rear and front gardens sit above and below a footpath that provides access
       around the terrace. Like its neighbours, the front garden is devoid of buildings and
       falls away from the appeal property towards a section of parkland. The garden is
       separated from neighbouring land by fencing and hedgerows that surround a
       concrete pad. The planting visible across the row of gardens creates a green and
       open appearance reinforced by the absence of built structures or nearby roads.
       These attributes provide a distinctive rural character to the appeal property and the
       wider terrace that is commensurate with its position in the Shibden Valley
       Landscape Character Area, as identified in the Calderdale District Landscape



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012633


       Character Assessment and Review of Special Landscape Character Area
       Designation document (October 2016).
6.     The proposed development involves the erection of a garden room upon the
       concrete pad in the front garden. It would be constructed of composite cladding
       with a rubber roof. Policy GN4 of the Calderdale Local Plan 2018/19 – 2032/33
       (adopted March 2023) (CLP) states that new development should be designed in a
       way that is sensitive to its landscape setting, retaining and enhancing the
       distinctive qualities of the landscape area in which it would be situated. The
       proposal would dominate the front garden by disrupting its open function within the
       terraced row, whilst inhibiting the interaction of the garden with the parkland
       behind. This would urbanise the front of the appeal property, harming the green
       and open appearance of its frontage and its wider contribution to the surrounding
       landscape, including the adjacent parkland.
7.     The proposal would be modest in size, set lower down than the appeal property,
       and set in from the boundary. It would also be reliant on the main dwelling for its
       electricity and would be subservient as a result. Nevertheless, the introduction of
       built form would interrupt the openness across the front of the terrace, undermining
       its undeveloped appearance and rural character.
8.     The proposal would be partially screened by a growing hedge, but this would not
       be sufficient to hide it from neighbouring properties or from those transiting the
       parkland. Moreover, there would be no mechanism to prevent the hedge being
       removed in the future, and I am not persuaded that a condition requiring retention
       of the hedge would be reasonable or enforceable in the long term. The Council
       indicated that there are no other conditions or amendments which could overcome
       the harm identified, and I see no reason to reach a different conclusion.
9.     The front garden of the neighbouring property, 7 Godley Gardens (No.7), is
       separated from the appeal property by an open-slatted fence and displays taller
       shrubbery than other gardens in the terraced row. However, the proposal would
       urbanise the front garden to a far greater degree than either the fence or the
       shrubs, limiting a comparison between them.
10. I understand that the proposed development would provide an ergonomic space
    intended to improve work from home conditions and reduce the likelihood of work-
    related ailments. It would also help separate work from family life by
    freeing-up space within the family home. However, these benefits do not persuade
    me that a less harmful scheme could not otherwise be achieved elsewhere on the
    appeal property. Particularly as the appellant indicates that the garden room would
    meet the size restrictions for permitted development rights. Consequently, these
    personal circumstances do not outweigh the public harm to character and
    appearance.
11. The proposal may be less impactful on the living conditions of neighbouring
    occupiers than if it were positioned in the rear garden. However, such a proposal is
    not before me, and the absence of harm in respect of living conditions is what is
    expected of all development in order to be acceptable. As such, it does not amount
    to a benefit that weighs in favour of the appeal proposal.
12. Other outbuildings, structures and extensions such as garages, sheds, outhouses
    pergolas and conservatories are visible in the gardens of the surrounding terraces.
    I do not know how these developments came into being, and whilst some may be

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012633


       in a poor state of repair, it was evident from my site visit that they are largely
       restricted to the rear or side of each terrace. This consistent approach to
       development has preserved the character at the front of the terraces on Godley
       Gardens. I therefore attach limited weight to the cited examples.
13. My attention has also been drawn to a miniature golf course situated nearby. This
    is not a residential development that is comparative to the appeal proposal and,
    again, I do not know the specific circumstances of how it came into being.
    Notwithstanding, its presence does not persuade me to reach an alternative
    conclusion on this main issue and does not overcome the harm that I have
    otherwise found, which I have determined on its own merits and on the basis of the
    evidence before me.
14. I note the appellant’s intent to resurface the footpath in front of their property. The
    resurfacing is not indicated on the submitted plans and does not form part of the
    proposal. It therefore has limited bearing on the appeal despite the benefits it may
    otherwise provide in terms of appearance and public safety. The appellant has
    also referred to the informative on the decision notice which includes advice from
    the Coal Authority. Coal mining risk is not a matter in dispute between the parties,
    therefore I have not considered it further.
15. For the reasons set out above, the proposed development would have a harmful
    effect on the character and appearance of the appeal property and the surrounding
    area. Conflict therefore arises with Policy BT1 and GN4 of the CLP which seek
    new developments that respect or enhance the character and appearance of
    existing buildings and surroundings, taking account of its local context and
    distinctiveness, while also designed in a way that is sensitive to its landscape
    setting.
Conclusion
16. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

Richard Gilbert
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
