Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by E Heron MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6012248
Land outside 81 Fishergate, Preston PR1 2UH
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Thomas Johnston (NWP Street Ltd), against the decision of Preston City
     Council.
•    The application Ref is 06/2026/0424.
•    The development proposed is described as ‘Installation of 1no. new communications kiosk with
     integrated defibrillator and advertising display.’

Appeal B Ref: 6012249
Land outside 81 Fishergate, Preston PR1 2UH
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Thomas Johnston (NWP Street Ltd), against the decision of Preston City
     Council.
•    The application Ref is 06/2026/0425.
•    The advertisement proposed is described as ‘Installation of 1no. new communications kiosk with
     integrated defibrillator and advertising display.’

Decision
Appeal A and Appeal B
1.    The appeals are dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    In my heading above, I have taken the description of development from the original
      application form used for both proposals. Appeal A seeks planning permission for
      the installation of a communications kiosk with a defibrillator and a digital display
      panel, mounted on the pavement. Appeal B seeks advertisement consent for the
      display of an illuminated digital display screen within the apparatus. The two
      appeals are intrinsically linked, and I have considered them together to avoid
      unnecessary duplication.
3.    In respect of appeal B, the Regulations make it clear that advertisements should
      be subject to control only in the interests of amenity and public safety, taking into
      account cumulative impacts. Regard does not need to be had to the development
      plan. Therefore, while I have taken relevant policies into account as a material
      consideration, they have not been determinative.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012248 and 6012249


4.    Since the determination of the application an updated and revised National
      Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026.
      The parties have had the opportunity to provide comments on it in relation to these
      appeals. I have therefore considered the proposal against the relevant policies in
      the Framework.
Main Issues
5.    The main issue with respect to Appeal A is the effect of the proposed development
      on the character and appearance of the area, including heritage assets.
6.    The main issue with respect to Appeal B is the effect of the proposed
      advertisement on the amenity of the area.
Reasons
7.    The appeal site is the pavement outside of a shopping centre complex within a
      busy retail area. Fishergate has a mixture of modern and historic buildings, with a
      cohesive quality due to the strong building lines, scale and massing of buildings,
      and variety in their detailing. Signage and advertisements are primarily confined to
      shopfronts. The street is wide with contrasting paviours. Street furniture and trees
      are arranged in alignment along the street creating a carefully designed, simple
      and uncluttered streetscape. They are positioned either side of the central narrow
      roadway, emphasising the perspective view along the street.
8.    The Winckley Square Conservation Area (the CA) lies a short distance to the east
      of the appeal site and encompasses much of the street scene described above.
      Relevant to this appeal, its significance lies in the mixture of nineteenth and
      twentieth century commercial buildings, and historic thoroughfares.
9.    Nearby is the former Fishergate Baptist Church (referred to as Bistro Pierre within
      the appeal evidence), a grade II listed building constructed circa 1858 in a
      Romanesque style (the LB). Its architectural detailing and historic interest
      contribute to its significance. The clock tower and distinctive form make it a
      prominent landmark within the wider street scene, including from the vicinity of the
      appeal site.
10. The proposal would comprise a tall, freestanding structure, an open-sided
    operations panel on one side, and a digital advertisement display on its rear
    elevation. It would be sited adjacent to the shopping centre complex, and it would
    be out of alignment with and isolated from, the general arrangement of street
    furniture along Fishergate, including other structures with advertisements, further
    away. Despite its heritage style canopy and integrated functions, its size, form and
    siting, would make it a highly conspicuous and incongruous addition.
11. Furthermore, it would add visual clutter around the shopping centre, due to its
     proximity to the existing large premises signs, and it would disrupt the strong
     perspective views along Fishergate.
12. Due to its illuminated display, sequentially changing images and prominent
    position within views towards the CA and the LB, the advertisement would
    compete for visual attention and detract from the appreciation of their architectural
    and historic qualities. Moreover, I am not persuaded that controls over luminance,
    image transitions, animation and screen malfunction secured by condition, could
    overcome the harmful effects.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012248 and 6012249


13. The appellant contends that the proposal would be reversible, however there is no
    further detail before me, or any suggestion of the structure’s removal. It is
    acknowledged that the advertisement is capable of being controlled through a five-
    year consent period. Nevertheless, the structure and advertisement are integral to
    one another and their presence would be harmful, even for a specified timescale.
14. For the above reasons, I consider that the proposal would harm the visual amenity
    of the area and would fail to conserve the setting and significance of the CA or the
    LB. The degree of harm to both designated heritage assets would be low, taking
    account of the small scale of the proposal, and the separation distance. In
    accordance with Policy HE6 of the Framework, that harm should be weighed
    against the public benefits of the proposal.
15. The proposal would provide free public access to telephone services, including
    emergency calls, for which there is a demand. Its design, features and
    management would deter anti-social behaviour, and it would be regularly
    inspected and maintained. It would offer wayfinding information, promote nearby
    businesses, provide free public messaging and its touchscreen would be simple to
    use. The kiosk would be durable, and capable of displaying emergency or
    community messages when required. It would also incorporate a defibrillator.
    These are public benefits, albeit modest, given the small scale of the proposal, and
    the availability of similar facilities and defibrillators within the locality.
16. The operators intend to plant one street tree for every kiosk installed, working in
    partnership with Trees for Cities. It has also been designed to allow for small-cell
    4G equipment if required. However, I am not persuaded that these specific matters
    could be reasonably required by planning condition, and there is no other
    mechanism before me to secure these benefits. I therefore attribute limited weight
    to these matters.
17. Taken together, these modest public benefits would not outweigh the identified
    harm to the significance of the designated heritage assets, to which substantial
    weight must be given.
18. The appellant has drawn my attention to appeal decisions and Council decisions1,
    in which the decision maker found developments and advertisements of a similar
    nature to be in character with local context. However, insufficient information has
    been provided regarding the circumstances and site context of those cases. As
    such, I am not satisfied that they are directly comparable to the circumstances of
    the appeal before me.
19. Accordingly, in respect of appeal A, I conclude that the proposal would have an
    unacceptably harmful effect on the character and appearance of the area,
    including the setting of the CA and the LB. It would therefore be contrary to the
    relevant provisions of Policy 16 of the Core Strategy2, Policies EN8, EN9 and EP7
    of the Local Plan3, and Policy SP1 of the Preston City Centre Plan4. Amongst
    other things, the policies seek to safeguard heritage assets from inappropriate
    development, minimise impact on visual amenity, require a positive contribution to
    local distinctiveness, and the enhancement of the public realm.


1
  APP/R5510/Z/16/3157043; APP/K5600/W/17/3190377; 22/0734/FUL
2
  Central Lancashire Adopted Core Strategy, Local Development Framework, July 2012.
3
  Preston Local Plan 2012-26, Site Allocations & Development Management Policies, Adopted 2 July 2015
4
  Preston City Centre Plan, ‘an area action plan to 2026’, Adopted June 2016


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              3
Appeal Decision 6012248 and 6012249


20. In respect of appeal B, I have taken account of the provisions of the development
    plan, insofar as they are material in respect of amenity. For the same reasons, I
    find that the proposal would result in demonstrable harm to the amenity of the
    area.
Other Matters
21. Preston Railway Station, a grade II listed building dating from around 1880,
    derives significance from its architectural, historic and communal value and
    remains an important transport focal point within the city centre. The railway
    station is set back from the main street scene of Fishergate and is largely out of
    view from the appeal site, with limited intervisibility between the two. As such, I am
    satisfied that the proposal would not diminish the setting in which the significance
    of this listed building is appreciated.
22. 95, 96, 97, 98-99 Fishergate, and 1 Lune Street are grade II listed buildings that
    are sited to the east of the appeal site. Individually they are significant for their
    architectural and historic interest, and they are most obviously appreciated when
    viewing their frontages, in their immediate vicinity. The appeal site lies on the
    opposite side of Fishergate with significant separation between it and these listed
    buildings. Given their separation from the appeal site and the limited contribution
    the site makes to their setting, I am satisfied that the proposal would not affect the
    significance of these listed buildings.
23. The proposal would result in the reduction in width of the footway available to be
    used by pedestrian traffic, however I am satisfied that this would not result in
    public safety issues and neither have any such issues been put to me. No harm to
    living conditions of any neighbouring occupiers has been identified. These are
    neutral points, which do not mitigate the harm I have identified.
Conclusion
24. With regard to Appeal A, the proposal would conflict with the development plan
    when read as a whole and material considerations do not indicate that the appeal
    should be decided other than in accordance with it. With regard to Appeal B, the
    advertisements would cause harm to the amenity of the area. Accordingly, I
    conclude that both Appeal A and Appeal B should be dismissed.



E Heron
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
