Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 9 September 2026
by K Dryden BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25th September 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6012328
Pavement outside 137 Chiswick High Road, Chiswick, London W4 2ED
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Safia Rana-Jaswal of BT Telecommunications PLC against the decision of
    the Council of the London Borough of Hounslow.
•   The application reference is P/2026/0937.
•   The development proposed is installation of 1no. new BT Street Hub, incorporating 2no. digital 75"
    LCD advert screens, and associated BT Phone Kiosk removal.

Appeal B Ref: 6012330
Pavement outside 137 Chiswick High Road, Chiswick, London W4 2ED
•   The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
    Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
    consent.
•   The appeal is made by Safia Rana-Jaswal of BT Telecommunications PLC against the decision of
    the Council of the London Borough of Hounslow.
•   The application reference is P/2026/0842.
•   The advertisement proposed is described on the application form as installation of 1no. new BT
    Street Hub, incorporating 2no. digital 75" LCD advert screens, and associated BT Phone Kiosk
    removal.

Decisions
1. Appeal A is dismissed.
2. Appeal B is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
3. The two appeals relate to the same site and to each other. I have considered each
   on its individual merits, but I have combined these cases into a single decision
   letter as they are intrinsically linked and raise the same issues.
4. Subsequent to the Council’s decision on the application to which this appeal
   relates, the Government published a new National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) on 17 August 2026, which replaces the previous Framework published
   in December 2024, and all earlier iterations. Both the appellant and the Council
   were given the opportunity to comment on any changes relevant to the main issues
   in these appeals. No further comments were received.
5. The appeal site lies within the Chiswick High Road Conservation Area (CA). In
   determining Appeal A, I am therefore vigilant of my duty imposed under Section 72
   of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 to pay special


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6012328, 6012330


        attention to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance
        of the CA.
6. The description of the proposal in the banner heading for Appeal B is taken from
   the application form. However, the Council has described the proposal as
   ‘installation of a double sided internally illuminated digital display on the proposed
   communications hub’. As this is a more accurate description that specifies the
   advertisements proposed, I have determined the appeal on this basis.
7. In respect of Appeal B, the Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements)
   (England) Regulations 2007 require that decisions are made only in the interest of
   amenity and public safety. Therefore, whilst I have taken account of the policies the
   Council considers to be relevant, these have not been decisive in my determination
   of this appeal.
Main Issues
8. The Council has raised no objection in respect of noise (aural amenity) and based
   on my observations at my site visit and the evidence provided, I have no reason to
   take a different view. The main issues in dispute are:
     •  the effect of the proposal on the amenity of the area, with particular regard to
        whether it would preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the CA.
     •  the effect of the proposal on public safety.
Reasons
Visual amenity
9. The appeal site comprises a section of public footway which is situated to the front
   of a Use Class E unit1, No 137 Chiswick High Road (No 137), close to the junction
   with Brackley Road. The surrounding area is predominantly commercial at ground
   floor level, with residential and commercial uses over upper storeys. The site is
   located within the designated CA, and the locality displays a coherent pattern of
   development, with consistent building lines and attractive, terraced period
   properties that contribute positively to its established character and visual interest.
10. The significance of the CA derives from the historic interest and architectural quality
    of its buildings. The Chiswick High Road Conservation Area Appraisal (2021)
    (CHRCA) identifies the focus of the designation as the commercial and shopping
    buildings developed during the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The site lies
    within the Chiswick High Road character area, where the CHRCA notes that the
    large, mature trees lining much of the road, together with the wide pavements, are
    important characteristics of the CA. The terrace of properties opposite the appeal
    site to the north of Chiswick High Road are identified in the CHRCA as positive
    contributors to the CA. In addition, the public house to the west of the site, at the
    junction of Chiswick High Road and Brackley Road, is a locally listed building.
11. The proposal would be sited adjacent to a narrow, hard surfaced verge which
    adjoins the public highway, between mature street trees and a more recently
    planted tree. At the time of my site visit, this area accommodated bicycle stands
    and numerous bicycles. Whilst I observed a small number of freestanding digital
    screens, payphones and bus shelters with integrated illuminated screens within the
    locality, advertisement signage generally consists of modestly sized fascia signage
1
    The Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended).


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               2
Appeal Decisions 6012328, 6012330


        and projecting signs that are proportionate to the scale of the shopfronts and that
        do not unduly detract from the character or appearance of the CA.
12. Whilst the street hub would be sited within a wide area of public footway, it would
    be positioned close to the highway edge and would appear visually prominent.
    Moreover, the scale and height of the proposal, combined with its large
    double‑sided illuminated digital screens, would result in a visually intrusive feature
    that would appear excessive in this location and at odds with the distinctive
    character and appearance of the CA. Furthermore, whilst No 137 is of
    contemporary construction, it incorporates extensive glazing and appears
    lightweight in form. By contrast, the proposed black, powder coated aluminium
    exterior finish of the street hub would appear visually oppressive and discordant
    within a street scene largely characterised by traditional and historic building
    materials.
13. The appellant has commented that the proposal would not appear out of context
    within the busy urban environment, which is heavily commercial in character and
    contains bright advertising displays. The appellant contends that it would be viewed
    in the context of existing street furniture and features of the street scene. However,
    I find that the street hub would appear at odds with its surroundings and would be
    visually prominent within the public realm, to the detriment of the character and
    appearance of the locality. Moreover, owing to its substantial form and large
    double-sided illuminated displays, the proposal would be readily visible in long
    views in both directions along Chiswick High Road.
14. Whilst there are examples of other illuminated advertisements and street lighting
    within the locality, where the Council has referenced an example of a shopfront at
    128 Chiswick High Road2, and therefore an existing level of illumination is present
    within the area, the size of the proposed displays and their prominent siting within a
    sensitive public realm setting would be at odds with the local context. I am also
    mindful of the guidance in the CHRCA, which identifies that upgrades to street
    furniture and advertisements can affect the character and appearance of the CA
    and should therefore be managed carefully. It identifies poor advertisements as a
    weakness within the CA and street decluttering as an opportunity for enhancement.
    In this context, I find that the introduction of a substantial street hub with large,
    illuminated panels would not accord with this guidance.
15. Although I acknowledge the proposed use of anti-glare glass and planning
    conditions could be used to control the level of brightness, frequency of image
    change, and hours of illumination, it remains that the proposal would be noticeable
    in this prominent and sensitive location. Moreover, the large, illuminated displays
    would appear as conspicuous and discordant features that would fail to respect the
    established character of the area.
16. Policy HE5 of the Framework requires proposals affecting heritage assets to be
    accompanied by an assessment of the significance of the assets affected and the
    likely effect of the development upon that significance. In this regard, it is the
    impact on significance, rather than the scale of development itself, that is of primary
    importance. Whilst Policy HE9 of the Framework recognises that not all elements of
    a conservation area necessarily contribute to its significance, the proposal would
    appear visually discordant in its setting, detracting from the character and

2
    P/2007/2081.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6012328, 6012330


     appearance of the area and eroding the contribution made by the generous footway
     and mature street trees to the significance of the CA, which the CHRCA identifies
     as important features of the CA.
17. Whilst the proposal is relatively modest in scale, it would, under the terms of the
    Framework, result in a low level of harm to the significance of the heritage asset. It
    is noteworthy that even a low level of harm to the significance of a designated
    heritage asset carries considerable importance and weight. Policy HE6 of the
    Framework establishes that when considering the potential effect of a development
    proposal on the significance of a designated heritage asset, substantial weight
    should be given to its conservation. Where a development proposal would harm the
    significance of a designated heritage asset, the effect on the asset and its
    significance should be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the
    proposal.
18. I have had regard to the benefits identified by the appellant in support of Appeal A,
    which in summary include the provision of improved and cost-free digital
    connectivity for the local community and visitors including 5G coverage wi-fi, and
    UK calls, a charging facility for electronic devices, wayfinding assistance and an
    emergency services button. Additional digital services are also cited as supporting
    local economic growth and productivity. The appellant further states that the
    proposal incorporates public messaging capabilities and that the unit can house
    sensors to monitor street activity and environmental conditions, which could benefit
    the Council and contribute to public health and well-being. I accept that the street
    hub is designed to deter crime and reduce the risk of vandalism.
19. I have also had regard to the appellants claims that the unit would assist
    educational needs, promote social inclusion and help reduce deprivation through
    access to digital services. I have also considered the provision of small cell 5G
    coverage through integrated equipment that would not take the form of a traditional
    telecommunications mast. The appellant further contends that the proposal is
    designed to be accessible to people with disabilities, including those with visual,
    hearing or mobility impairments. I do not dispute that meaningful public benefits
    would arise from the proposal. However, I have been provided with insufficient
    evidence to demonstrate that these benefits could not be provided in a less harmful
    manner and/or in a less sensitive location. Moreover, I find that the public benefits
    associated with the proposal do not outweigh the harm that I have identified.
20. Further benefits are claimed by the appellant whereby two redundant kiosks, which
    are identified on page 6 of the appellants statement as outside of 80 to 82 Chiswick
    High Road and outside of 36 Chiswick Lane, would be removed within the wider
    area as part of the proposal, addresses which fall outside the CA. I also note that
    pages 23 and 24 of the statement refer to the two redundant kiosks as elsewhere
    on the High Street with further reference to the Feltham Town Centre boundary.
    This address does not form part of the site context and is therefore not a relevant
    matter for consideration.
21. Nevertheless, the removal of existing and redundant kiosks may improve
    pedestrian movement and the appearance of the wider locality to some degree.
    However, the benefit associated with removing any additional units within the wider
    area does not relate to the appeal site itself and does not overcome the harm that I
    have identified arising from the siting of the street hub, with its large double-sided
    illuminated displays, in this prominent and sensitive location within the CA.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decisions 6012328, 6012330


     Therefore, whilst the benefits of removing redundant kiosks have been taken into
     account, this does not alter my findings or justify the harm that I have identified.
22. Whilst I have given careful consideration to the public benefits advanced by the
    appellant, it is my judgment that the identified benefits would not outweigh the low
    level of harm that I have identified to the significance of the heritage asset. The
    proposal therefore conflicts with the Framework’s policies relating to the
    conservation and enhancement of the historic environment.
23. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude that the proposed development in
    regard to Appeal A would be harmful to the amenity of the area, and would fail to
    preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the CA. This is contrary to
    Policies CC1, CC2, CC4 and CC5 of the London Borough of Hounslow Local Plan
    2015-2030, Volume One (2015) (HLP), which collectively seek high-quality
    development which does not adversely impact the setting of heritage assets. The
    proposal is also contrary to Policy HC1 of The London Plan (2021) (LP) which
    requires development proposals affecting heritage assets and their settings to
    conserve their significance. Further, the proposal is contrary to LP Policies D8 and
    T2 which collectively support healthy streets and resist the introduction of
    unnecessary street furniture in the public realm.
24. With regard to Appeal B, I conclude that the proposed advertisements would cause
    harm of an unacceptable degree to the amenity of the area. The policies of the
    development plan have been considered as far as they are material, and in this
    respect, the scheme would conflict with the development plan.
Public safety
25. The appeal site is located within an area of footway that I found to experience high
    levels of pedestrian activity at the time of my site visit. Bus stops serving several
    local routes are located to the east of the site, on either side of Chiswick High
    Road, together with a pedestrian crossing. The proposal would be sited within the
    footway which, although wide at this location, would nevertheless impede
    pedestrian movement due to its substantial size and presence within the public
    realm. Furthermore, its siting adjacent to well-used bicycle stands would
    exacerbate this effect by introducing an obstacle that pedestrians and those using
    the adjacent bicycle facility would need to navigate around.
26. As such, I find that the scale and siting of the proposal would create an unsafe
    obstruction to pedestrian movement, particularly for disabled people and those with
    visual impairments, whose ability to navigate the footway, nearby bus stop and
    pedestrian crossing would be adversely affected by the presence of the street hub
    within an area of high pedestrian activity. In this regard, the proposal would fail to
    provide a street arrangement that is safe, inclusive and attractive for all users,
    contrary to Policy TR4 of the Framework.
27. The appellant has drawn my attention to the Department for Transport guidance,
    ‘Inclusive Mobility: A Guide to Best Practice on Access to Pedestrian and Transport
    Infrastructure’ (2021), which provides guidance on appropriate footway widths and
    clearance distances. However, whilst I note that the proposal may satisfy the
    spatial requirements set out in that document, it remains guidance only.
    Furthermore, I have considered the appellant’s comments that No 137 provides its
    own frontage, thereby affording additional space for pedestrian movement, and that
    the footway narrows beyond the junction with Brackley Road, such that pedestrians

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
Appeal Decisions 6012328, 6012330


       are likely to use the rear part of the footway. However, I have not been provided
       substantive evidence to demonstrate that this is the case, and, during my site visit, I
       observed that the footway was widely used across its width. As such, these matters
       do not alter my finding that, in the particular circumstances of this site, the proposal
       would unacceptably impede pedestrian movement.
28. I have not been provided evidence to demonstrate that the proposed
    advertisements would be a distraction to highway users or that this section of the
    public highway is particularly susceptible to vehicular accidents. I therefore do not
    find harm from obstruction of view for motorists and there would be limited
    opportunities to distract drivers and cyclists. Furthermore, conditions could be
    imposed to control the minimum display time for each advertisement, the use of
    visual effects between successive displays and to ensure appropriate illumination
    levels are met.
29. I therefore conclude that the proposed development in regard to Appeal A would
    have a harmful effect on public safety. Consequently, the proposal would conflict
    with Policy EC2 of the HLP which seeks opportunities for sustainable travel modes
    and improve the public realm. I further find that the proposal does not accord with
    HLP Policy CC5 which requires advertisements and their associated structure to
    not adversely impact on pedestrian movement and safety. The proposal is also
    contrary to LP policies T2 and D8 which collectively support healthy streets and
    resist the introduction of unnecessary street furniture in the public realm.
30. With regard to Appeal B, for the above reasons, I conclude that the proposed
    advertisements would have a harmful effect on public safety. The policies of the
    development plan have been considered as far as they are material, and in this
    respect, the scheme would conflict with the development plan.
Other Matters
31. The appellant has referred to inconsistency in decision making and draws my
    attention to free-standing advertising units within the CA, including installations
    outside 80 to 82 Chiswick High Road, and outside 40 Chiswick High Road3. In
    respect of the former, the appellant advises that details of a planning application
    submission could not be found. The appellant has also cited integrated
    advertisements within bus shelters in the locality, including those outside 117
    Chiswick High Road and outside 124 to 126 Chiswick High Road. Although I do not
    have full details of these cases, including the relevant plans and officer reports,
    each proposal must be assessed on its own merits and in accordance with current
    planning policy. Furthermore, from observations at my site visit, whilst the area
    already contains several large free-standing and integrated advertisements, the
    addition of a further unit in such a prominent and sensitive location would add to a
    proliferation of visual clutter in the area and would be harmful to public safety.
    Moreover, their existence does not diminish the harm that I have identified, nor
    does it alter my findings on the appeal proposal.
32. The appellant has provided examples of allowed appeals in Bristol where the
    appeal sites are located within conservation areas, including, Pavement o/s 30
    Triangle West, Bristol BS8 1ET4 and Pavement o/s 10 Straits Parade, Fishponds,


3
    P/2024/0570
4
    APP/Z0116/W/25/3366474 & APP/Z0116/Z/25/3366475


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              6
Appeal Decisions 6012328, 6012330


       Bristol, BS16 2LA5. However, any proposal for development must be assessed on
       its own individual merits in accordance with the specific case and site
       circumstances. As such, these examples do not alter my overall findings.
33. Whilst I note that the appellant is subject to a Universal Service Obligation to
    provide telephony services, this matter does not outweigh the harm that I have
    found in my reasoning above.
34. I have had regard to the additional policies cited by the appellant in the HLP and
    LP, including any support they provide for the installation of the street hub.
    However, these considerations do not lead me to a different finding overall, where I
    have given greater weight to the harm and policy conflicts identified above.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
35. The proposed development would provide a street hub which the appellant has
    stated would provide meaningful public benefits. However, for the reasons given
    above, I have found that the proposal would harm the amenity of the area and fail
    to preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the CA and be harmful to
    public safety. Consequently, the proposal conflicts with the development plan,
    when taken as a whole.
36. The proposal would constitute development within a settlement and therefore
    Policy S4 of the Framework is engaged. The policy states that development
    proposals within settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so
    would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against
    the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
37. Whilst Chapter 9 of the Framework recognises that advanced, high quality and
    reliable communications are essential to meet changing technological, social,
    business and security requirements, Policy CO1 of the Framework requires such
    proposals to be sited and designed to minimise their visual impact. For the reasons
    given above, I have found that the proposal would harm the character and
    appearance of the CA. Furthermore, the public benefits advanced by the appellant
    would not outweigh the low level of harm identified to the significance of the
    heritage asset. I have also found that the proposal would harm public safety.
38. Taking these matters together, I find that the benefits of the proposal would be
    substantially outweighed by its adverse effects when assessed against the national
    decision-making policies of the Framework. As such, Policy S4 of the Framework
    does not indicate that planning permission should be granted in this instance.
39. In the final balance, for the reasons given, and having regard to all other matters
    raised, the proposal that is the subject of Appeal A conflicts with the development
    plan when read as a whole and material considerations do not lead me to a
    decision otherwise. With regard to Appeal B, I conclude that the proposed
    advertisements would cause harm of an unacceptable degree to the amenity and
    public safety of the area. I therefore conclude that Appeal A and Appeal B should
    be dismissed.

K Dryden
INSPECTOR
5
    APP/Z0116/W/25/3369235 & APP/Z0116/H/25/3369236


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              7
