 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 18 August 2026
 by Martin H Seddon BSc MPhil DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 24 August 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012645
 3 Sandown Road, Bolton BL2 3QB
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs David and Catherine Trimble against the decision of Bolton
     Council.
 •   The application Ref is 00374/26.
 •   The development proposed is demolition of conservatory, conversion of garage to habitable room,
     alterations to fenestration, render to all elevations and provision of three off-street parking spaces.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.

Preliminary Matter

2. I have determined this appeal on the basis of the Council’s description of
   development as I consider that it is a more accurate specification for the proposed
   development.
Main Issue
3. The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the
   surrounding area.
Reasons
4. The appeal concerns a detached bungalow located in a residential area comprised
   of detached single and two storey houses. The Council considers that the proposal
   would have an acceptable impact on the residential amenity of neighbours in terms
   of privacy and loss of outlook. No objection has been raised regarding the
   proposed parking arrangements. I see no reason to disagree given that the
   proposal would involve minimal change to the form of the building. The Council’s
   reason for refusal of the proposal only related to the “cumulative impact of the
   increased glazing on the front elevation and the use of render.”
5. Dwellings in the vicinity of the appeal site are primarily detached bungalows of
   varying and repetitive designs. The main external materials include timber
   boarding, brick, and stone cladding. The front elevations of several bungalows have
   been altered through the use of render in colours including white, cream, and pale
   stone finishes. That includes the bungalow at 7 Sandown Road which has white
   render. In view of the significant number of bungalows in the immediate vicinity that

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012645


     incorporate render I see no reason why it should not be used as an external
     material at the appeal building.
6. The proposed fenestration at the front elevation of the appeal building would extend
   from ground level to the roof apex with single matching windows with a horizontal
   emphasis at either side. There are no other bungalows with full height fenestration
   in the immediate vicinity of the appeal site. Consequently, the front elevation would
   appear prominent and out of character in the street scene. The proposal would
   conflict with guidance in the Council’s Supplementary Planning Guidance: House
   Extensions which indicates that extensions should respect and be sensitive to the
   proportions of the existing house and any particular features including the size and
   style of windows.
7. The appellant has referred to examples of alterations to the front elevations of
   buildings at 145 Hough Way and 11 Chale Green, Harwood. These buildings are
   not seen from the appeal site and there is greater variation in the design and layout
   of neighbouring development in both instances when compared to the relatively
   close sited bungalows at Sandown Road. My attention is also drawn to
   development granted permission at 5 Sandown Road, which includes a high-level
   triangular window in the front elevation. However, the window would not dominate
   the appearance of that building because of its small size, scale, and separation
   from the double doors below. Whilst these other developments are a material
   consideration, I must determine this appeal based upon the particular site
   circumstances of the proposal having regard to relevant development plan policies.
8. I find that the proposed fenestration at the front elevation of the bungalow would be
   harmful to the character and appearance of the surrounding area because of its
   scale and extent. The proposal would therefore conflict with Bolton Core Strategy
   policy OA5, which concerns north Bolton and indicates that special attention be
   given to the massing and materials used in new development. It would also fail to
   comply with policy JP-P1 of Places for Everyone which seeks to ensure, amongst
   other things, that development respects and acknowledges the character and
   identity of the locality in terms of design, siting, size, scale, and materials used.
Conclusion.
9. For the reasons given above, the proposed development would conflict with the
   development plan as a whole and should be dismissed.

Martin H Seddon
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      2
