Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by P Eggleton BSc(Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012364
Ashcroft, Louth Road, Wragby, Lincolnshire LN8 5PH
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Dawn Graves against the decision of the East Lindsey District Council.
•   The application reference is 00220/26/FUL.
•   The development proposed is a shed.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issue
2. The main issue is the effect on the character and appearance of the area.
Reasons
3. The shed has already been erected and is located in the front garden. It is a good
   quality structure set within a well maintained garden. There is a large protected tree
   close to the structure and other trees along this section of road. These, together
   with the front hedge and other landscaping in the immediate vicinity, ensure that
   the prominence of the structure is reduced, particularly in longer views. Its dark
   colour and materials also help in this regard. The wide verge and lack of pavement
   on this side of the road also reduce its prominence when passing on foot.
4. Despite the above, the shed, given its size and position, so close to the front
   boundary and well in front of the building line of these three dwellings, does detract
   from the character and appearance of these properties and the approach to the
   settlement. It represents an uncharacteristically prominent structure that is at odds
   with the layout of these houses. Further planting and allowing the hedge to grow
   could help to reduce its prominence further but this would not overcome my
   concern, particularly in the short to medium term.
5. The shed provides benefits with regard to storage and water collection, which are
   matters that weigh in its favour.
6. A number of other structures in the village have been referenced but those I was
   able to identify, do not have the same characteristics as this development. The
   prominence of vehicles to the fronts of houses, particularly those diagonally
   opposite, negatively contributes to the appearance of the area but those properties
   are of a very different character to the appeal dwelling and its two immediate


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision: 6012364


     neighbours. These matters do not offer any significant weight in favour of the
     development.
7. Overall, the proposal results in conflict with Policy SP10 of the East Lindsey Local
   Plan 2018 as despite the quality of the materials, the building fails to maintain or
   enhance the character of the area due to its scale and position. As the policy is
   consistent with the design aspirations of the National Planning Policy Framework
   2026, I afford it full weight.
8. Whilst I have had regard to all of the matters put forward, these are not sufficient to
   outweigh my concern or indicate that a decision contrary to the development plan
   should be reached. Whilst not raised as a concern by the council, I agree with the
   neighbouring resident that the structure is harmful with regard to the outlook from
   the front windows of the adjacent dwelling. This adds to my concern with regard to
   the character and appearance of the area. I therefore dismiss the appeal.


Peter Eggleton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
