Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 2 September 2026
by L Reid BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012043
The Granary, Colemans Farm, Colemans Lane, Toot Hill Road, Ongar CM5 9QN
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Ian Gorst against the decision of Epping Forest District Council.
•    The application Ref is EPF/0128/26.
•    The development proposed is the erection of a traditionally designed three-bay cart lodge.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the erection of a
       traditionally designed three-bay cart lodge at The Granary, Colemans Farm,
       Colemans Lane, Toot Hill Road, Ongar CM5 9QN in accordance with the terms of
       the application, Ref EPF/0128/26, subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: Location Plan, GCB-002A, GCB-004A, GCB-
              005A, GCB-007A, GCB-008A, GCB-009A, GCB-1010A.
     3)       No development above ground level shall take place until details of the
              materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
              development hereby permitted have been submitted to and approved in
              writing by the Local Planning Authority.
              The development shall be carried out in accordance with the approved
              details.
     4)       The development hereby permitted shall not be occupied at any time other
              than for purposes ancillary to the residential use of the dwelling known as
              The Granary, Colemans Farm, Colemans Lane.
Preliminary Matters
2.     Since the appeal was made, the Government published a revised National
       Planning Policy Framework (the Framework). Both main parties have had the
       opportunity to make representations, and I have taken the comments received into
       account.
3.     As part of the appeal, the appellant has submitted new evidence in the form of a
       Heritage Report (dated 10 June 2026). This report would not result in a substantial
       or fundamental change to result in a different application. The Council has also
       had the opportunity to comment on the report. Given its nature, the acceptance of
       this report would not deprive those who should have been consulted of the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012043


       opportunity of such consultation. I have therefore considered it in determining this
       appeal.
4.     The reason for refusal refers to the listed group at Colemans Farm. The Historic
       England List Entry (Number: 1168848) lists the name as Colemans Farmhouse,
       which I shall also use.
Main Issues
5.     The main issues are:
     •     Whether the proposed development is inappropriate development in the Green
           Belt, including the effect on openness, having regard to the Framework and
           any relevant development plan policies; and,
     •     Whether the proposed development would preserve the setting of Grade II
           listed building Colemans Farmhouse, or any features of special architectural or
           historic interest which it possesses.
Reasons
Green Belt
6.     The appeal site is in the Green Belt. Policy DM4 of the Epping Forest District Local
       Plan 2011 – 2033 Part One Adopted March 2023 (the Local Plan) sets out the
       purposes of the Green Belt and states that planning permission will not be granted
       for inappropriate development in the Green Belt, except in very special
       circumstances. It also confirms that the construction of new buildings is
       inappropriate development, with a number of exceptions, reflecting those set out in
       the Framework at the time the plan was adopted.
7.     The appellant contends that the proposed development meets paragraph (1)(e) of
       Policy GB7 of the Framework, which allows for the redevelopment of previously
       developed land (including a material change of use to residential or mixed-use
       including residential), which would not cause substantial harm to the openness of
       the Green Belt. Although the Council’s case is silent on this matter, I must consider
       whether that exception applies.
8.     The Granary is a large, detached house. The proposed development is for the
       erection of a freestanding building comprising two open-sided parking bays and
       one enclosed bay for storage.
9.     Having regard to the definition of previously developed land set out within the
       Framework, there is nothing before me to indicate that the appeal site was not
       lawfully developed. The house is clearly a permanent structure, and from my
       observations at the site visit and the information before me, the proposed
       development would be positioned within the driveway which forms part of the
       curtilage of the developed land, and it would be located on an area of hard
       standing. Furthermore, the appeal site is not within a built-up area.
10. Given these factors, the appeal site is previously developed land. The proposed
    development could therefore reasonably be described as infilling or redevelopment
    of previously developed land. In accordance with the Framework, it may therefore
    comprise an exception to inappropriate development if it would not cause
    substantial harm to the openness of the Green Belt.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012043


11. Whilst the proposed development would inevitably result in some loss of spatial
    openness through the introduction of additional built form, the extent of that harm
    would be reduced by the building's modest scale, footprint and design. In visual
    terms, opportunities for public views of the building would be limited, and it would
    largely be experienced in private views. Where visible, it would be perceived as a
    subordinate structure associated with the dwelling and contained within the
    existing residential curtilage. Taking these factors into account, I find that the
    proposed development would result in a moderate degree of harm to the openness
    of the Green Belt, a conclusion that is consistent with that reached by the Council.
12. For these reasons, as the proposed development relates to the redevelopment of
    previously developed land and would not cause substantial harm to the openness
    of the Green Belt, it would meet the exception of Policy G7(1)(e) of the
    Framework. I therefore conclude that the proposed development would not be
    inappropriate development in the Green Belt. Accordingly, it would comply with
    Policy DM4 of the Local Plan and the Framework.
13. Having reached this conclusion, it is not necessary for me to consider whether the
    proposed development would meet any of the other exceptions listed in the
    Framework. Furthermore, where a development is found not to be inappropriate
    development, it should not be regarded as harmful either to the openness of the
    Green Belt or to the purposes of including land within the Green Belt.
Colemans Farmhouse
14. Whilst there is no longer the concept of less than substantial harm, Policy DM7 of
    the Local Plan adopts the same broad approach as Policy HE6 of the Framework,
    in seeking to conserve heritage assets, harm to be weighed against the public
    benefits, with substantial harm or the total loss to be demonstrated it is necessary
    to achieve substantial public benefits. Policy DM7 of the Local Plan is therefore
    consistent with the Framework and is given full weight.
15. Section 66(1) of the Town and Country Planning (Listed Buildings and
    Conservation Areas) Act 1990 requires that special regard is had to the desirability
    of preserving the building or its setting or any features of special architectural or
    historic interest which it possesses.
16. Colemans Farmhouse is a Grade II listed building. The list entry notes that it dates
    back from the 16th century or earlier. In so far as relevant to this appeal, it partly
    derives its significance from its historic agricultural use and architectural character,
    as well as its setting within an isolated courtyard farmstead surrounded by open
    countryside. This setting contributes positively to the understanding and the special
    interest and significance of Colemans Farmhouse, along with the ability to
    appreciate it. I have had special regard to this matter in considering the appeal.
17. Colemans Farmhouse retains some historic agricultural buildings, including the
    former barn and former dairy and calf shed, which are curtilage listed. The survival
    of these buildings and their historic arrangement within the farmstead positively
    contributes to an understanding of the site's agricultural origins and historic
    development. By contrast, The Granary is a later addition that replaced a large
    agricultural shed and therefore does not share the same historic or functional
    relationship with Colemans Farmhouse. Although its design draws upon the
    appearance of a traditional threshing barn, it occupies a separate residential plot


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6012043


     and is separated from Colemans Farmhouse by a brick wall, limiting the
     relationship between the two.
18. Whilst the appeal site forms part of the setting of Colemans Farmhouse by virtue of
    its location within the farmstead, it is physically distinct from it. Moreover, the
    historic layout of the farmstead has evolved over time, including through the
    redevelopment of the appeal site. Its historic and functional association with
    Colemans Farmhouse is limited and plays a minor role in how the wider farmstead
    is experienced and understood. I therefore find that the appeal site makes a neutral
    contribution to the special interest and significance of Colemans Farmhouse.
19. Turning to the effect of the proposed development, whilst it would interrupt a small
    part of the view of Colemans Farmhouse from near the farmstead entrance on
    Colemans Lane, such views are fleeting, and the effect would be negligible. The
    proposed building would be located close to Colemans Farmhouse, but it would be
    behind the boundary wall. From the other public vantage point along Colemans
    Lane, near the entrance to the main farmhouse, the proposed development’s
    visibility would be limited and would therefore not impair the ability to understand or
    appreciate the significance of the farmstead group.
20. The proposed development would have a footprint smaller than Colemans
    Farmhouse and would not be nearly comparable to it in terms of scale. The
    submitted section drawings indicate that it would also be lower than Dairy Cottage
    and the single-storey garage to the rear of Colemans Farmhouse. It would
    therefore remain subordinate to these buildings and would not visually compete
    with them. Its scale and massing would be consistent with the curtilage listed
    group. In addition, the proposed half-hipped roof reflects a feature of Colemans
    Farmhouse, which includes a half-hipped roof at one end.
21. The more recently approved housing, including The Granary, has introduced a
    residential character to this part of the wider farmstead, reducing the extent to
    which the area can still be perceived as reflecting a traditional farmstead
    arrangement. Consequently, the proposed development would be viewed in the
    context of an already domesticated residential environment, rather than as part of a
    historic agricultural courtyard. In this regard, the domestic appearance of the
    proposed development would not appear incongruous within this context.
22. Taking all of the above into account, I find that the proposed development would
    not impinge on the important functional and visual relationship with Colemans
    Farmhouse and the curtilage listed buildings. It would not erode any of the
    elements which contribute positively to the special interest of Colemans
    Farmhouse. I therefore conclude that the proposed development would preserve
    the setting of Colemans Farmhouse and would not harm its significance.
23. Accordingly, it would comply with Policies DM7 and DM9 of the Local Plan. These
    policies, amongst other things, require heritage assets and their settings to be
    preserved, having regard to the special architectural or historic interest of its
    character, appearance and the contribution made by its setting. It would also
    comply with Policy HE4 of the Framework which requires heritage assets, as an
    irreplaceable resource, to be conserved in a manner appropriate to their
    significance.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6012043


Other Matters
24. Although not a reason for refusal, the Council's Delegated Report takes issue with
    the design of the proposed development. Whilst it would be of a similar height to
    Little Orchard, it would have a narrower width and shallower depth, resulting in a
    smaller overall scale. Owing to its modest scale and proportions, the inclusion of
    doors and windows would not undermine the proposed development's subordinate
    relationship with The Granary. Its design would therefore be acceptable.
Conditions
25. I have imposed the statutory implementation condition [1], along with a condition
    listing the approved plans to provide certainty [2].
26. A condition seeking details of the proposed materials is also necessary in the
    interests of maintaining the character and appearance of the area and the setting
    of Colemans Farmhouse [3]. A condition requiring the proposed building to be
    used for purposes ancillary to the main house is necessary to accord with the
    terms of the application and in the interests of certainty [4].
27. Based on the information available, this permission is considered to be one which
    will not require the approval of a biodiversity gain plan before development is
    begun because a statutory exemption applies.
Conclusion
28. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.



L Reid
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
