Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 September 2026
by P Barton BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6012115
55 Boundary Lane, St Leonards and St Ives, Dorset BH24 2SE
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) (the
     Act) against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Stephen Brown against the decision of Dorset Council.
•    The application Ref is P/FUL/2025/00299.
•    The development proposed is described as “static caravan to be used as rental accommodation.
     Proposed new access to the site from Grange Road. New gravel paths, gravel driveway and decking
     on site”.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A new version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published on 17 August 2026. The main parties were given the opportunity to
       comment, and the comments received have been taken into account in the
       determination of the appeal.
3.     The application form states that the work or change of use started on 13
       November 2023 but has not yet been completed. The accompanying site plan
       indicates that the static caravan was added on the same date. At my site visit I
       observed the static caravan in situ and saw that the proposed gravel driveway and
       paths, as well as the proposed decking have been completed. However, I have
       dealt with the appeal on the basis of the plans before me.
4.     Reference is made within the Council’s officer report to the retention of the
       ancillary static caravan. The appellant’s statement does not include the static
       caravan in its description of the pre-existing site. As this appeal is made under
       section 78 of the Act, it is not ordinarily the role of such appeals to examine the
       lawful use of land or buildings. It is open to the appellant to apply to have such
       matters determined under sections 191 or 192 of the Act. Any such matter would
       be unaffected by my determination of this appeal. I am required to consider the
       proposed scheme, including the static caravan, as a whole.
5.     Whilst reference has been made by the appellant to the statutory duty to consider
       the needs of people residing in caravans, the application was not made to provide
       specific provision for gypsies, travellers or travelling showpeople. Moreover, the
       appellant has stated that the caravan would be for rental accommodation
       purposes. As such, I have determined the appeal on the basis of the provision of a
       static caravan for rental accommodation.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6012115


Main Issues
6.     The main issues are:
           •    whether the proposed development would be inappropriate development in
                the Green Belt having regard to the Framework and any relevant
                development plan policies;
           •    the effect of the proposed development on the openness of the Green Belt;
                and
           •    whether other considerations clearly outweigh the harm to the Green Belt
                and any other harm as to amount to very special circumstances.
Reasons
Whether inappropriate development in the Green Belt
7.     The appeal site is a triangular-shaped parcel of land associated with 55 Boundary
       Lane, at the junction between Boundary Lane and Grange Road, which is located
       within the Green Belt. The Framework identifies that the objective of Green Belt
       policy is to prevent urban sprawl by keeping land permanently open. The essential
       features of Green Belts are their openness and permanence. The Framework
       states that inappropriate development is harmful to the Green Belt and should not
       be approved except in very special circumstances.
8.     Policy KS3 of the Christchurch and East Dorset Local Plan Part 1- Core Strategy
       April 2014 (CS) identifies the most important purposes of the Green Belt, and
       signposts the guidance contained in the Framework. Although it does not make
       specific requirements relevant to this case, it is broadly consistent with the
       Framework.
9.     Development in the Green Belt is inappropriate unless it falls within one of the
       exceptions given in policy GB7 of the Framework. The appellant contends that the
       proposal would not represent inappropriate development in the Green Belt in terms
       of policy GB7(1)(f)(iii). The change of use of land to residential gardens does not
       fall under this policy. It is not an open-ended category but rather, because of the
       words “such as”, the uses that will be within it should take their flavour or extent
       from the examples given. Notwithstanding this, the application form refers to the
       current use of the site as garden, and there is nothing before me to reach a
       different conclusion. However, policy GB7(1)(f)(iii) does not include development
       that covers the provision of a static caravan.
10. Policy GB7(1)(g) is subject to four criteria, one of which requires that the
    development would be in a sustainable location, with particular reference to policy
    TR3 of the Framework.
11. Bus services are available on the A31 to Ferndown and Ringwood, and I saw bus
    stops close to its junction with Boundary Lane. Whilst the appellant indicates that
    the distance between these bus stops and the appeal site is 0.6 miles, the Council
    claims that the distance is over 1km. In either case, the distance along the
    pavement to Boundary Lane is a noticeable one, with most of its length being unlit.
    Access to the bus stop on the northbound side of the A31 is via a non-signal-
    controlled crossing where traffic flows are heavy. Consequently, these road
    conditions would not be an attractive option for walkers and those with mobility

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6012115


       issues, particularly during hours of darkness and in adverse weather. Except for
       very experienced cyclists, cycling on the carriageway of the A31 would be an
       intimidating prospect.
12. Therefore, the necessary day-to-day services and facilities that would be required
    by future occupants of the proposal would not be readily accessible. A result of the
    absence of genuinely sustainable travel choices is that occupants of the appeal
    scheme would be heavily reliant on the private car to access services and facilities
    on a regular basis.
13. Accordingly, the proposed development is not in a sustainable location, and as all
    the criteria listed must be satisfied, it would not fall under the category of
    development specified under policy GB7(1)(g) of the Framework.
14. Moreover, based on the evidence before me, I have also found that none of the
    other categories of development given under policy GB7 of the Framework apply
    to the proposed development.
15. In conclusion, the proposal would therefore be inappropriate development within
    the Green Belt in terms of the Framework and CS Policy KS3.
Openness
16. Openness is an essential characteristic of the Green Belt. In considering the
    concept of openness, the courts have found that it broadly has spatial and visual
    dimensions. In considering this, including the cases1 brought to my attention, due
    to its size, the introduction of the static caravan on the site, where previously there
    had not been one, has resulted in moderate harm to the spatial openness of the
    Green Belt. Moreover, moving a static caravan is not a quick and easy undertaking
    and thereby constitutes a semi-permanent presence on the site.
17. Although the site is enclosed by high level fencing to Boundary Lane and Grange
    Road and there is some mature vegetation along the boundaries, the upper part of
    the static caravan is clearly visible above the fence from outside the site and its
    light colour finish further highlights its presence. The prominent position of the
    appeal site and the caravan’s orientation results in a perceptible increase in built
    form at the road junction along Boundary Lane and Grange Road as well we from
    nearby properties. Furthermore, the use of the site as an independent dwelling,
    with a separate access off Grange Road, would also result in an increase in
    comings and goings from the site including regular trips for day-to-day services
    and facilities, and other movements such as deliveries. The parking of vehicles
    and domestic paraphernalia associated with the independent dwelling would also
    be present. Overall, there would be moderate harm to visual openness.
18. Taking all these factors together, the appeal scheme would have both spatial and
    visual impacts on openness.
Other considerations
19. The proposal would deliver a static caravan to the supply of this form of residential
    accommodation, where the Framework indicates that substantial weight should be
    given to the benefits of providing homes, and a more efficient use of the land.

1
 Turner v SSCLG & East Dorset Council [2016] EWCA Civ 466, Samual Smith Old Brewery (Tadcaster) v North Yorkshire County
Council [2020] UKSC 3 & Mole Valley DC v SSCLG & Meloney [2025] EWHC 2127 (Admin)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             3
Appeal Decision 6012115


       There would also be associated social and economic benefits with the occupation
       of the static caravan. Nevertheless, due to the small scale of the proposal, and
       thereby the small scale of the benefits, I afford this moderate weight.
20. Whether the static caravan would have the same effect on openness as the appeal
    scheme if it were used in a manner ancillary to No. 55 has been discussed by the
    main parties. However, for the reasons given above, occupation of the appeal site
    and the static caravan as an independent dwelling would result in a noticeably
    more intensive use on the land, including in terms of comings and goings as well
    as the presence of vehicles and domestic paraphernalia. Therefore, the proposal
    would have a more harmful impact on the openness of the Green Belt than this
    fallback, and I afford this limited weight.
21. A lack of harm or policy compliance in terms of flood risk, highway safety and living
    conditions, as well as no requirement for Biodiversity Net Gain, are neutral
    considerations that weigh neither for nor against the proposal.
Other Matters
22. Located within 5km of heathland, which forms part of the internationally protected
    Dorset Heaths Special Area of Conservation (SAC) and Dorset Heathlands
    Special Protection Area (SPA) and Ramsar site, the site also lies within 13.8km of
    sites that make up the New Forest SAC and SPA. The Council undertook an
    appropriate assessment (AA) and concluded that the harm resulting from a net
    increase in dwellings could be suitably mitigated via financial contributions in
    accordance with the Dorset Heathlands Supplementary Planning Document, the
    Dorset Heathlands Interim Air Quality Strategy and the New Forest Strategic
    Access Management & Monitoring Strategy.
23. A draft Unilateral Undertaking (UU) has been provided, and the Council has
    indicated that the matter can be addressed via the signing of a legal agreement.
    Nevertheless, as I have found that the appeal scheme would be unacceptable for
    other reasons, it is not necessary for me to consider whether there would be any
    likely significant effects on the integrity of these European Sites or undertake AAs.
    If suitable mitigation had been appropriately secured, a lack of harm would have
    been a neutral factor.
Green Belt Balance
24. Policy GB6 of the Framework is clear that substantial weight should be given to
    the harm to the Green Belt, including harm to its openness. I have found that there
    would be harm to the Green Belt by reason of the proposal’s inappropriateness
    and its effect on openness.
25. The Framework states that the potential harm to the Green Belt by reason of
    inappropriateness and any other harm resulting from the development must be
    clearly outweighed by other considerations for permission to be granted. The other
    considerations in this case, as detailed above, do not have sufficient cumulative
    weight to clearly outweigh the harm to the Green Belt and any other harm. As
    such, the very special circumstances necessary to justify this development do not
    exist. This would be contrary to the Framework and CS Policy KS3. For this
    reason, policy S5 of the Framework is not engaged.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6012115


Conclusion
26. The proposal conflicts with the development plan as a whole and the material
    considerations, including the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal should be
    decided other than in accordance with it. Therefore, the appeal is dismissed.

P Barton
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
