 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 3 September 2026
 By G Powys Jones FRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 15 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6012816
 29 Bockhampton Road, Kingston Upon Thames, KT2 5JU
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as
     amended) against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Sophie & Paul Newcombe against the decision of the Royal
     Borough of Kingston Upon Thames.
 •   The application Ref is 26/00675/HOU.
 •   The development proposed is a hip to gable extension with raising of ridge height with rear
     dormer with removal of 2No chimneys & installation of 2No Roof lights to front and 2No
     windows on gable end.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed, and planning permission is granted for a hip to gable
   extension with raising of ridge height with rear dormer with removal of 2No
   chimneys & installation of 2No Roof lights to front and 2No windows on gable end
   at 29 Bockhampton Road, Kingston Upon Thames, KT2 5JU in accordance with the
   terms of the application Ref 26/00675/HOU, subject to the conditions set out in the
   attached Schedule to this decision.
Main Issue
2. This is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of the host
   property and its surroundings.
Reasons
3. The host property is a semi-detached dwelling standing in an attractive street of
   detached and semi-detached, largely brick-built late Victorian/Edwardian dwellings
   of varying designs. The site is included within The Wyndham Road/Bockhampton
   Road Local Area of Special Character which the Council treats as a non-
   designated heritage asset. I saw that several houses in the street display roof
   alterations of different forms.
4. The Council acknowledges that the roof of the dwelling to which the appeal
   property is attached (No 21) displays alterations and additions similar to those
   proposed by the appellant. No 21’s original hipped roof has been altered to a
   gable, it has rooflights in the front roof and a large rectangular shaped dormer has
   been added at the rear. The original symmetry of the pair has therefore been lost,
   and the proposal, as suggested by the appellant, would therefore assist in
   redressing the balance.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6012816


5. The Council’s concerns however appear to centre on the height of the proposed
   dormer which would project above the roof’s ridge. The Council says that this
   aspect of the scheme would unbalance the appearance of the properties, since it
   would be highly visible in the street scene.
6. When approaching from the west, the dormer’s roof would be effectively screened
   by No 27’s roof, whose ridge runs at right angles to the highway to form a gable
   facing the street. When approaching from the east, the dormer would be largely
   shielded by the extant roof divider, a protruding structure running through the roof,
   whose height would not be exceeded. The dormer’s height in relation to the ridge
   would be discernible when standing in front of the house, but it is not a feature of
   the design which, in itself, would catch or draw the eye, given the extent of the
   overall roof alterations to the pair’s roof. Accordingly, I do not share the Council’s
   view that the height of the proposed dormer in comparison with its immediate
   neighbour would be striking or prominent.
7. In conclusion, I find the development is of an acceptable design which would not
   harm the character of the host property or its surroundings, and nor would the
   heritage asset be harmed. Accordingly, no conflict arises with those provisions of
   policies CS8, DM10 and DM12 of the Kingston Core Strategy and policy D3 of the
   London Plan requiring development to be of a good design respecting local
   distinctiveness and to preserve the significance of heritage assets.
Conditions
8. The Council has suggested the imposition of several conditions. Those identifying
   the approved plans and one in respect of materials are imposed in the interests of
   certainty and amenity, albeit that an amended form of wording is adopted. The
   Council has also referred to a Fire Strategy, but it has not forwarded such a
   document to the Inspectorate, and none appears on its application portal.
   However, if such a document was produced, it would be in the appellant’s interests
   to comply with it.
9. The Council suggests a condition in relation to windows facing westwards,
   presumably with a view to protecting neighbouring privacy. This is considered
   unnecessary since no new windows are shown in the proposed plans at first floor
   level and the openings proposed above are rooflights facing no 27’s side roof.
10. However, I consider conditions in relation to proposed roof openings to be
    necessary. Firstly, to avoid protrusion, the appellant suggests a condition relating
    to the opening proposed in the dormer’s roof. Secondly, I note that the use of white
    aluminium is proposed in the roof’s proposed rooflights. In the interests of visual
    amenity, their colour should match those of No 31’s.
Other matters
11. I have taken account of the references made to other development plan policies
    and other matters, but other matter raised is of such strength or significance as to
    outweigh the considerations leading me to my conclusions.

G Powys Jones
INSPECTOR



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
 Appeal Decision 6012816


SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS
     1)     The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
            date of this decision.
     2)     Save for the provisions referred to in conditions 4 & 5, the development
            hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the following
            approved plans: Location and Block plans; 01A; 02A; 03A; 04A; 05A; 06A
            07A & 08A.
     3)     The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
            development hereby permitted shall match those of the existing building.
     4)     The window to be inserted in the flat roof of the dormer, hereby permitted,
            shall be of a conservation style, and shall not protrude above the level of the
            roof.
     5)     The colour of the frames of all roof lights hereby permitted shall match the
            colour of those of 31 Bockhampton Road.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
