Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by D Troy BSc (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1st October 2026


Appeal A Ref: 6012105
O/S 131 Fulham Road, London, SW3 6RT
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Patrick Thomas of JOLT Charge Limited against the decision of Royal
     Borough of Kensington and Chelsea.
•    The application Ref is PP/26/00162.
•    The development proposed is the installation of one JOLT Unit (Electric Vehicle Charge Point, with
     integral double-sided LCD screen) and associated electrical connection works.

Appeal B Ref: 6012107
O/S 131 Fulham Road, London, SW3 6RT
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Patrick Thomas of JOLT Charge Limited against the decision of Royal
     Borough of Kensington and Chelsea.
•    The application Ref is CA/26/00163.
     The advertisement proposed is the installation of one JOLT Unit (Electric Vehicle Charge Point, with
     integral double-sided LCD screen) and associated electrical connection works.

Decisions
1.     Appeals A and B are dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     Appeal A concerns the refusal of planning permission to erect a JOLT Unit (JOLT).
       Appeal B concerns the refusal of express consent to display advertisements on the
       JOLT. I have considered each on its individual merits, however, as they raise
       similar issues I have combined both decisions into a single decision letter.
3.     With respect to Appeal B, Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements)
       (England) Regulations 2007 (the Regulations) specify that decisions must be
       based solely on considerations of amenity and public safety. Therefore, while I
       have taken the development plan policies referred to by the Council into account,
       they have not been determinative in respect of Appeal B.
4.     Since the determination of the application an updated and revised National
       Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17 August 2026.
       The main parties have been consulted and provided with an opportunity to provide
       comments on it in relation to these appeals. I have therefore considered the
       development against the relevant policies in the Framework.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6012105 and 6012107


Main Issues
5.     The main issues in relation to Appeal A are the effect of the proposed
       development on the character and appearance of the area, including the setting of
       the Thurloe/Smiths Charity Conservation Area (CA), and highway safety.
6.     The main issues in relation to Appeal B are the effect of the proposed
       advertisement on amenity and public safety.
Reasons
Appeals A and B - Character and Appearance/Amenity
7.     The appeal site comprises of a footpath outside No. 131 Fulham Road, a
       commercial premises with residential uses above situated on the busy Fulham
       Road. It forms part of a tall terrace with retail and commercial units at ground floor
       level located within the Brompton Cross Secondary Frontage District Centre that
       provides a busy and vibrant commercial character to the area.
8.     The public realm in the vicinity of the appeal site is defined by the wide and open
       nature of the footway. The existing street furniture is limited and generally discreet
       and unobtrusive, in the form of a bin, road signs and lampposts. This enables a
       good degree of openness within the footway, with an uncluttered pedestrian area
       running in front of the terrace of properties, with exception of the seating and
       tables outside the front of the commercial premises at No. 125 Fulham Road.
9.     The new JOLT would be in an open and prominent position close to the edge of
       the pavement and would be clearly visible to passing pedestrians and motorists.
       Due to its height, width and overall solidity it would be the most prominent feature
       within its immediate setting. Due to its overall size and visibility, it would contrast
       unfavourably with the more discreet forms of furniture that are characteristic of the
       footpath. Thus, despite its commercial district centre location, it would have an
       undue presence in its setting, appearing as an incongruous and uncharacteristic
       feature, which I consider would adversely harm rather than positively contribute to
       the character and appearance of the area.
10. The adjacent commercial units display advertisement signage typical of a district
    centre location, with modestly sized fascia signage and projecting signs that are
    proportionate to the scale of the shopfronts. The double-sided illuminated
    advertisement display screens integrated with the JOLT would be an
    uncharacteristic and prominent feature that would detract from the public realm
    and the open character and appearance of the footway. The fact that the
    illumination levels would be limited and the frequency of image changes could be
    controlled by planning conditions would not be sufficient measures to overcome
    the harm I have found to the visual amenity of the area.
11. The CA boundary lies on the opposite side of Fulham Road. Given the location of
    the appeal site within the setting of the CA, special attention must be paid to
    considering the impact of the development on the significance of the designated
    heritage asset and to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or
    appearance of the CA. The historic and architectural significance of the CA with its
    older more traditional buildings running along Fulham Road and the adjacent
    grand sweeping Pelham Crescent with its private garden square and uniform
    elegant terraced townhouses, with classical porticos, can be readily appreciated


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6012105 and 6012107


       within the immediate vicinity of the site. I consider that the proposed JOLT and
       advertisement, by virtue of their siting and design, would have a negative material
       impact on how the CA is viewed and appreciated and as such would fail to
       preserve or enhance the CA.
12. Whilst the degree of harm resulting from the proposed JOLT and advertisement on
    the significance of the CA would be at the lower level, in accordance with Policy
    HE6 (4) of the Framework, that harm should be weighed against any public
    benefits of the proposals.
13. I have considered the appellant’s comments regarding the benefits of improving
    electric vehicle charging infrastructure in line with the policies in the Framework
    and the various public benefits put forward by the appellant. These benefits
    include the inclusive design to ensure usability by all drivers, including those with
    mobility impairments; delivery of publicly accessible and affordable competitively
    priced on-street charging facility powered by renewable energy, including a free
    daily 7kWh allowance for all users funded through advertising revenue and serving
    the high proportion of residents lacking off-street parking in the Borough.
14. The appellant has also highlighted the potential wider benefits associated with the
    increased footfall and expenditure in local businesses whilst vehicles are being
    charged as well as supporting the national and local policy objectives for
    decarbonisation, air quality improvements and transition to zero and low emission
    vehicles. However, I find insufficient public benefits arising from the proposals to
    offset the identified harm to which I attach substantial weight.
15. Accordingly, for these reasons, I conclude for Appeal A that the proposed
    development would have an unacceptably harmful effect on the character and
    appearance of the area, including the setting of the CA. It would therefore be
    contrary to Policies CD1, CD2, CD3, CD4, CD15 and TR4 of the Kensington and
    Chelsea Local Plan 2024 (KCLP), which, amongst other things, seek to ensure
    that developments are designed and sited so as to respect the local character and
    protect views that contribute to the character and quality of the area, preserve or
    enhance the character and appearance and the significance of designated
    heritage assets, including conservation areas and their settings.
16. With regard to Appeal B, I conclude the proposed advertisements would have an
    unacceptable harmful effect on visual amenity. Though not determinative, I have
    taken account of Policies CD1, CD2, CD3, CD4, CD15 and TR4 of the KCLP,
    which in addition to above, seeks to resist advertising that harms amenity and
    contributes to street clutter in the streetscape.
Appeals A and B - Highway Safety/Public Safety
17. The proposed JOLT would be positioned close to the edge of the wide pavement
    broadly in line with the existing lamp posts. King’s Road is a busy and wide
    commercial street, and it was apparent from my site visit on a weekday that
    pedestrian footfall on the footpath was relatively busy.
18. Whilst I acknowledge the potential for higher footfalls in this location at certain
    times, particularly at peak times and weekends, given the position of the proposed
    JOLT close to the edge of the footpath, it would leave a gap of around 2.8m of
    clear space in front of the adjacent commercial premises. Whilst the residual
    footway width would fall just below the 3m minimum clear width set out in the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6012105 and 6012107


         Council’s Transport and Streets Supplementary Planning Document 2016, it would
         be in excess of the minimum effective unobstructed footway width of least
         2000mm sought by the Transport for London Streetscape Guidance 2022 on
         pedestrian flow.
19. In any event, I observed the proposed JOLT would not significantly interrupt any
    obvious desire line for pedestrians along the footpath, as the pedestrians naturally
    walked along the wide and open central area of the footpath in front of the
    commercial premises in this location. I am therefore satisfied that the proposed
    JOLT would not have any additional significant impact in this respect and would, in
    my view, leave ample room for the free and safe movement of pedestrians.
20. Whilst I note the Council’s comments that part of the footpath in front of the
    adjacent commercial units falls within private ownership and is not part of the
    public highway, there was no obvious demarcation or evidence to suggest that
    pedestrian access and use of the footpath would be restricted to members of the
    public at any time.
21. Therefore, for the reasons given, I conclude with regard to Appeal A that the
    proposed JOLT would not have a harmful effect on highway safety with particular
    regard to the free and safe movement of pedestrians. Consequently, the proposal
    would accord with Policy TR6 (f) of the KCLP and Policy T4 of the London Plan
    2021 (LP) insofar as they relate to ensuring development protects the safety and
    free flow of the transport network; does not reduce access to, or the attractiveness
    of existing footways and maintains a high quality, safe and accessible pedestrian
    environment where the transport impacts are appropriately mitigated.
22. For Appeal B, I conclude that the proposed advertisements would not cause harm
    to public safety. Though not determinative, I have taken into account Policy TR6 (f)
    of the KCLP and Policy T4 of the LP as outlined above.
Other Matters
23. I have noted the other development in the area drawn to my attention by the
    appellant. However, the BT Street Hub granted at No. 97 Fulham Road1 has
    different development characteristics to the appeal scheme and involves the
    replacement of an existing InLink Kiosk in the same location. As a consequence,
    whilst I have taken this into account, it does not materially alter my conclusions on
    the appeal proposals.
24. In support of the appeals, the appellant has included references to similar JOLT
    structures installed across London. However, I have not been provided the full
    details of these to know how directly comparable they are to the current proposals,
    which in turn limits their relevance. In any event I have determined the appeals
    before me on their own merits.
25. The appellant states that the proposals would contribute towards improving
    publicly available on-street electric vehicle infrastructure in line with the Framework
    and the Government’s EV Infrastructure Strategy. I have considered the various
    other public benefits put forward by the appellant in the main issues above,
    including the higher utilisation rates of the JOLT as compared to other public
    charging facilities. Nonetheless, given the limited scale of the proposals, these

1
    Ref PP/25/02154


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decisions 6012105 and 6012107


       benefits would be modest and there is no indication that they could not be
       achieved in a less harmful manner than proposed. Therefore, the above combined
       benefits would not be sufficient to outweigh the harm I have identified in this case.
Conclusion
26. With regard to Appeal A, having regard to all other matters raised, I conclude that
    the proposed development is not in accordance with the development plan when
    read as a whole and Appeal A should be dismissed.
27. For the reasons given above, I conclude Appeal B should be dismissed.

D Troy
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
