Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 September 2026
by L Francis BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6013151
72-74 High Street, Beckenham BR3 1ED
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended) against
     a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Zacks Properties Ltd against the decision of the Council of the London Borough
     of Bromley.
•    The application Ref is 26/01563/FPA.
•    The development proposed is “single storey upwards extension to provide additional living
     accommodation and bedroom space for existing second floor apartments”.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.     An updated National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
       17 August 2026, during the consideration of the appeal. The Council and the appellant
       were given the opportunity to comment upon the revisions insofar as they relate to the
       appeal and I have taken any responses into account in reaching my decision.
Main Issue
3.     The main issue is whether the appeal proposal would preserve or enhance the
       character or appearance of the Beckenham Town Centre Conservation Area.
Reasons
4.     The appeal site is located in the Beckenham Town Centre Conservation Area (CA).
       The statutory duty under Section 72 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
       Conservation Areas) Act 1990 requires me to pay special attention to the desirability
       of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of the CA.
5.     The CA is focussed around Beckenham High Street, Manor Road and the area
       immediately surrounding St George’s Church. High Street is characterised by densely
       developed, 3-4 storey frontages in typically narrow, deep plots which contribute to a
       sense of enclosure along the street. Buildings often feature highly articulated facades,
       using a limited palette of traditional materials including red brick, render and timber.
       Roofs are typically steeply pitched and tiled. Manor Road contains more spaciously
       arranged Victorian villas, and to the north, the church, open space and mature trees
       provide a greater sense of openness.
6.     The significance of the CA is derived from the pattern of development and relationship
       of the church and open space with the historic centre. The plot widths, scale, roof form
       and materials contribute to the significance of the CA surrounding the appeal site.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6013151


7.     The appeal site comprises a building with a ground floor restaurant and two upper
       floors comprising residential flats. The front elevation contains extensive brick
       detailing, above which is a steeply pitched, gabled roof. The gable and depth of the
       roof is visible in views from the south due to the projection of the appeal site from the
       adjoining building at No. 78 High Street. The rear elevation of the building is visible
       from Church Avenue due to the large gap in the streetscape accommodating the
       access road serving the buildings around the appeal site.
8.     The proposed extension would effectively obscure the original rear roof slope and due
       to its height and depth would appear as a bulky high-level addition. The gabled rear
       projection extended to second floor level would also add to this bulk. The resultant
       effect would be an overly dominant and bulky addition to the rear of the buildings
       which would obscure the original roof form, contributing to the erosion of the
       traditional roofscape which presently contributes positively to the significance of the
       CA as a whole.
9.     Under the terms of Framework Policy HE5, I consider there would be harm to the
       significance of the CA through the scale and bulk of the roof extension. Paragraph 4
       of HE6 states that where a development proposal would harm the significance of a
       designated heritage asset the effect on the asset and its significance should be
       weighed against any public benefits resulting from the proposal.
10. The public benefits are said to be an improved size and quality of accommodation to
    two existing flats. Whilst the improvement of existing accommodation would offer
    benefits, they would be confined to the occupiers of the flats and in my view would be
    very limited as a public benefit. Consequently, the limited public benefits associated
    with additional accommodation for the existing residential units are insufficient to
    outweigh the identified heritage harm.
11. To conclude on this issue, the appeal scheme would, due to its scale and bulk, fail to
    preserve or enhance the character and appearance of the CA. The scheme would
    conflict with London Plan (2021) Policies D3 and HC1 and Bromley Local Plan (2019)
    Policies 6, 37 and 41. Taken together, and amongst other things, these policies seek
    high-quality design, and to preserve and enhance the character of the local built,
    historic and natural environment, including the Borough’s designated heritage assets.
Other Matters
12. I have been referred to several examples of extensions within the CA where the
    Council has granted planning permission. These include schemes at 49 High Street
    (ref 16/05584/FULL1), 115A High Street (ref DC/17/05068/FULL1 and
    DC/18/04669/FULL1), 158B High Street (ref DC/17/05662/FULL1), and 150-156 High
    Street (ref DC/23/02171/FULL1). Whilst these locations are all within the CA, they
    display characteristics distinct from the appeal site.
13. I noted on my site visit that the rear of 49 High Street is significantly less visible from
    the public domain than the appeal site. Whilst the rear of 115A High Street is visible
    from the street and other public vantage points around the car park, I do not regard it
    as comparable to the appeal scheme given the scale of the extensions and number of
    flats provided.
14. At 158B High Street, the officer’s report noted that visibility was restricted and I note
    the front dormers were designed to mirror other front dormers nearby. Similarly, at
    150-156 High Street, whilst the front dormers are visible, there is very limited visibility

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6013151


       of the rear elevations from any public vantage point. The buildings in this stretch of
       High Street are of a different character and appearance to the appeal site with very
       limited visibility of their rear elevations from publicly accessible vantage points. None
       of the schemes referred to are in my view sufficiently similar to indicate to me that the
       appeal should otherwise be allowed.
15. I note the planning history of the site and that the appeal proposal has been reduced
    in extent and bulk to that of previous applications. Nevertheless, I have necessarily
    assessed the scheme before me on its own merits.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
16. The Council have not identified any harm to the living conditions of neighbouring
    residents and consider it would be acceptable in terms of its effect on highway safety,
    cycle and refuse storage, and flood risk. There is no evidence before me which would
    lead me to disagree. This carries neutral weight in the planning balance.
17. The appeal proposal would provide improved living accommodation for the flats and
    would be an efficient use of land, for which there is support within the Framework.
    Given the small scale of the scheme, I attach limited weight to these benefits. The
    harm I have identified to the CA would outweigh the benefits.
18. The proposal conflicts with the development plan and the material considerations do
    not indicate that the appeal should be decided other than in accordance with it. For
    the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

L Francis
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
