Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by Mr C J Tivey BSc (Hons) BPl MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date:22 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6013802
 33 Oakfield Road, Harpenden, Hertfordshire AL5 2NP
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs L O’Kelly against the decision of St. Albans City and District
      Council.
 •    The application Ref. is 5/26/0489.
 •    The development proposed is for new electrically operated gates with brickwork piers and
      intermediate railings to site frontage.


 Decision
 1. The appeal is dismissed.


 Preliminary Matter

 2. A new National Planning Policy Framework (the ‘Framework’) was issued on
    17 August 2026 which replaced the previous version published in December 2024,
    and all other iterations. Paragraph 1 of Policy S4, as set out therein, stipulates that
    development proposals within settlements should be approved unless the benefits
    of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies in the framework. Policy
    DP3 of the Framework sets out the key principles of well-designed places.

 3. I consider that this new national policy does not affect the substance of the
    proposal before me and therefore it was not necessary to refer back to the parties, I
    have determined the appeal on this basis.
  Main Issue
 4. The main issue is the effect of the appeal proposal upon the character and
    appearance of the area.
 Reasons
 5. The appeal site is located within a low-density residential area predominantly
    comprising large detached dwellings set within generous plots. Oakfield Road and
    surrounding streets are verdant in character, many of which have mature hedging
    to their front boundaries. I also noted on my site visit that there is a mature tree
    belt located between the two legs of Oakfield Road thereby rendering views of the
    appeal site as relatively localised to those immediately passing its frontage.

 https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6013802


6. However, whilst I have sympathy with the appellants and the spate of actual and
   attempted car thefts that they have experienced, I am not convinced that the
   proposal before me is the only way to improve security of the appeal site. For
   example, those dwellings that have mature front boundary hedging provide a
   greater degree of privacy than the properties that are open fronted, although
   nonetheless I have found that other properties that do have a more open front
   garden area do tend to add value to the spaciousness of the area.
7. The proposed gates and railings with brick piers would appear very urban in their
   appearance and would run counter to the heavily soft landscape boundary
   treatments that are found within the road, and would be what I consider to be a
   retrograde step from the existing situation.
8. Consequently, the proposal would be of a visually intrusive nature that would be
   harmful to the character and appearance of the area. In coming to this conclusion I
   have had regard to the examples cited by the appellants, however ultimately each
   case must be assessed on its own merits. I say this notwithstanding that I have no
   reason to doubt that a great deal of consideration was given to the design and
   choice of materials.
9. However, I find that the proposal conflicts with Policies SP12 and DES1 of the
   St Albans City & District Council Local Plan (2026) which together require all
   development to be of a high standard of design that responds positively to its
   context, taking into account the local distinctiveness of an area.
Conclusion
10. Having regard to the above and all other matters raised, I conclude that the appeal
    be dismissed.



C J Tivey
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      2
