Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 September 2026
by S Poole BA(Hons) DipArch MPhil MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6013978
41 Elgin Road, Croydon CR0 6XD
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Ms Belinda Lodge against the decision of the Council of the London Borough
    of Croydon.
•   The application Ref is 26/00900/HSE.
•   The development proposed is described on the application form as “replacement fenestration with
    historically appropriate fenestration comprising matching joinery design with slimline double glazing”.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed in so far as it relates to the replacement of the ground and
   first floor front windows and the front door of 41 Elgin Road, Croydon CR0 6XD.
   The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the replacement of
   the front dormer window and all windows and doors to the rear of 41 Elgin Road,
   Croydon CR0 6XD in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref
   26/00900/HSE, subject to the following condition:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall accord with the following approved
              drawings in so far as they relate to the elements of the proposal hereby
              approved: 446-01-A005-1 and 446-01-A006-1.
Procedural Matters
2. The majority of the alterations for which planning permission has been sought have
   been carried out and therefore the appeal essentially relates to an application for
   retrospective planning permission.
3. The National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was revised on
   17 August 2026. Those parts of the Framework most relevant to this appeal have
   not materially changed. As a result, I have not sought submissions on the revised
   Framework, and I am satisfied that no party’s interests have been prejudiced by
   taking this approach.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are the effect of the appeal scheme on the character and
   appearance of the locally listed host building and whether it preserves or enhances
   the character or appearance of the East India Estate Conservation Area.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6013978


Reasons
5. The appeal property forms part of a handsome, locally listed terrace comprising
   four 2-storey houses. Whilst one house has a rendered front elevation and the
   dormer has been reconstructed, the group retains a high degree of unity due to the
   retention of key features such as the stucco window surrounds, recessed entrances
   and the symmetrical arrangement of the frontage and roof form.
6. Elgin Road is a residential street which is situated within the East India Estate
   Conservation Area (CA). The CA derives its significance from its historic
   development, the regular street pattern, a concentration of Victorian and Edwardian
   buildings, consistent building lines and the architectural quality and group value of
   the houses and terraces. Elgin Road includes a wide variety of styles and ages of
   housing including 20th century flats.
7. The Council’s Conservation Area Appraisal and Management Plan (2014) states
   that alterations and poor maintenance of buildings and front gardens, lack of street
   trees and planting in front gardens has had a detrimental impact on the appearance
   of Elgin Road and the overall condition of the streetscape could be significantly
   improved.
8. In respect of window replacement, the Management Plan states that replacements
   should match the original window design and be of timber construction. It advises
   that the use of uPVC as a replacement material for original or traditional style
   timber windows will not be considered acceptable as their proportions, opening
   methods, shiny plastic appearance, and light reflection are all at odds with the
   character of historic buildings.
9. The information before me indicates that prior to the appeal scheme being carried
   out the ground and first floor front windows were timber sashes and the front
   entrance comprised a timber panelled door with glazing. Most notably, the ground
   floor window comprised 3 separate openings divided by protruding mullions, which
   were either original features or closely replicated the original arrangement. These
   mullions remain in place at 43 Elgin Road but have been removed from the other
   two houses in the group, to the detriment of the appearance of the locally listed
   building and the CA.
10. The appeal scheme comprises the replacement of windows and doors with uPVC
    windows and doors. The application drawings indicate that the windows broadly
    replicate those that have been replaced whilst the doors are of a different format.
    The Council has advised that it does not object to the alterations carried out at the
    rear of the property. I find no reason to take a contrary view in this respect. In
    addition, I am satisfied that the front dormer window adequately preserves the
    appearance of the terrace and the CA given that it has replaced a similar casement
    window.
11. However, the replacement of the ground floor window has resulted in the loss of the
    mullions which were a key feature of the frontage. This, together with the use of
    uPVC frames, has resulted in clear harm. Unlike the earlier front door, the uPVC
    replacement is entirely at odds with the style and age of the appeal property. Due
    to their prominence in the street scene, I am also of the view that the pair of uPVC
    first floor windows result in material harm.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6013978


12. Due to their design, materials and appearance I therefore conclude that the ground
    and first floor front windows and the front door have an unacceptable effect on the
    appearance of the locally listed building and fail to preserve the character and
    appearance of the CA. For this reason, these aspects of the appeal scheme are
    contrary to policies DM10 and DM18 of the Croydon Local Plan (2018) and London
    Plan (2021) Policy HC1 which, amongst other matters, seek high quality design that
    integrates with and makes a positive contribution to the historic environment.
13. The Framework states that where a development proposal would harm the
    significance of a designated heritage asset the effect on the asset and its
    significance should be weighed against any public benefits resulting from the
    proposal. Public benefits can include enabling energy efficiency. Whilst the appeal
    scheme improves the energy efficiency of the appeal property there is no evidence
    before me to indicate that comparable benefits cannot be achieved through
    alterations that result in lesser impact on the historic environment. As such the
    benefits of the appeal scheme are not sufficient to outweigh the harm.
14. I note my colleague’s observations in respect of the allowed appeal1 for window
    replacement at 61 Elgin Road and the other appeal decisions referred to by the
    appellant. However, the appeal scheme is materially different from that approved
    at No. 61 and elsewhere. As each planning application and appeal needs to be
    considered on its individual merits I accord limited weight to these matters.
Conditions
15. I have considered the conditions suggested by the Council having regard to the
    Framework and Planning Practice Guidance. As the development hereby
    permitted has been carried out the standard time limit condition is not necessary.
    However, for the avoidance of doubt and in the interests of proper planning, a
    condition requiring the approved development to accord with the approved
    drawings, in so far as they relate to matters that have been permitted, is needed.
Conclusions
16. For the reasons set out above, and having regard to all other matters raised, I
    conclude that the appeal should fail in respect of the replacement of the ground and
    first floor front windows and the front door and should succeed in respect of the
    replacement of the front dormer window and all windows and doors to the rear of
    the appeal property.



S Poole
INSPECTOR




1
    Appeal ref: APP/L5240/W/25/3365922




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
