Appeal Decision
by L McKay MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 22 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6013018
2 Hart Dyke Road, Swanley, Kent, BR8 7DE
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Oladimeji Kehinde against the decision of Sevenoaks District Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/01078/HOUSE.
•    The development proposed is erection of a first floor ‘pilotis’ side extension incorporating a catslide
     roof, with associated alterations including new fenestration and fence.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for erection of a first
       floor ‘pilotis’ side extension incorporating a catslide roof, with associated
       alterations including new fenestration and fence at 2 Hart Dyke Road, Swanley,
       Kent, BR8 7DE in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref
       26/01078/HOUSE, and the plans submitted with it, subject to the following
       conditions:
     1)       The development shall begin not later than three years from the date of this
              decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: OK_2 C, OK_3 C
     3)       The external surfaces of the extension hereby permitted shall be constructed
              using concrete tiles to match the tiles used on the existing dwelling, and
              painted render to match the colour of render used on the exterior of the
              existing dwelling.
     4)       The first floor rear window of the extension hereby permitted shall be
              installed with obscured glazing and fixed such that no part of that window that
              is less than 1.7 metres above the floor of the room in which it is installed shall
              be capable of being opened. The obscured glazing and fixed areas shall
              thereafter be retained in that form.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A revised description of development was agreed in writing between the Council
       and the appellant during the application process, and I have therefore used it
       above.
3.     The most recent iteration of the National Planning Policy Framework (Framework)
       was published in August 2026. With regard to the main issues of this appeal, the
       relevant policies are not materially different from the previous iteration of the
       Framework. I am therefore satisfied that I can proceed without further consultation
       with the main parties since, with the above in mind, their respective cases would
       not be prejudiced.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6013018


Main Issues
4.       The main issues are the effect of the proposed development on the character and
         appearance of the area, and on the living conditions of the occupiers of 40 St
         Mary’s Road with particular regard to outlook and light.
Reasons
Character and appearance
5.       The appeal site is in a residential area characterised by pairs of dwellings with
         part-hipped roofs and front dormers or gable features. Gaps between pairs are
         consistently relatively narrow, other than at corners where dwellings are set at right
         angles to each other with a larger gap at the corner. The set back of properties
         from the roads and relatively low eaves levels gives the area a spacious quality,
         particularly at road junctions.
6.       No 40 has been extended to the side and rear, so is closer to the appeal dwelling
         than is characteristic on other corners locally. Therefore, the relationship is
         somewhat at odds with the character of the area. Nevertheless, there remains a
         moderate gap between the dwellings which is clearly visible in the street scene. A
         sense of space is created by the separation between the roofs of the properties.
7.       The proposal would result in a first-floor addition with a gap beneath, supported by
         a wall along the boundary and enclosed by a gate to the front. It would be parallel
         to the side wall of the dwelling, leaving a small gap to the boundary, with a catslide
         roof following the line of the part-hipped roof.
8.       The proposed catslide roof is not a feature found on this style of dwelling locally,
         however it is a design feature of other house styles in the area. Therefore, it would
         not be an alien addition to the street scene. It would continue the simple form of
         the existing roof below the existing eaves, at a similar pitch, and would not be as
         deep as the other catslide features in the area. Consequently, it would be
         considerably less bulky than those other features and the scheme previously
         dismissed at appeal1. Furthermore, it would not harmfully unbalance the
         symmetrical roof form of this pair of dwellings, as it would sit below the main roof.
9.       Overall, therefore, the modest scale, simple design and significant set back from
         the front of the house would mean that the proposal would not appear unduly bulky
         or prominent in the street scene. Therefore, it would be relatively unobtrusive and
         create a satisfactory composition with the host property and its attached pair.
10. No 40 sits on a higher ground level than the appeal site. While the proposal would
    narrow the gap between the properties at ground floor level, this would not be
    unusual in the streetscene where gaps are often reduced by the presence of
    extensions, fences and hedges. The catslide roof would significantly limit the bulk
    of the proposal at first floor level, and with the level differences between the
    properties most of the gap between them at roof level would be retained.
    Consequently, I do not consider that this slight reduction in the gap would appear
    any more at odds with the regular pattern of development than currently, and it
    would not appear unduly cramped.



1
    Appeal decision 6002820


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6013018


11. Accordingly, the proposal would not harm the character and appearance of the
    area. Therefore, I find no conflict with Policy EN1 of the Sevenoaks Allocations
    and Development Management Plan (2015) (DMP) insofar as it requires high-
    quality design which, amongst other things, responds to the scale, height,
    materials and site coverage of the area and makes efficient use of land.
Living conditions
12. I saw on site that No 40 has a kitchen window facing the side of No 2 and there is
    a sitting out area along the shared boundary. The side of No 2 limits the outlook
    from these areas, however they receive good levels of sunlight and daylight, being
    sited to the south of No 2. A single storey rear extension adjacent to the sitting out
    area contains a study space. This is set at a lower level than the main house and
    faces towards the rear part of the side elevation and the garden of No 40. The
    windows face the shared boundary fence, resulting in very limited outlook. The
    room is darker than others on the main ground floor level of the house but has a
    rooflight providing additional light.
13. Rooms in the roof space of No 40 have windows or roof lights providing views of
    the sky and local roofscape, and it is possible to look down towards the first-floor
    windows of No 2. However, due to their position and height, the outlook from these
    openings is largely across the roofscape and rear gardens of neighbouring
    properties.
14. The proposed extension would occupy the central part of the side elevation of the
    appeal property and project towards the shared boundary. It would be clearly
    visible from the sitting out area and kitchen window. The proposed extension
    would however be of limited scale in relation to the height and depth of the existing
    side elevation of No 2. Consequently, while it would be closer, the limited depth
    and scale mean that the change to outlook from these areas of No 40 would be
    modest. The kitchen also benefits from outlook through the dining space to the
    main garden area at the side of the property. The sitting out area of No 40 would
    retain its current outlook towards the front of the plot.
15. While the proposed extension would be visible from part of the main garden, it
    would be seen at an angle looking back towards the sitting out area and would not
    materially affect the open outlook from the main amenity space. As the outlook
    from the study area is already very restricted, and given its location relative to No
    2, the additional built form proposed would have very little impact from that room.
16. Overall, therefore, the proposal would not appear unduly dominant or visually
    intrusive when viewed from No 40 and would not result in a harmful loss of outlook
    for the occupants of that property.
17. Given the relative orientation of two dwellings, the proposed extension would not
    result in additional shading of No 40. Daylight reaching the kitchen window of No
    40 is already restricted by the presence of No 2, with light coming over the top of
    the side elevation and at an angle past the front and rear of that dwelling. Daylight
    to the study is primarily restricted by the proximity of the boundary fence.
18. The Council’s Residential Extensions Supplementary Planning Document (2009)
    (SPD) sets out a ’45 degree test’ which provides a guideline to measure the likely
    impact of an extension on daylight to a neighbouring property. The Council advises


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6013018


       that the 45 degree test is met with regard to the relevant neighbouring windows
       and on the evidence before me I see no reason to disagree.
19. The submissions also refer to a ’25 degree test’ which does not appear to be part
    of the SPD, but may refer to Building Research Establishment (BRE) guidance.
    From the evidence before me it appears that the existing dwelling already
    breaches a 25 degree line drawn from the centre of the facing windows of No 40.
    The proposed extension would also breach this line in respect of the kitchen
    window of No 40, but would be lower in height than the existing dwelling.
    Therefore, it has not been demonstrated that it would result in any further material
    reduction in daylight compared with the existing situation.
20. The study windows of No 40 are sited towards rear of No 2 so would not face the
    proposed extension, and light to the rooflight would not be materially affected
    given the relative angles. Therefore, it has not been demonstrated that there would
    be any material impact on daylight to this room. Accordingly, the proposal would
    not result in a harmful reduction in either sunlight or daylight reaching No 40.
21. Consequently, I find that the proposal would not result in excessive visual intrusion
    or result in an unacceptable loss of light in relation to No 40. It would therefore
    retain adequate living conditions for the occupiers of No 40 with regard to outlook
    and light and would not conflict with DMP Policy EN2, which seeks to safeguard
    the amenities of occupants of nearby properties. Nor would there be conflict with
    the SPD in this regard.
Conditions
22. Conditions are necessary in relation to implementation of the permission and
    compliance with the approved plans, in the interests of certainty. A condition to
    secure use of matching materials is necessary to safeguard the character and
    appearance of the area.
23. Overlooking would be possible between the proposed rear first floor window and
    the rear rooflights of No 40, to the detriment of the privacy of both sets of
    occupiers. A condition is therefore necessary to require the window to be obscure
    glazed and fixed, in order to mitigate this harm. There is no need to similarly
    restrict the front window as it would not directly overlook, or be overlooked by,
    neighbouring properties.
Conclusion
24. The proposal would comply with the development plan and there are no material
    considerations that justify a decision otherwise than in accordance with the
    development plan. Therefore, for the reasons given above the appeal is allowed,
    subject to the conditions listed above.

L McKay
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
