Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by E Heron MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 15th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6013375
Bees Vape Store, 146 Whalley road, Clayton-le-Moors, Accrington BB5 5DY
•      The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
       Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
       consent.
•      The appeal is made by Mrs Sidrah Akhtar against the decision of Hyndburn Borough Council.
•      The application Ref is 11/26/0156.
•      The advertisement proposed is described as ‘2 signs, 1 – banner, 1 – illuminated sign’.

Decision
1.       The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.       The Regulations require that decisions be made only in the interests of amenity
         and public safety. The Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) reiterates this approach.
         Development plan policies and guidelines that the parties consider to be relevant
         cannot be decisive, but I have taken them into account as a material consideration.
         Prior to the start of the appeal, the Council adopted the Hyndburn Local Plan 1. For
         the avoidance of doubt, I have taken it into account as a material consideration as
         part of the development plan.
3.       The application form confirms that the advertisements are already in place. I was
         able to see this during my site visit, and I have determined the appeal on that
         basis.
Main Issues
4.       The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the amenity of the area.
Reasons
5.       The appeal site occupies a highly prominent, corner position within a terrace of
         similarly proportioned buildings in a mixed commercial and residential area. The
         shopfront directly faces the busy thoroughfare, Whalley Road, whilst the shop’s
         entrance door is positioned on the building’s curved corner.
6.       The non-illuminated ‘banner’ occupies the curved space between the entrance
         door and the building’s eaves. The colour scheme includes a muted black
         background. However, the banner and its lettering are significantly larger and more
         prominent than the building’s traditionally proportioned entrance door, and the line
         of first floor windows within the building and wider terrace row. As a result, the

1
    Hyndburn 2040: Local Plan (Strategic Policies and Site Allocations), Adopted July 2026.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6013375


         banner appears unduly dominating and visually intrusive, detracting from the visual
         amenity of the area.
7.       There is first floor signage advertising a barber on the building opposite. However
         this is smaller and comprises only a logo. Similarly, photographs on the submitted
         plan indicate a much smaller pre-existing curved sign on the appeal site. These
         examples are not directly comparable with the bold yellow lettering, which
         contrasts sharply with the dark background of the banner, and as such I afford
         them limited weight in my decision,
8.       The illuminated sign is of a fascia-type, and projects forward of the shopfront with
         internally illuminated lettering positioned to one side. The annotation on the
         submitted plan states that it is positioned above the roller shutter box, however I
         noted during my site visit that the sign appears to be fixed directly to it, and the
         Council has made a similar observation.
9.       Due to its position, the illuminated fascia sign projects excessively from the
         building frontage, resulting in a bulky and box-like appearance, which is further
         exacerbated by the projecting cut lettering. The result is a dominant, visually
         intrusive feature. On this basis, it is discordant with the simple architectural
         detailing of the host building and the visual amenity of the wider street scene.
10. For these reasons, the proposed signs appear out of keeping with other signage in
    the locality, resulting in inharmonious and visually intrusive features in the street
    scene. They result in visual clutter and fail to respect the scale and proportions of
    the host building. I therefore conclude that the proposal has a harmful effect on
    visual amenity.
11. Although not determinative, I have had regard to Policies DM26, DM27 and GN4
    of the Development Management DPD2, as well as Policy SP18 of the Hyndburn
    Local Plan. Amongst other things, the policies require that proposals secure high
    quality design by respecting and reinforcing local distinctiveness, including
    architectural features.
Other Matters
12. The appellant’s stance is that the advertisements support the vitality and activity of
    the local commercial area. However, similar benefits could be achieved from a less
    visually harmful scheme, and I must assess the appeal only on the basis of
    amenity and public safety. The appellant also states that neighbours have no
    concerns about the appeal proposal, however the absence of objections does not
    indicate a lack of harm.
13. The Council has not suggested that the proposal would affect public safety, and I
    see no reason to disagree.
Conclusion
14. For the reasons given above, and having had regard to all matters raised, I
    conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

E Heron
INSPECTOR

2
    Hyndburn Borough Council Local Plan, Development Management DPD, adopted January 2018.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate              2
