 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 01 September 2026
 by Nicola Davies BA DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 14 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6013132
 9 Tamworth Close, Earley, Wokingham RG6 4EQ
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Haroon Qaiser against the decision of Wokingham Borough Council.
 •   The application Ref is 260569.
 •   The development proposed is for a front/side ground floor extension and a two story rear extension.


Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) has
   been published since the planning application was determined by the Council. I
   have had regard to the revised Framework in reaching my decision.
3. I have taken the description of proposed development from the planning application
   form although I note it is expressed differently on other documents.
Main Issue
4. The main issue raised by this appeal is the effect of the proposed development on
   the living conditions of the existing neighbouring occupiers at Nos 16 and 18
   Cannock Way.
Reasons
5. There is overlooking from the existing first floor habitable accommodation toward
   No.16 Cannock Way however, the proposal would bring outlook from first floor
   accommodation closer to that neighbouring property. Given the limited separation
   between the development and this neighbouring property, overlooking from
   elevated outlook would take place of the private garden of No16, which hosts a
   conservatory, patio area and outbuilding just beyond the appeal site. This loss of
   privacy would be harmful to the living conditions the neighbouring occupiers should
   reasonably expect to enjoy.
6. The existing fence is not of sufficient height to obviate the harm from overlooking
   that I have identified. I acknowledge that this is a residential area where there is a
   degree of mutual overlooking of the rear private areas of neighbouring properties.
   Nonetheless, this does not obviate the harm that I have identified or justify the
   proposed development.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6013132


7. The rear garden of No.18 Cannock Way is adjacent the side elevation of the appeal
   property that is proposed to be extended over two-storeys. The proposal would be
   a large addition to the property and a significant feature clearly visible in the outlook
   from the rear of No.18 and substantially so when observed in conjunction with the
   existing side elevation. It would create a sense of being enclosed by built
   development. The visually dominant and overbearing impact of the flank elevation
   in such close proximity to the adjoining occupiers at No.18 would diminish the
   enjoyment of the residential living environment, and particularly that of the outdoor
   amenity space, for the neighbouring occupiers. The incorporation of a sloping roof
   would not significantly reduce the visual impact of the proposed development.
8. Further to the above, the garden of No.18 is south facing. Given the orientation of
   the proposed development directly to the south of No.18 and the overall size of the
   proposed development it would cast a shadow over No.18. As such, this would
   create overshadowing of No.18 reducing both sunlight and daylight to the garden
   area of this neighbouring property over a substantial part of the day. The proposal
   in such close proximity to the adjoining neighbouring occupiers would diminish the
   enjoyment of the residential living environment. This would be harmful to the
   enjoyment these occupiers should reasonably expect to enjoy.
9. For these reasons, I conclude that the proposed development would be harmful to
   the living conditions of the existing neighbouring occupiers of Nos 16 and 18
   Cannock Way. The proposal would, therefore, conflict with Policies CP1 and CP3
   of the Wokingham Borough Core Strategy and the provisions of the Framework.
   These policies seek, amongst other matters, development to maintain or enhance
   the high quality of the environment without causing detriment to the amenities of
   adjoining land users. This accords with the revised Framework that seeks to
   achieve well-designed places.
10. The Wokingham Borough Council Borough Design Guide advocates a minimum
    back to side separation distance of 12m. The separation distance between the
    rear of the proposed two storey extension and the neighbouring property at No.16
    is less than that at said to be approximately 8m.
Other Matters
11. It is contended that Wokingham Borough Council has granted planning permission
    for extensions in other similar residential settings and some on more constrained
    plots with constrained garden depths and closer relationships to neighbouring
    boundaries. I have been provided with postcodes pertaining to examples of such
    development that includes an annotated image of a site at 41 Strand Way. I have
    not been provided the full details of these cases that might enable me to consider
    what similarity, if any, those examples have to that of the case that is before me
    and the policy context they were assessed against. In any event the proposal that
    is before me can and should be considered on its own merits against the current
    policies that are in place.
12. I note that the appellant wishes to create a larger bathroom as it is indicated the
    size of the existing family bathroom is constrained in size and impacts upon the
    circulation space and movement within the room. The proposal would address
    these shortfalls and provide a more appropriately sized family bathroom of
    improved layout. Whilst I sympathise with the personal circumstances of the
    appellant and his family in respect of the practicalities of the existing family


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision 6013132


     bathroom, I am mindful that the harm identified to the existing adjoining occupiers
     would be permanent and this is not outweighed by the appellant’s particular
     personal circumstances.
Conclusion
13. Having regard to the above findings, the appeal should be dismissed.



Nicola Davies
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
