Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by Mr C J Tivey BSc (Hons) BPl MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date:22 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6013026
 11 Stevens Green, St Mary Bourne, Hampshire SP11 6DF
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Snelling against the decision of Basingstoke and Deane Borough Council.
 •    The application Ref. is 26/00434/HSE.
 •    The development proposed is for a rear dormer loft extension.


 Decision
 1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a rear dormer loft
    extension at 11 Stevens Green, St Mary Bourne, Hampshire SP11 6DF in
    accordance with the terms of the application, Ref. 26/00434/HSE, subject to the
    following conditions:
       1)      The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
               date of this decision.
       2)      The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
               the following approved plans: Drawing Nos. 01 and 02.
       3)      The Juliet balcony shall be retained in perpetuity and the adjacent roof shall
               not be used as a roof terrace or any form of outside amenity area.
 Application for Costs
 2. An application for costs was made by the appellant against the Council and this is
    the subject of a separate decision.
 Preliminary Matter
 3. A new National Planning Policy Framework (the ‘Framework’) was issued on
    17 August 2026 which replaced the previous version published in December 2024,
    and all other iterations. Paragraph 1 of Policy S4, as set out therein, stipulates that
    development proposals within settlements should be approved unless the benefits
    of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when
    assessed against the national decision-making policies in the Framework.
 4. Policy L2 of the Framework stipulates that substantial weight should be given to the
    benefits where proposals would achieve, amongst other things, the creation of
    additional homes or floor space within settlements through additional development
    within existing plots, provided that it is consistent with the overall street scene
    (Policy L2, para. 1.d i.). Policy DP3 of the Framework sets out the key principles for
    well-designed places.

 https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6013026


5. I consider that this new national policy does not affect the substance of the
   proposal before me and therefore it was not necessary to refer back to the parties, I
   have determined the appeal on this basis.
Main Issues
6. The main issues are the effect of the appeal proposal upon the character and
   appearance of the area; and upon the living conditions of the occupants of
   neighbouring residential properties, specifically with regard to the outlook from
   12 Stevens Green.
Reasons
7. The appeal site comprises a semi-detached two storey former Local Authority
   house located within a relatively low density residential area.
8. The host dwelling has been extended to the rear in the form of a two storey flat roof
   rear extension, in lieu of an original cat-slide roof form; and a single-storey
   extension to the side. There exists an alcove created by the two storey rear
   extension and a single storey rear extension with a high parapet/crown roof located
   to the rear of no12 on the shared boundary.
9. The rear dormer would be quite substantial in scale, however, public views of it
   would be very limited and with the Public Footpath that runs along the rear garden
   boundary being very well screened by mature vegetation. As found within the
   committee report, the proposed roof extension would be seen against the backdrop
   of other dwellings within Stevens Green; and due to its location, and the presence
   of the neighbouring extension, I consider that notwithstanding the visual change
   from the rear garden scene, that the proposal would not be unduly overbearing
   upon the occupants of this neighbouring property as it would not project beyond the
   rear eaves line.
10. I acknowledge concerns of local residents with regard to overlooking and loss of
    privacy, although in reality a degree of mutual overlooking already occurs within the
    residential area, where properties are two storeys or more. The very fact that an
    extension can be seen does not necessarily mean that it would give rise to
    demonstrable harm to residential amenities.
11. I note concerns with regard to the potential for light pollution emanating from the
    proposed windows, however I consider that the chances of such would be limited,
    bearing in mind that the use of the loft conversion would be for bedroom
    accommodation where the primary purpose is for sleeping.
12. Furthermore, any views down towards the large glass skylight on no12’s rear
    extension and the immediate rear sitting out area for that property would be
    oblique. I also note concern has been raised with regard to the proposed provision
    of 3no rooflights to the front elevation, however, the Council’s Committee report
    stipulates that these would likely be Permitted Development and I have been given
    no substantive reason to come to a different conclusion on this.
13. I therefore conclude, on balance, that the proposed development would not give
    rise to an overdevelopment of the host property or be materially harmful to the
    character and appearance of the area; neither would it be overbearing or therefore
    give rise to a demonstrable loss of outlook to the occupiers of the adjoining
    property at 12 Stevens Green.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    2
Appeal Decision 6013026


14. From this basis I find the proposal complies with Policy EM10 of the Basingstoke
    and Deane Local Plan 2011 – 2029 which requires development proposals to
    respect the local environment and amenities of neighbouring properties to, amongst
    other things, provide a high quality of amenity for occupants of developments and
    neighbouring properties, whilst having due regard to the density, scale, layout,
    appearance, architectural detailing, materials and history of the surrounding area.
Other Matters
15. The Council’s decision notice did not make reference to the fact that the site falls
    within the St Mary Bourne and Stoke Conservation Area with the appeal site falling
    within its Area 1. The associated Conservation Area Appraisal focuses upon the
    more historic elements of the area which I consider would not be adversely
    impacted upon by virtue of the previously mentioned screening. I therefore
    conclude that the proposal would preserve the character and appearance of the
    Conservation Area.
Conclusion and Conditions
16. For the reasons set out above and having regard to all other matters raised, I
    conclude that the appeal should succeed.
17. In addition to the standard time limit condition, I consider that it is appropriate to
    require the development to be carried in accordance with the submitted plans in the
    interests of protecting the character and appearance of the area; and that the flat-
    roof over the existing two storey rear extension be prevented from being utilised as
    a form of outdoor amenity space. Consequently, I have imposed an amended
    version of the Council’s suggested condition, in order to protect the living conditions
    of neighbouring residential properties from additional overlooking and general noise
    and disturbance that the use of a roof terrace could potentially create.



C J Tivey
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
