Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 14 September 2026 by S Manson DipTP MRTPI
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6013422
2 Lime Grove, Chorley, Lancashire PR7 3JA
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Callum Field against the decision of Chorley Borough Council.
•   The application Ref is 26/00363/FULHH.
•   The development proposed is the erection of 1.8m timber fencing alongside boundary of property
    (retrospective).

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matter
3. I have used the description from the decision notice. The application form includes
   some explanatory text which, whilst I have taken it into account, is superfluous for
   identifying the development to which the appeal relates. It does not alter anything
   fundamental of the appeal scheme, nor prejudice the respective cases of the main
   parties.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the development on the character and appearance
   of the area.
Reasons for the Recommendation
5. The appeal property is a two-storey semi-detached dwelling located on a corner
   plot where Lime Grove meets Ash Grove. The prevailing boundary treatment in the
   immediate street scene consists mainly low brick walls, fences and hedges. These
   enclose modest front gardens which are generally laid to lawn and accompanied by
   short driveways. This consistent arrangement provides a sense of openness and
   uniformity that contributes positively to the character and appearance of the area.
6. The appeal fence, by virtue of its considerable height, solid timber construction and
   unrelieved, visually impermeable design, forms a prominent, conflicting and overly
   assertive feature within the street. It introduces a harsh, defensive enclosure that
   unacceptably contrasts with the softer, more open frontage treatment elsewhere.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6013422


     This results in a loss of visual continuity and negatively erodes the open and
     cohesive character that defines the street and surrounding area.
7. Whilst I observed a taller boundary fence within the wider street scene, this
   appeared to be of a significant older form, and its planning status is unknown. In
   any event, the existence of an isolated example does not justify the perpetuation of
   similar forms of development. Each proposal must be assessed on its own merits,
   and the existence of an incongruous boundary treatment elsewhere does not justify
   the replication of a similarly harmful design.
8. Consequently, the development causes unacceptable harm to the character and
   appearance of the area. It thus conflicts with Policy BNE1 of the Chorley Local Plan
   2012-2026, 2015, which, amongst other things, requires development, including
   free standing structures, not to have a detrimental impact on the surrounding area
   by virtue of its height, scale, massing and design.
Other Matter
9. It remains the responsibility of the appellant to ensure that any necessary
   permissions are obtained prior to any works taking place. It is unfortunate that they
   were incorrectly advised by a third party, but I am unable to give this matter more
   than very limited weight.
Conclusion and Recommendation
10. For the reasons given above, the scheme conflicts with the development plan and
    material considerations do not indicate a decision other than in accordance
    therewith. I therefore recommend that the appeal should be dismissed.

S Manson
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
11. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is dismissed.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
