Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by Andrew Fuller BSc (Hons), Dip TP, MA, MRTPI, IHBC
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6013153
1 Manor Close, Oadby, Leicestershire LE2 4FE
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Mandeep Johal against the decision of Oadby and Wigston Borough
     Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00133/FUL.
•    The development proposed is described on the application form as ‘proposed two storey side and
     rear extension, including roof conversion’.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a first-floor side and
       rear extension, single storey rear extension and loft conversion at 1 Manor Close,
       Oadby, Leicestershire LE2 4FE in accordance with the terms of the application
       reference 26/00133/FUL, subject to the conditions set out in the attached
       schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.     Notwithstanding the description of development set out in the heading above,
       which is taken from the application form, it is clear from the plans and
       accompanying information that the development comprises the construction of a
       first-floor side and rear extension, single storey rear extension and loft conversion.
       The Council dealt with the proposal on this basis and so shall I, and I have
       therefore used its description of development in my decision. Whilst there is no
       letter in the evidence before me from the Council advising the appellant of this
       change, they have had sight of both the Planning Officers Delegated Report and
       the notice of refusal. As such, I am content that the applicant has had the
       opportunity to comment on the revised description, and I am satisfied that no party
       would be prejudiced as a result.
3.     The Council does not object to the proposed single storey rear extension and loft
       conversion. From my site visit these elements of the proposal would assimilate to
       an acceptable standard with the building. As such, I have no reason to reach a
       different conclusion and have not considered this matter further in my assessment
       below.
4.     The Council has prepared the Oadby & Wigston Local Plan (2025-2042)
       Regulation 22 Submission Draft (June 2026) (Reg 22 Local Plan). Whilst at this
       stage, the Reg 22 Local Plan is advanced, it has yet to go through examination
       and therefore for the purposes of this appeal I give the policies within it limited
       weight. The Council has identified the relevant replacement policy for this decision
       and has provided it in evidence. Whilst the policy includes a new approach to

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6013153


       design quality, it does not introduce any new standards with regards to living
       conditions that would alter my considerations on the main issue below.
5.     A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was
       published on 17 August 2026. The changes to the Framework do not affect the
       merits of this case in a material way and I, therefore, have not consulted the
       parties with regard to these changes. I am satisfied this would not result in
       prejudice to either party.
Main Issue
6.     The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the living conditions
       of the neighbouring occupiers of No 65 Manor Road, with particular reference to
       outlook and privacy.
Reasons
7.     The appeal site consists of a detached two-storey house with its immediate
       neighbour at No 65 Manor Road comprising a detached bungalow. It is inset away
       from the boundary with this neighbour by a passageway and forms a long side
       hipped roof towards it. Currently, there are no rear or side facing windows that
       easily afford views into the rear garden of No 65.
8.     The appeal property projects part way across the side of a decked courtyard to the
       rear-side of No 65, which provides access to utility areas, but is otherwise absent
       of windows. Beyond it, the rest of this neighbouring property is sat further back
       within its garden than the appeal property, forming a staggered formation away
       from the common boundary. Whilst the garden is smaller than some other gardens
       in the area, it is adequate in its proportions relative to the size of the dwelling it
       serves.
9.     The proposed development would extend at first floor over the existing side/rear
       hipped roof, to form a full two-storey flank elevation towards the boundary. Over it,
       a hipped roof would be formed, running parallel to the boundary at a lower height
       than the existing main roof of the house. Primary bedroom windows would be
       positioned to the rear elevation and a secondary bedroom window to the side,
       along with other side windows that would be obscure glazed.
10. Being sat above the existing ground floor footprint, the proposed first-floor would
    be contained to the side of No 65’s rear-side utility yard and set back from its main
    rear elevation. As such, the scale and massing of the proposal would only be fully
    experienced from within this enclosed yard area and along a limited section of the
    common boundary. It would not appear overbearing from other parts of the garden
    where occupants would most likely sit and enjoy an outlook that would mostly be
    away from this proposed development.
11. The secondary bedroom window would look directly sideways into No 65’s rear
    garden. This would introduce a new relationship of overlooking which would have
    an adverse effect on the living conditions of occupiers of that property. The Council
    has suggested a condition which would make this window obscure glazed and
    non-opening below 1.7m. However, this would not remove the perception of
    overlooking from the side elevation.
12. The Planning Practice Guidance confirms that conditions can be used to enable
    development to proceed where it would otherwise have been necessary to refuse

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6013153


       planning permission, by mitigating the adverse effects. The appellant has indicated
       they would accept the removal of this window, as the bedroom would be served by
       the window on the rear elevation. I am therefore satisfied it would be reasonable to
       impose a condition requiring the removal of this window. This would address the
       concerns about overlooking and consequent loss of privacy to the neighbouring
       occupier.
13. Rear facing bedroom windows would gain some views across the rear parts of No
    65’s garden, as well as limited views at an oblique angle across a central area of
    the garden closest to the appeal site. However, areas towards the house, where
    occupants could reasonably be expected to sit and enjoy the garden would remain
    private. As such, whilst the proposed development would result in a change to the
    privacy of some limited areas of the garden, it is not an uncommon relationship
    found between many neighbouring properties sat side by side.
14. For the reasons outlined above, I conclude that the proposed development would
    not harm the living conditions of the neighbouring occupiers of No 65 Manor Road,
    with particular reference to outlook and privacy. As such, I find no conflict with,
    Policy 6 of The Borough of Oadby and Wigston Local Plan 2011-2031 (2019)
    which, amongst other things, seeks development to protect local amenity,
    including overlooking.
Conditions
15. The Council has suggested conditions should I be minded to allow the appeal. I
    have had regard to these in light of the tests set out in Policy DM6(1) of the
    Framework and the advice in the PPG. I have made amendments where
    necessary to ensure they are enforceable and precise. I have imposed standard
    conditions relating to the commencement of development and approved plans to
    define the terms of the permission (1,2).
16. I have imposed a condition requiring materials to match the existing building to
    ensure the development will not harm the character and appearance of the area
    (3). Finally, in the interest of neighbouring privacy, I have imposed conditions to
    remove the first-floor secondary bedroom window in the east facing elevation, as
    well as preventing the installation of further windows in both the east and west
    facing elevations (4) and (5).
Conclusion
17. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be allowed.

Andrew Fuller
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6013153


Schedule of Conditions
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: 942/01C Rev C (Block and location plan), and
              942/03 Rev E (Proposed floor plans and elevations) (as amended by
              condition 4).
     3)       The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
              extension shall match those used in the existing building.
     4)       Notwithstanding the details shown on plan ref: 942/03 Rev E (Proposed floor
              plans and elevations), no development shall take place above ground level
              until an amended east elevation has been submitted to and approved in
              writing by the local planning authority. The amended elevation shall not
              include any secondary windows serving bedroom 4. The development shall
              be carried out in accordance with the approved plan.
     5)       Notwithstanding the provisions of the Town and Country Planning (General
              Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (or any order revoking and re-
              enacting that Order with or without modification), no windows or dormer
              windows shall be constructed in the east or west facing elevations.
End of Schedule




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
