Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 September 2026
by L Francis BA (Hons) MA MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6013465
247-249 Beckenham Road, Beckenham, Bromley BR3 4RP
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of
     the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as
     amended).
•    The appeal is made by Moffat Investments Ltd against the decision of the Council of the London
     Borough of Bromley.
•    The application Ref is 26/01947/NOT.
•    The development proposed is Change of use from Class E (Commercial, Business and Service) to
     Use Class C3 (Dwellinghouses) to form 2 no. 1 bed studio residential units under Class MA, Part 3,
     Schedule 2 of the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) Order 2015 (as
     amended).

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and prior approval is granted under the provisions of Article
       3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of the Town and Country Planning (General
       Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) for “Change of use
       from Class E (Commercial, Business and Service) to Use Class C3
       (Dwellinghouses) to form 2 no. 1 bed studio residential units under Class MA, Part
       3, Schedule 2 of the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted
       Development) Order 2015 (as amended)” at 247-249 Beckenham Road,
       Beckenham, Bromley BR3 4RP in accordance with the application 26/01947/NOT
       and the details submitted with it subject to the conditions set out in the attached
       schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.     In the interests of conciseness and clarity I have shortened the description of
       development contained on the application form.
3.     I note the fenestration shown on the drawings has already received planning
       permission under reference 25/03291/FPA.
4.     Development plan policies and the National Planning Policy Framework (the
       Framework) can be considered relevant in prior approval cases, but only insofar as
       they relate to the development and prior approval matters. I have proceeded on
       this basis.
Background and Main Issue
5.     Under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 3, Class MA of the Town and Country
       Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended)
       (the Order), planning permission is granted for the change of use of a building

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6013465


       falling within use Class E (commercial, business and service) to Class C3
       (dwellinghouse). This is subject to limitations and conditions, as set out in
       subsequent paragraphs of Class MA.
6.     The conditions establish a requirement for developers to apply to the local
       planning authority for a determination as to whether prior approval will be required
       in relation to various specified prior approval matters. The dispute between the
       parties arises from the requirement of condition MA.2 – (f) for all habitable rooms
       of the dwellinghouses to receive adequate natural light.
7.     In light of the above, the main issues are:
           •    whether adequate natural light would be provided to all habitable rooms in
                compliance with Condition MA.2. - (2)(f); and,
           •    if so, whether prior approval should be granted.
Reasons
8.     MA.2. – (2)(f) requires the provision of adequate natural light in all habitable rooms
       of the dwellinghouses.
9.     Studio A as shown on the drawings would be single aspect, served by 4 windows.
       Studio B, also single aspect, would be served by 2 windows. The bathrooms would
       not contain windows, however they are not classified as ‘habitable rooms’
       according to the definition in Part 3 of the Order, Paragraph X.
10. Natural light levels within the studios have been calculated using the Target
    Daylight Factor test as set out in the Building Research Establishment guidelines;
    the results show that each studio would exceed the minimum recommended
    standards. There is little substantive evidence before me which would lead me to
    conclude that the flats would not receive adequate natural light.
11. Based strictly on the wording used in the Order therefore, I find that the proposed
    studios would meet the requirements of Condition MA.2.-(2)(f) and would be
    permitted development.
Other Matters
12. The other matters described under MA.2. – 2 include the transport impacts of the
    development, contamination risks, flood risk, loss of services, and impacts from
    heavy industry. There is no substantive evidence before me which would lead me
    to conclude that the proposal would not be acceptable with regard to these
    matters. The site is not within a conservation area, and it would not meet the
    requirements set out in Paragraph MA.3 in relation to the need to consider fire
    safety. There is no requirement for me to consider these matters further.
13. The appeal site is located on a busy street with surrounding commercial uses. In
    light of this, there would be the potential for the living conditions of future occupiers
    to be affected by noise from the nearby commercial premises which include
    entertainment uses. Whilst the Council did not refuse the application on this
    matter, they suggest conditions which require the submission and approval of a
    noise assessment and the installation of any necessary mitigation. I consider this
    would be necessary and reasonable in the interests of ensuring acceptable living
    conditions for future occupiers.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6013465


Conditions
14. Paragraph W13 of the Order allows the local planning authority to grant prior
    approval unconditionally or subject to conditions reasonably related to the subject
    matter of the prior approval.
15. Development under Class MA is permitted subject to conditions at paragraphs
    MA.2.(5) and (6) which provide that the development must be completed within a
    period of 3 years starting with the prior approval date and that any building
    permitted to be used as a dwellinghouse by virtue of Class MA is to remain in use
    as a dwellinghouse within the meaning of Class C3 of Schedule 1 to the Use
    Classes Order and for no other purpose, except to the extent that the other
    purpose is ancillary to the use as a dwellinghouse.
16. I have not applied a plans condition because prior approvals are granted subject to
    the submitted details and therefore this is not necessary.
17. As there is an extant permission for operational development to install additional
    windows, it would be necessary to add a condition (1) which restricts the
    occupation of the studios until after the operational development has been carried
    out. This is necessary to ensure the studios would contain sufficient natural light.
18. Conditions 2 and 3 are necessary in the interests of achieving acceptable living
    conditions for future occupiers with particular regard to noise. I have removed the
    reference to external space from condition 2 since the appeal proposal does not
    contain external space.
Conclusion
19. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed and prior approval
    should be granted.

L Francis
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6013465


                                           Schedule


    1. The residential studios authorised by this prior approval shall not be occupied
       until the windows have been installed pursuant to the planning permission
       reference 25/03291/FPA. Those works shall thereafter be retained for the
       lifetime of this development.

    2. Prior to first occupation of the studios, an acoustic assessment shall be
       submitted to the local planning authority for approval in writing. A scheme of
       mitigation, as necessary in light of the results of the assessment, covering
       façade, glazing and ventilation specifications, shall achieve levels not exceeding
       30dB LAeq (night) and 45dB LAmax (measured with F time weighting) for
       bedrooms, 35dB LAeq (day) for other habitable rooms, with window shut and
       other means of ventilation provided. Where necessary the evaluation of human
       exposure to vibration within the building shall not exceed the Vibration dose
       values criteria ‘Low probability of adverse comment’ as defined BS6472. The
       studios shall not be occupied until the mitigation has been installed fully in
       accordance with the approved scheme; it shall be permanently maintained
       thereafter.

    3. (a) The studios shall not be occupied until full written details, including relevant
       drawings and specifications of the proposed works of sound insulation against
       airborne noise to meet D’nT,w + Ctr of not less than 55 dB for walls and/or
       ceilings where residential parties non domestic use, shall be submitted to and
       approved in writing by the local planning authority.

         (b) The studios shall only be occupied once the soundproofing works as agreed
         under part (a) have been implemented in accordance with the approved details.

         (c) The soundproofing shall be retained permanently in accordance with the
         approved details.


                                           End of schedule




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
