Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 23 September 2026
by S Sharp BSc(Hons) BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 1st October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6013951
Orchard View, Silver Street, West Buckland, Wellington, Somerset TA21 9JZ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Newnes against the decision of Somerset Council.
•    The application reference is 46/26/0010.
•    The development proposed is erection of a two-storey & single-storey extension to the rear (west)
     and associated works.

Decision
1.     The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the erection of a two-
       storey & single-storey extension to the rear (west) and associated works, at
       Orchard View, Silver Street, West Buckland, Wellington, Somerset TA21 9JZ, in
       accordance with the terms of the application, reference 46/26/0010, subject to the
       following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
              the date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: KRAD.26.021.100 - Block & Location Plan,
              KRAD.26.021.110 – Rev B - Proposed Site Plan, KRAD.26.021.140 - Rev B -
              Proposed Plans, KRAD.26.021.150 - Rev C - Proposed Elevations.
     3)       Prior to its installation, the window serving the ensuite to the master bedroom
              as shown on plans KRAD.26.021 .140 - Rev B and KRAD.26.021.150 - Rev
              C shall be obscure glazed. The glazing shall conform with or exceed
              Pilkington Texture Glass Privacy Level 3 (or an equivalent level in any
              replacement standard). The obscure glazing shall thereafter be retained for
              the lifetime of the development.
Preliminary Matters
2.     An amended application form is included in the evidence before me. This was
       submitted prior to the determination of the application by the Council. I have used
       the details from the amended form in my decision.
3.     Following the appeal site visit, with prior agreement with the relevant interested
       parties, I also assessed the proposed development from Trelowarren, West
       Buckland, Wellington, Somerset TA21 9JZ.
4.     During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
       (the Framework) was published. There are no substantive changes relevant to the
       appeal before me and therefore no interested parties would be prejudiced by my


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6013951


       consideration of the 2026 version of the Framework. References hereafter are to
       the August 2026 version.
Main Issue
5.     The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
       appearance of the host dwelling and the surrounding area.
Reasons
6.     The area around the appeal site is predominantly characterised by late twentieth
       and twenty-first century residential development. These include those at Lee Park
       which are spaced closely together. Those on Silver Street are afforded larger gaps
       between them. There is no specific reference to a local vernacular in any of the
       design and detailing. Gabled, half hipped, hipped and flat roofs are all present in
       the area, as are facing brickwork, render and cladding. No one design or form
       prevails and the character and appearance of the area, in terms of its layout,
       design and scale of dwellings are eclectic.
7.     The host dwelling at the appeal site is a detached house dating from the mid
       twentieth century. It possesses some architectural detailing such as deep
       corbelled eaves, chimney stacks and a first-floor window that breaks the wall plate.
       These details aside, it is of a simple, plain design. Its painted rendered external
       walls, siting close to the public highway, and two storey height, result in it being a
       prominent feature within the street scene, particularly when one approaches from
       the south heading towards the settlement centre.
8.     The existing internal and external layout of the property are such that the principal
       elevation of the host dwelling is, at first sight, difficult to discern. Upon the
       evidence before me, including my observations on site, I find that it is the gable
       facing Silver Street. This is where the front door to the dwelling is located, beyond
       which is the entrance hall. There are no other external doors other than patio
       doors serving the lounge which provide access onto the private garden space to
       the south of the dwelling. Visitors, as I did, approach the front door long the shared
       driveway to the west of the dwelling looping around its north side.
9.     In this context, the proposed development would be sited subserviently on the rear
       of the host dwelling. Both the two and single storey elements of the proposal would
       also be subservient in height. Existing facing materials would be largely matched,
       as would the host dwelling’s roof pitches for the proposed two-storey element. The
       proposal would also be simple in design with no features that would appear overly
       dominant. The visual effect from public receptors would be further reduced by the
       screening provided by the existing two storey projection from the north elevation
       and the hedge adjoining Silver Street on this side. I do not have details of the
       exact existing and proposed floorspaces in the evidence before me, but it is clear
       from examination of the plans that the additional floorspace proposed is
       subservient in its extent to that which exists currently.
10. The additional footprint is a material increase to that existing but, given the other
    design qualities I have highlighted above, I find that the proposed development
    would not overwhelm the form and proportions of the host dwelling and would not
    unbalance its appearance. Furthermore, with the proposed breaks in the external
    walls and roofline, the legibility of the host dwelling’s original form would remain.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6013951


11. I also find that, given the eclectic character and appearance of the surrounding
    area, it would not be adversely affected by the proposed development. The latter
    would reduce the gap to the dwellings on Lee Park but the separation distance
    would still be much greater than that which prevails on this neighbouring
    development.
12. Overall, the proposed development would not harm the character and appearance
    of the host dwelling or the surrounding area. It would accord with policy D5 of the
    Taunton Deane Site Allocations and Development Management Plan (2016)
    (SADMP) and Policy DM1 of the Taunton Deane Core Strategy (2012) (CS). The
    former, amongst other things, seeks to ensure that extensions to dwellings do not
    harm form and character of the dwelling and are subservient to it in scale and
    design. Criterion d) of the latter advises that the appearance and character of any
    affected landscape, settlement, streetscene or building should not be unacceptably
    harmed by any proposed development.
Other matters
13. During my assessment of the proposed development from the neighbouring
    property, Trelowarren, I noted that there is a window serving a dining area and
    patio doors serving a living room on the elevation facing the appeal site. There is
    also private garden space serving the occupiers of Trelowarren between the
    dwelling and shared boundary. The orientation of the elevation and the garden
    mean that the rooms served by the window and patio doors as well as the garden
    space currently enjoy sunlight for much of the day.
14. The proposed development would result in the appeal property’s mass increasing.
    It would extend beyond the limits of the existing garage when viewed from
    Trelowarren. This would result in loss of sunlight afforded to Trelowarren’s garden
    and to its living room and dining area. However, the separation distance between
    the proposed development and Trelowarren is significant and the times of day and
    the year when sun would be screened by the proposal would be limited. I also
    noted that both the affected living room and dining area are also served by
    windows on other elevations, they are dual aspect rooms. As such, the harm to the
    living conditions of Trelowarren resulting from overshadowing would be very minor
    in scale and not determinative in this instance.
15. Boundary hedges and fences as well as the detached garage at the appeal site,
    and the current lack of first floor windows at the appeal property facing
    Trelowarren, mean that the latter’s occupiers are afforded a high level of privacy
    when in their garden, living room or dining area. The proposed development would
    introduce a first floor window facing Trelowarren. The view from this window would
    afford a view directly into this property’s garden and through its patio doors into the
    living room. The window is planned to serve an ensuite to the master bedroom. It
    is reasonable and necessary for this window to be obscure glazed. With such
    glazing in place the living conditions of the occupiers of Trelowarren in terms of
    privacy, would not be harmed.
16. I acknowledge the comments made by interested parties in relation to the potential
    effects of the construction phase of the proposed development, specifically
    because the private driveway access to the appeal site is shared with two other
    properties. I have considered the effects of the construction phase on pedestrian
    and vehicular access to the two other properties. I find that it would not be


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6013951


       reasonable or necessary for an alternative access and/or construction
       management plan to be provided for the minor, householder scale of development
       proposed.
17. During my site visit I noted that a significant number of cars were parked on Silver
    Street, which I understand from the evidence before me, are associated with the
    use of the nearby primary school. The appeal property currently has three
    bedrooms and is served by two on-site car parking spaces in addition to a
    detached garage. The proposed development would result in an additional
    bedroom at the appeal property. This minor increase in the accommodation would
    be unlikely to result in a material increase in demand for car parking, if at all. As
    such, I afford this matter very minor weight in my assessment and no harm to
    highway safety would arise from the proposed development.
18. The proposed development’s siting would result in the removal of natural
    landscaping. I note from the Council’s evidence that, although the landscaping
    includes trees, none of them are afforded any statutory protection; there are no
    Tree Preservation Orders, and the appeal site is not within a designated
    Conservation Area. The loss of the landscaping and its associated biodiversity
    value is a material consideration to which I have had regard. However, I find that,
    due to the relatively minor visual, landscape and biodiversity value that it holds, the
    harm would be very minor in scale, and not to the extent that permission should be
    withheld.
19. The Framework is a material consideration. Policy S4 relates to developments in
    settlements. The appeal site is within the settlement of West Buckland. The policy
    advises that development proposals within settlements should be approved unless
    the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects,
    when assessed against the national decision-making policies (NDMPs) in the
    Framework. It continues by providing examples of circumstances where the
    benefits are likely to be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects.
20. One such NDMP is policy DP3 which advises that proposals should respond to
    their context (the history, character and features of their site and its setting), so
    that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings. The policy continues by
    stating that development proposals should be refused if, without clear justification,
    they conflict with this provision. For the reasons I have given in this decision, there
    is no conflict with the policy.
21. Overall, there are only limited benefits that I afford to the proposed development,
    specifically the provision of additional bedroom space to accommodate a wider
    range of family sizes. However, these benefits are not substantially outweighed by
    any adverse effects, when assessed against the NDMPs.
22. Having considered the Framework’s provisions, I find that the relevant
    development plan policies are consistent with it in this instance. I have also had
    regard to the provisions of Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) in my assessment.
    The Framework is not a material consideration which indicates that a decision
    should be made otherwise than in accordance with the development plan.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6013951


Conditions
23. In addition to the standard time condition, I have imposed a condition requiring that
    the development is carried out in accordance with the approved plans, for the
    avoidance of doubt and in the interests of certainty.
24. I have also explained in my decision that it is necessary in the interests of the living
    conditions of occupiers of Trelowarren, to secure the obscure glazing of the window to
    the proposed ensuite to the master bedroom. This is to prevent a loss of privacy. I have
    imposed a condition accordingly.
25. Based on the information available, this permission is considered to be one which
    will not require the approval of a biodiversity gain plan before development is
    begun. This is because a statutory exemption applies.
Conclusion
26. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.

S Sharp
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
