Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 3 September 2026 by Elizabeth Davies BSc (Hons) MISEP, CEnv
Decision by M Russell BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6013146
9 Tylers Hill Road, Chesham, Buckinghamshire HP5 1XH
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Kaley against the decision of Buckinghamshire Council.
•   The application Ref is PL/26/01883/FA.
•   The development proposed is roof extensions and new and replacement side dormer windows.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a roof extension
   incorporating a replacement side dormer, removal of the existing rear dormer,
   installation of a Juliet balcony with sliding door, and formation of a new dormer to
   the south flank elevation at 9 Tylers Hill Road, Chesham, Buckinghamshire HP5
   1XH in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref PL/26/01883/FA, subject
   to the following conditions:
     1) The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
        the date of this decision.
     2) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
        following approved plans: THR PP 01 Rev E (Existing Floor Plans and
        Elevations), THR PP 02 Rev Q (Proposed Floor Plans and Elevations) and THR
        PP 03 Rev H (Location Plan and Site Plan).
     3) The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
        development herby permitted shall match those used in the host dwelling.
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Preliminary Matters
3. On 17 August 2026 the Government published a new National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework). Having reviewed the changes to the Framework, I am
   satisfied that they do not affect the substance of the main issues in the appeal.
   Since they would not therefore be prejudiced, I have proceeded without further
   consultation with the main parties.
4. For the purposes of the appeal banner heading, I have used the description on the
   planning application form. However, the description of the proposed development
   was amended by the Council following the submission of the planning application.
   The applicant agreed to the change of description. In the interests of precision and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6013146


     clarity, I have used the amended description for the purposes of the decision
     paragraph.
Main Issues
5. The main issues are the effect of the proposed development on:
          •    the character and appearance of the area; and
          •    ecology, with particular regard to bats.
Reasons for the Recommendation
Character and Appearance
6. The appeal property is a detached chalet bungalow with a hipped roof and
   accommodation in the roof space served by dormers to the front, rear and to one
   side. Tylers Hill Road is a narrow single track road and the vicinity of the appeal
   property is residential in nature. The appeal property and other properties on the
   same side, are set back on higher ground in relation to the road, with sloping
   driveways and front gardens. The front of the properties are all fairly open to view.
   The appeal property sits within a small run of properties that, whilst not identical,
   share similarities in terms of their hipped roof designs and broad proportions. Front
   dormer windows appear as a common feature. However, the street scene on Tylers
   Hill Road is varied with a number of different dwelling types and styles present,
   some incorporating gable features.
7. The reconfigured roof would have a gabled form which would reduce the visual
   cohesion with the hipped roofs of the immediate neighbouring properties. Even so,
   the appeal property would remain modestly proportioned and of comparable height
   to its neighbours, incorporating well balanced fenestration. The materials would
   also be in keeping with the host dwelling. Moreover, the roof shape would suitably
   reflect the gabled forms already present elsewhere on Tylers Hill Road. As a result,
   the extended dwelling would sit comfortably amongst the varied design of dwellings
   in the street scene. In addition, the Council have raised no specific concerns in
   respect of the proposed side dormer windows and rear Juliette balcony. From my
   own observations on site, I find no reason to disagree.
8. On the basis of the above, the proposed development would have an acceptable
   effect on the character and appearance of the area. In that regard, the proposal
   would accord with the requirements in Policy CS20 of the Core Strategy for Chiltern
   District (2011) (the Core Strategy) and with Policies GC1, H13, H15 and H18 of the
   Chiltern District Local Plan (1997) (as altered and consolidated) (the Local Plan) for
   development to be of a high standard of design, that the character and appearance
   of the street scene in the vicinity of the extension would not be adversely affected,
   that an extension should be designed to respect the scale and proportions of the
   existing dwelling, and that dormer windows respect the external appearance of the
   roof with materials to match.
9. For the reasons set out, the proposals would also accord with the guidance in the
   Residential Extensions and Householder Development Supplementary Planning
   Document (2013) which sets out that roof alterations should take into account the
   ridge height of nearby buildings and consider the prevailing roof styles in the
   surrounding area.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6013146


Ecology
10. I accept that the area in which the appeal site is located includes a number of trees
    and has a verdant character. Even so, the evidence before me indicates that the
    roof of the appeal property is well sealed. The roof already contains habitable
    accommodation. Whilst the proposed roof level accommodation would extend
    slightly further towards the eaves, the appellant has confirmed that all the eaves
    storage space is already boarded out and insulated. There is nothing to dispute this
    or to suggest that the Council sought or obtained any specialist ecological advice.
11. In the circumstances, and having regard to OPDM Circular 06/2005, there does not
    seem to be a reasonable likelihood of protected species being present within, or
    affected by works to, the roof space in this particular instance. In the absence of
    any credible evidence to indicate otherwise, a requirement for a preliminary ecology
    survey or bat survey would not be justified and would place an unreasonable
    burden on the proposed development in this instance. For the avoidance of doubt,
    this conclusion does not diminish the appellant’s separate legal obligations with
    regard to protected species and compliance with the relevant legislation.
12. On this basis the proposal would be unlikely to result in an unacceptable effect on
    ecology, with particular regard to bats. In that regard, it would not conflict with
    Policy CS24 of the Core Strategy, Policy NC1 of the Local Plan which seek,
    amongst other things to protect protected species and sites with an acknowledged
    conservation interest of established importance. For the same reasons, the
    proposed development would also comply with the Framework insofar as it seeks
    to minimise any adverse impacts on biodiversity.
Conditions
13. I have imposed the standard conditions relating to the timescale for
    commencement of development and specifying the approved plans in order to
    provide certainty. I have also included a condition requiring the external materials to
    match the existing dwelling to protect the character and appearance of the appeal
    property and local area.
Conclusion and Recommendation
14. For the reasons given above, the proposal would comply with the development plan
    when taken as a whole and there are no material considerations, including the
    Framework, that would outweigh this finding. Consequently, I recommend that the
    appeal should be allowed.

Elizabeth Davies
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
15. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed.

M Russell
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
