 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 01 September 2026
 by Nicola Davies BA DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 14 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6013480
 24 Beesfield Lane, Farningham, KENT DA4 0BZ
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Sue Carne against the decision of Sevenoaks District Council.
 •   The application Ref is 26/00401/HOUSE.
 •   The development proposed is a dropped kerb removing existing hedgerow and site works for vehicle
     access to property so that front garden can be paved and an electric charger point installed for
     parking for one car.



Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Application for costs
2. An application for costs was made by Sue Carne against Sevenoaks District
   Council and that is the subject of a separate decision.
Preliminary Matters
3. A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) has
   been published since the planning application was determined by the Council. I
   have had regard to the revised Framework in reaching my decision.
4. I have taken the description of proposed development from the planning application
   form although I note it is expressed differently on other documents.
5. A plan illustrating visibility splays has been provided to inform the appeal process.
   However, this does not appear to have been subject to consultation through the
   planning application consultation process. The visibility splays include a much
   wider stretch of vegetated verge to that illustrated within the planning application
   that is now the subject of this appeal. If I determine the appeal on the basis of the
   additional plan it is possible that the interests of parties who might wish to comment
   would be prejudiced. For this reason, I have not had regard to this plan.
Main Issues
6. The main issues raised by this appeal are the effect of the proposed development
   on the character and appearance of the area and highway safety.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6013480


Reasons
Character and appearance
7. The proposal would result in the loss of part of a vegetated frontage that runs
   alongside the public highway. I saw that the hedgerow at the front of the property
   is currently unmaintained however it is not dead, as has been suggested. The
   vegetated verge is an attractive verdant feature within the street scene and is of
   high visual amenity value for this reason. It contributes to the character and
   appearance of the locality. The loss of part of the vegetated verge would have a
   negative and significant visual impact to the street scene. Further to this, the visual
   harm would be exacerbated if the visibility sight lines required by Kent County
   Council Highways were to be implemented.
8. It has been advised that Kent County Council own the hedge and as part of the
   appeal process written confirmation has been provided by Kent County Council
   Soft Landscaping team that they would have no objection to the removal of the
   hedgerow on the grounds of its condition. Whilst the owners of the hedgerow may
   not object to its removal, this does not overcome the visual harm that I have
   identified above to the removal of the hedgerow, nor would it justify the proposal.
9. For these reasons, I conclude that the proposed development would be harmful to
   the character and appearance of the area. The proposal would, therefore, conflict
   with Policy EN1 of the Sevenoaks District Council’s Allocations and Development
   Management Plan (the DMP). This policy seeks, amongst other matters,
   development to respond positively to local character and to respect the distinctive
   qualities of the site and its surroundings.
10. The Council has commented in its officer report that the proposal would fail to
    maintain and enhance the overall character of the National Landscapes but has not
    referred to this within its decision notice other than to refer to Policy EN5 of the
    DMP. The appeal site forms part of existing residential development along
    Beesfield Lane. The appeal proposal would not introduce development into an
    undeveloped or rural landscape. As such, the proposal would not undermine the
    purposes of the National Landscape designation. As such, the proposal would not
    conflict with Policy EN5.
Highway safety
11. Beesfield Lane is a classified C road that is subject to a 30mph speed limit.
    Vehicular visibility splays are required for the vehicular crossover. However, these
    have not been provided as part of the planning application submission. The
    proposal, without adequate visibility, would create an increased safety risk to
    highway users.
12. For this reason, I conclude that the proposed development would be harmful to
    highway safety. The proposal would, therefore, conflict with Policies EN1 and T1 of
    the DMP and the provisions of the Framework. These policies seek, amongst other
    matters, development to be safe. This reflects TR3 of the recent Framework that
    seeks to mitigate adverse highway safety impacts of a development to an
    acceptable degree, which has not been achieved here.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
 Appeal Decision 6013480


Other matters
13. It has been advised that wheelie bin collection is to commence in October. The
    proposal would assist with collection as the site could allow for space to place bins
    that could potentially obstruct the existing driveway at No.26 and that of the access
    pathway. The proposal could potentially improve refuse collection accessibility.
14. Currently the appellant parks a vehicle at Alban Crescent. It is commented that it is
    not a pleasant or safe experience to walk to the house and the proposal would
    improve personal safety. The proposal would reduce vehicles parking on the
    pavement at Alban crescent.
15. It is also highlighted that when leaving Alban Crescent by vehicle it is necessary to
    go beyond the white lines in order to gain visibility along Beesfield Road. This is
    said to be a highway hazard.
16. The inclusion of wildflower planting in the new frontage could mitigate habitat loss.
    In addition, the creation of the driveway could facilitate electric charging for the
    cars. This would provide a benefit in reducing vehicle CO2 emissions.
17. Whilst these are all benefits of the proposed development, they do not outweigh the
    harm that I have identified above or justify the granting of the proposed
    development.
Conclusion
18. Having regard to the above findings, the appeal should be dismissed.



Nicola Davies
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
