Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 29 September 2026
by David Smith BA(Hons) DMS MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 2nd October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6013634
Sunny Bank Kitchen Garden, Killington New Bridge, Killington, LA10 5EW
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Sunny Bank Kitchen Garden Ltd against the decision of Yorkshire Dales
    National Park Authority.
•   The application Ref is S/08/23.
•   The development proposed is infrastructure to support the market garden business at Killington New
    Bridge: erection of 14m x 8m agricultural barn for use as a packing shed, storage, rainwater
    harvesting and solar power generation (8 photovoltaic panels); erection of 8m x 30m cropping
    polytunnel; erection of 5m x 8m propagation polytunnel; installation of porous ground
    paving/grasscrete (107 square metres); erection of composting toilet (1.6m x 1m); installation of
    compost bins (6 bins measuring 2m x 1.5m) and installation of 10,000 litre water tank.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for infrastructure to
   support the market garden business at Killington New Bridge: erection of 14m x 8m
   agricultural barn for use as a packing shed, storage, rainwater harvesting and solar
   power generation (8 photovoltaic panels); erection of 8m x 30m cropping
   polytunnel; erection of 5m x 8m propagation polytunnel; installation of porous
   ground paving/grasscrete (107 square metres); erection of composting toilet (1.6m
   x 1m); installation of compost bins (6 bins measuring 2m x 1.5m) and installation of
   10,000 litre water tank at Sunny Bank Kitchen Garden, Killington New Bridge,
   Killington, LA10 5EW in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref S/08/23,
   subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Main Issues
2. These are:
       •    The effect on the character and appearance of the Lune Valley which is within
            the Yorkshire Dales National Park ; and
       •    Whether there would be an unacceptable impact on highway safety due to the
            use of the existing access.
Reasons
National Park
3. The National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949 (as amended) sets out
   the purposes of National Parks and the duties of relevant authorities. In addition,
   the National Planning Policy Framework provides that substantial weight should be
   placed on the importance of conserving and enhancing the natural beauty of

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6013634


     Protected Landscapes which includes National Parks. Policy CP2 of the Yorkshire
     Dales National Park Local Plan confirms that development will not be permitted
     where it would significantly conflict with the statutory purposes.
4. The appeal site forms part of a larger slither of land alongside the River Lune. The
   wider field has been used as a market garden since 2024. As well as cultivated
   areas, there are various other items on the land, including a small shipping
   container. The proposed development is to enable propagation, packing and
   associated activities to be undertaken at the site rather than through shared
   facilities elsewhere. To this end the proposal includes a barn and two polytunnels.
5. The site falls within the Lune Valley Landscape Character Area (LCA4) in the
   Yorkshire Dales National Park Landscape Character Assessment. The northern
   part of LCA4 is dominated by pastureland and comprises a settled landscape of
   villages, small hamlets and farms linked by narrow lanes which are often tightly
   enclosed by hedgerows or woodland. This description of the key characteristics of
   the Valley reflects the area around the appeal site where there is mainly agricultural
   land and a few scattered buildings, as well as the river. As an undeveloped area
   the appeal site contributes to the strong pastoral character in the vicinity.
6. The vegetable growing enterprise has changed the nature of the land from its
   original state. However, that is not necessarily inconsistent with the qualities and
   nature of this part of the Park. Indeed, farms are mentioned as an intrinsic part of
   the landscape and it is reasonable to expect that agricultural or horticultural uses
   would have buildings associated with them in order that they can function. The
   barn and polytunnels would therefore not be unusual or unexpected features in this
   location, even if separated from other built development. As they would be modest
   in size and would not result in an undue concentration or excessive visual clutter,
   the effect on the landscape value of the Park would be insignificant.
7. The buildings would be discretely positioned behind and alongside the strong
   boundary hedge to the lane. Because of this, close range views would be
   restricted to those gained at the entrance. From here they would be seen in the
   context of the large trees behind them and the distant fells and so would be readily
   absorbed into the local scene. Even without leaves the hedgerow is so dense that
   it would provide a visual barrier in winter and there is no reason to suppose that it
   would be cut to such an extent as to expose the site to public gaze. In this way, the
   proposed buildings would be integrated with their surroundings in line with Policy
   DP3 of the Framework.
8. No long-distance views have been highlighted. The proposed development would
   be visible from the vicinity of Killington New Bridge but would not be close to the
   B6256. Because of the distance from the road, the dimensions and disposition of
   the buildings, their evident function and the backdrop of vegetation, they would not
   form unsympathetic elements within the context of the National Park.
9. According to the Framework, development proposals within Protected Landscapes
   should be limited in scale and extent and sensitively located and designed to avoid
   harm to its statutory purposes and special qualities. The proposal would fulfil that
   expectation of national policy. Indeed, the character and appearance of the Lune
   Valley would not be spoiled or materially eroded. As such, the proposed
   development would not be contrary to policies in the Local Plan on sustainable
   development (CP1) and landscape character (CP8) or Policy CP2.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6013634


    Highway safety
10. Vehicular access to the site is gained from the C5079. This is a minor road leading
    to Halbeck and Killington. At a set back of 2.4m the visibility splays that can be
    achieved whilst retaining the existing hedgerow are no more than 15.2m in either
    direction which is well below normal standards. However, even if the proposed
    development did not take place, there would still be vehicle movements to and from
    the site in order to operate the existing business. Trips would also be made to the
    Environment Agency’s gauging station on the land.
11. The Authority’s case is that it has not been demonstrated that the proposed
    development would have an acceptable impact on the safety of the local highway
    network. Although having sufficient visibility of approaching traffic is clearly
    important there is no evidence about the likely risks. Indeed, the appellant’s
    contention that vehicle speeds are likely to be lower than the national limit, owing to
    the constrained geometry and alignment of the lane, has not been questioned. It is
    also reasonable to assume, based on my early morning observations, that traffic
    flows along the lane are very light.
12. The precise way that the use would be operated cannot be controlled by condition
    but equally there is nothing to suggest how the proposal could, over time, lead to a
    significant increase in vehicular activity. On the contrary, the appellant maintains
    that the consolidation of propagation, packing and storage activities on the site
    would reduce off-site vehicle movements. When leaving the site, the vision of any
    oncoming traffic is heavily restricted but the likely low level of movements and the
    characteristics of the lane mean that the danger of collisions is acceptably small.
13. As the proposal would not have an unacceptable impact on highway safety it does
    not fall within the type of development that should be refused in line with the
    Framework. Given that the access already exists and would not be a new provision
    it would not fall foul of Local Plan Policy AC3.
Other Considerations
14. Planning Practice Guidance1 indicates that it would generally be inappropriate to
    refuse an application on the grounds that the biodiversity gain objective will not be
    met. This is because development may not commence until a biodiversity gain
    plan has been submitted to and approved by the planning authority as per
    paragraph 13(2) of Schedule 7A of the Act. The detailed points raised regarding
    the use of the metric would therefore be resolved in this way and there is no conflict
    with Local Plan Policy CP9.
15. Killington New Bridge across the River Lune is Grade II listed. There is a duty
    under section 66 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act to
    pay special regard to the desirability of preserving its setting. Its significance stems
    from its architecture, materials and history. However, as accepted by the Authority,
    the bridge’s setting would not be adversely affected as the appellant’s land closest
    to it would be unchanged and as the new buildings would be well away from it.
16. In meeting the need for business land and premises, Policy E4 of the Framework
    indicates that the sustainable growth of businesses in rural areas should be
    supported. This includes development to maintain and enhance farm viability and

1
    Paragraph: 019 Reference ID: 74-019-20240214


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate           3
Appeal Decision 6013634


     sustainability and support domestic food production with specific reference to
     polytunnels. Framework Policy S5 also establishes that development for
     horticulture is one of the forms of development outside settlements that should
     generally be approved. Local Plan policies recognise that rural economic activity
     and food production can be supported where compatible with National Park
     purposes and local environmental quality.
17. Sunny Bank Kitchen Garden is an established and operating enterprise which
    supports employment, local food production and short supply chains with an active
    customer base. The Authority is concerned that any benefits to the business
    arising from the proposal cannot be secured in the long term. However, that is
    always likely to be the case for any commercial venture. Given the broad support
    for rural business of the kind undertaken here this is a matter that favours accepting
    the proposed development.
Conditions
18. The approved plans should be specified in the interests of certainty.
19. Local Plan Policy E2 indicates that a condition will be placed on the approval of
    buildings and structures for rural land-based enterprises, requiring their dismantling
    and removal when no longer needed. However, the Planning Practice Guidance on
    Use of planning conditions says that a condition requiring the demolition, after a
    stated period, of a building that is clearly intended to be permanent is unlikely to
    pass the test of reasonableness. The polytunnels are lightweight and readily
    removable and the other infrastructure is ephemeral but the barn is a permanent
    structure which could serve another purpose if the market garden ceased. Whilst
    development plan policy justifies a condition requiring removal, national guidance
    means that this should not include the packing shed.
20. Given the sensitivity of the dark skies within the National Park, external lighting
    should be controlled although setting a fixed lumen limit is not warranted. The
    suitability of any lighting could be determined through the approval of details
    including the fittings, shielding, colour temperature, mounting height and sensor
    operation. These matters therefore do not need to be specified at this stage.
21. There are no existing residential properties sufficiently near to the site to warrant
    controlling the hours of construction or any specific justification for this within Local
    Plan Policy CP6.
Conclusion
22. The proposal would conform to the development plan and there are no material
    considerations which indicate that a decision should not be made in accordance
    with it. Therefore, for the reasons given, the appeal should succeed.


David Smith
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6013634


SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS


1)      The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from the
        date of this decision.
2)      The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
        Location Plan, Proposed Development Plan version 5, DWG-1-PackShed, DWG-
        2-CropTunnel, DWG-3-CLWT, DWG-4-CPSTBS, DWG-5-TGPP and DWG-6-
        PropTunnel (Refs: PP-14145701).
3)      When the polytunnels and associated infrastructure (excluding the agricultural
        barn) hereby permitted, cease to be used for the purpose for which they were
        installed, they shall be dismantled and removed from the site. The site shall be
        restored in accordance with details and a timetable previously submitted to and
        agreed in writing by the local planning authority.
4)      Any external lighting at the site shall only be installed in accordance with details
        previously submitted to and agreed in writing by the local planning authority. The
        details shall include the purpose, number, position and design of the lighting.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
