Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 19 August 2026
by Stewart Glassar BSc (Hons) MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 15th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6013133
1 Bailey Close, Horsham, RH12 5QR
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Joseph Torgbor against the decision of Horsham District Council.
•    The application Ref is DC/26/0376.
•    The development proposed is the erection of a single storey front extension, a two-storey rear and
     side extension with a single storey infill rear extension.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issue
2.     The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
       appearance of the area.
Preliminary Matter
3.     I have taken the description of development from the Council’s decision notice as it
       more accurately reflects that for which permission is sought.
Reasons
4.     The appeal property is a semi-detached house on the corner of Bailey Close and
       Meadow Farm Lane. Houses in the immediate vicinity display a similar design
       aesthetic and range of external finishes to that of the appeal property. Some of
       these neighbouring dwellings have been altered or extended but their overall size
       and appearance fits within the prevailing character of the area, which is one of
       modest buildings and a broad sense of homogeny.
5.     The proposal comprises several elements and when taken as a whole, the
       extensions would notably increase the size and bulk of the building. Accordingly,
       the results would appear very obvious in the street scene, bringing the building
       noticeably closer to the side boundary of the site. There would also be a number of
       competing roof forms, extensions and heights across the building which, given its
       prominent corner position, would be clearly visible and which cumulatively would
       create a somewhat incongruous and over-extended appearance. The use of
       matching materials would not overcome this harm.
6.     As such, the extensions overall would not appear subservient but instead would
       appear out of proportion to the scale of the existing dwelling and other buildings in
       the vicinity. The proposal would therefore cause harm to the character and
       appearance of the area and thus it would conflict with Policies 32 and 33 of the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6013133


       Horsham District Planning Framework 2015 which, amongst other things, seeks to
       ensure development is sympathetic to, and integrates with, its surroundings.
Other Matters
7.     The Council comments that in isolation some elements of the scheme would
       appear modest, and I note that a single storey front extension was previously
       permitted by the Council. However, I must consider the scheme which has been
       presented to me as a whole and thus the previous permission for part of the
       current proposal, regardless of whether or not it is extant, is not of sufficient weight
       to lead me to allow the appeal.
8.     Harm to living conditions was not identified as a reason for refusal and there was
       no objection to the proposal from residents of the adjoining property. A lack of
       harm to neighbours would be expected for any development to be considered
       acceptable and so this does not weigh in favour of this particular proposal.
       Similarly, the absence of other harms, such as to highway safety, does not absolve
       me from making a decision in relation to the main issue of the case.
9.     Reference has been made to other two-storey side extensions approved by the
       Council, but I was not provided with their addresses, only planning application
       numbers. I therefore am unable to make direct comparisons. However, I did
       observe other extensions to houses in the vicinity of the appeal site. These
       generally appear to assimilate acceptably in terms of their design and do not,
       based on what I have seen, harm the character and appearance of the street
       scene in the same way the appeal proposals would.
10. An existing boundary hedge screens part of the site. Notwithstanding the fact that
    a hedge can be easily removed, provide less protection at various times of the
    year or simply suffer disease and die, it would not provide the level of protection
    necessary to overcome the harms I have identified above.
11. I understand that the proposal would meet the needs of the existing occupiers but
    Planning Practice Guidance advises that planning permission usually runs with the
    land, and it is rarely appropriate to provide otherwise. There may be exceptional
    occasions where development that would not normally be permitted may be
    justified on planning grounds because of who would benefit from the permission
    but there are not sufficient grounds in this case to justify such an approach.
12. It was suggested that the decision notice did not contain the Council’s reason for
    refusal. However, as part of this appeal I have been provided with a copy of the
    decision notice in which the reason for refusal is clearly set out. It is also evident
    that the appellant has responded to the main issues in this case, so it is not a
    matter on which I need to comment further.
Conclusion
13. The proposal would conflict with the development plan taken as a whole. There
    are no material considerations that indicate the decision should be made other
    than in accordance with the development plan. Therefore, for the reasons given, I
    conclude that the appeal should not succeed.

Stewart Glassar
INSPECTOR

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
