Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026 by Kim Vo MPlan
Decision by John Morrison BA (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6013709
Orchard House, Layters Green Lane, Chalfont St Peter, Buckinghamshire SL9 8TH
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant approval required under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A,
    Paragraph A.4 of the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order
    2015 (as amended).
•   The appeal is made by Mr. & Mrs. Scopes against the decision of Buckinghamshire Council.
•   The application Ref is PL/26/03600/PNE.
•   The development proposed is for a single storey rear extension (depth extending from the original
    rear wall of 8.00m, maximum height 2.90m, eaves height 2.50m).

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and approval is granted under the provisions of Article 3(1)
   and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A, paragraph A.4 of the Town and Country Planning
   (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) for the
   development of a single storey rear extension (depth extending from the original
   rear wall of 8.00m, maximum height 2.90m, eaves height 2.50m) at Orchard House,
   Layters Green Lane, Chalfont St Peter, Buckinghamshire SL9 8TH in accordance
   with the application PL/26/03600/PNE and the details submitted with it (including
   plan nos. 3243.PD.100 (Location Plan); 3243.PD.101 (Proposed Site Layout);
   3243.PD.102 (Proposed Elevations); and 3243.PD.103 (Proposed Floor Plans)
   pursuant to Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A, paragraph A.4(2).
Appeal Procedure
2. The site visit was undertaken by a representative of the Inspector whose
   recommendation is set out below and to which the Inspector has had regard before
   deciding the appeal.
Applications for Costs
3. An application for an award of costs was made by Mr. & Mrs. Scopes against the
   decision of Buckinghamshire Council. This application is the subject of a separate
   decision.
Preliminary Matters and Main Issue
4. I have omitted yet taken into account narrative wording from the description of
   development above for clarity and relevance purposes. It does not change any
   element of the appeal scheme and so would not affect the ability of the main parties
   to make their cases in respect thereof.
5. Under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the Town and Country
   Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 as amended (the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6013709


    GPDO), planning permission is granted for the enlargement of a dwellinghouse
    subject to limitations and conditions. Where an application is made for a
    determination as to whether prior approval is required for development which
    exceeds the limits in paragraph A.1(f) but is allowed by paragraph A.1(g) to Part 1,
    paragraph A.4(3) provides that the local planning authority may refuse the
    application where it considers that the proposed development does not comply with
    the conditions, limitations or restrictions that are applicable to such permitted
    development.
6. The main issue is whether the proposal complies with the limits set out within
   Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the GPDO, with specific regard to the width of the
   extension and whether or not it would extend beyond a wall forming a side
   elevation.
Reasons for the Recommendation
7. Paragraph A.1(j) states that development is not permitted if the enlarged part of the
   dwellinghouse would extend beyond a wall forming a side elevation of the original
   dwellinghouse, and would (i) exceed 4 metres in height, (ii) have more than one
   storey, or (iii) have a width greater than half the width of the original dwellinghouse.
   It also states that development is not permitted if any total enlargement (being the
   enlarged part together with any existing enlargement of the original dwellinghouse
   to which it will be joined) exceeds or would exceed the limits set out in sub-
   paragraphs (e) to (j).
8. The appeal property is a detached, two storey dwelling. It features a ‘U’ shaped plan
   at the rear, formed by a two storey rear extension on one side and a single storey
   side/rear projection on the other. The proposal would be in the space between these
   structures and leave gaps on both sides, with a separation of approximately 0.3
   metres to the single storey side/rear extension. The Council contends that de
   minimis gaps are not viewed as material and are not treated as gaps for the
   purposes of assessing the criteria of the GPDO. Accordingly, they conclude that the
   proposal would be taken jointly with the existing side/rear extension and would
   therefore extend beyond a wall forming an original side elevation and have a width
   greater than half the width of the original dwellinghouse, thus failing to comply with
   paragraphs A.1(j)(iii) and A.1(ja).
9. However, there is nothing set out in the legislation that explicitly states or indicates
   this. In any case, whilst the proposed gap would be modest, the submitted plans
   show that it would be sufficient to clearly distinguish the proposed extension from
   the existing extensions on either side. The gaps would therefore demonstrate that
   the proposal would be freestanding rather than physically joined to those structures.
   Accordingly, I find that, as a matter of fact and degree and in this case, the gap of
   0.3 metres would be sufficient to ensure the proposal retains the appearance and
   characteristics of a separate rear extension.
10. The gap would also serve a practical function by accommodating the roof overhang
    for the proposed extension, whilst also having a design purpose through reinforcing
    a visual separation between the proposed and existing structures. It would have a
    flat roof and a boxy, modern appearance, which would further differentiate it from
    the adjacent pitched roof, traditionally designed projections. Whilst the gap may be
    seen as a way to circumvent the limitations of the GPDO, it would nonetheless
    provide a visual break between the built forms.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6013709


11. Both the Council and the appellant have referred to appeal decisions (3172923,
    3151883 and 3201035), which considered de minimis gaps and I have taken them
    into account insofar as they are relevant. However, whilst they share some
    similarities, they are not directly comparable to the proposal before me, as they
    involved extensions of different designs and dimensions with different gaps. They
    also made different conclusions. I have therefore determined this appeal on its own
    individual facts and circumstances.
12. The proposed extension would not be joined with any existing enlargement of the
    original dwellinghouse, nor would it extend beyond a wall forming an original side
    elevation. It would therefore comply with paragraphs A.1(j)(iii) and A.1(ja) and be
    permitted development under Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A of the GPDO. The
    delegate report confirms that no objections were received from neighbouring
    occupiers, and so prior approval is not required.
Conditions
13. Any planning permission granted under Article 3(1) and Schedule 2, Part 1, Class A
    is subject to the conditions in paragraphs A.3 and A.4. This includes the
    requirement for the exterior materials to be similar to those used in the construction
    of the exterior of the existing dwelling and for the development to be carried out in
    accordance with the details and plans submitted as part of the application to the
    local planning authority. No further conditions are necessary.
Conclusion and Recommendation
14. For the reasons given above, the appeal scheme would comply with the description
    of permitted development set out by the relevant provisions of the aforementioned
    legislation. The appeal should therefore be allowed.

Kim Vo
APPEAL PLANNING OFFICER

Inspector’s Decision
15. I have considered all the submitted evidence and my representative’s report and on
    that basis the appeal is allowed, in the circumstances and subject to the provisions
    and conditions set out above.

John Morrison
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
