Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 27 August 2026
by Rachael Pipkin BA (Hons) MPhil MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 15 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6013441
19 Seaway Avenue, Christchurch BH23 4EU
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Power against the decision of Bournemouth Christchurch and
     Poole Council.
•    The application Ref is P/26/00981/HOU.
•    The development proposed is Alteration and extension of the house including single and two storey
     extensions (previous extensions to be demolished).

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Main Issue
2.     The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
       appearance of the area.
Reasons
3.     Seaway Avenue is a residential street characterised by large detached and link-
       detached properties set back from the road behind front gardens and driveways
       and a tree-lined verge. Together with the separation of properties from each other,
       this gives the area a spacious character. Properties date from the early twentieth
       century with more modern development towards the southern end of the street.
       Many properties have been extended and remodelled, resulting in a noticeable
       variation in their size and appearance.
4.     Number 19 is a two-storey link detached property with a traditional appearance.
       The proposal would substantially remodel the property resulting in a more
       contemporary appearance. Existing single-storey side and rear extensions would
       be demolished and replaced with larger single-storey extensions to the side and a
       full width part single / part two-storey extension to the rear. This two-storey
       extension would wrap around the southern side of the property, where it would be
       set in a short distance from the boundary with Number 21 at first floor level.
5.     There is an existing gap between Nos 19 and 21 above both properties’ adjacent
       single-storey garages. This would be reduced by the first floor side extension.
       However, it would be set back from the front elevation with a hipped roof and lower
       ridge height than the main roof. In combination with its position set in from the
       shared boundary, it would not unacceptably close up this gap. Views between
       properties, which I observed are a feature of some, but not all, properties along the



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6013441


       road, would still be available between Nos 19 and 21. The proposal would not
       unduly erode the spacious character of the area or the streetscene.
6.     The first floor rear extension would extend across much of the width of the original
       dwelling. It would have a flat roof which would terminate above the eaves and
       extend slightly beyond the line of the hip of the main roof. Whilst the appellant has
       argued that this design allows for the retention of the original building and its roof
       form, the juxtaposition of this large cubic extension extending above the eaves and
       roof line would be visually jarring. Its significant size and rearward extension would
       appear as a disproportionate and incongruous addition which along with its
       awkward relationship with the existing roof would be visible from the street
       between the first floor gap between Nos 17 and 19. This would detract from the
       appearance of the host property, the streetscene and the character and
       appearance of the area.
7.     Between Nos 19 and 21, the extent of the rearward projection would not be visible
       from the public realm due to the position and size of the first floor side extension
       and its roof. It would nonetheless have a similarly discordant relationship with the
       hipped roofed elements of the host property and this side extension. However, this
       would only be visible from neighbouring properties.
8.     My attention has been drawn to various other developments locally which have
       remodelled traditional houses to more contemporary forms, some have been
       extended to incorporate flat-roofed designs others are also large scale, as would
       be the case here. However, none of these are the same as the appeal proposal
       and they do not justify the scheme before me which I have considered on its own
       individual merits.
9.     Whilst elements of the scheme would be acceptable, the large size of the rear first
       floor extension and its failure to integrate with the host property would be harmful
       to the character and appearance of the area. It would therefore conflict with Policy
       HE2 of the Christchurch and East Dorset Local Plan: Part 1- Core Strategy (2014)
       which requires design to be of a high quality, reflecting and enhancing local
       distinctiveness and to be compatible with its surroundings.
Other Matters
10. The scheme has not been identified as causing harm to the living conditions of
    neighbouring occupiers. However, this is a neutral factor.
11. The scheme proposes the extension of a dwelling within a settlement. It does not
    provide a net gain in residential development. The proposal would extend the
    original dwelling rather than demolition and construction of a replacement dwelling
    which would be a more sustainable approach. However, I give this limited weight
    given the extent of demolition proposed as part of the redesign. In any event, this
    is not a factor that would be sufficient to outweigh the harm that I have found.
Conclusion
12. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

Rachael Pipkin
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
