Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 17 September 2026
by Eleni Marshall BSc (hons) MSc FRICS FAAV MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6013777
6 Pateley Road, Woodthorpe, Nottinghamshire, NG3 5QF
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
    to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Claire De Motte against Gelding Borough Council.
•   The application Ref is 2026/0115.
•   The development proposed is first floor side extension above garage. Partially demolish front
    boundary wall to create wide dropped kerb and new parking area.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. Since the determination of this application, and submission of this appeal, the
   Government issued the new revised version of the National Planning Policy
   Framework 2026. On this occasion I do not consider there any need to revert to
   the main parties regarding this change. The new policies for decision making do
   not substantially alter matters relating to the main issues which are the subject of
   this appeal.
3. I have utilised the Council’s description of the proposal as it describes the proposal
   more concisely following a change of description having been recorded and agreed
   between the parties during the application process.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the impact of the proposal upon visual amenity and the character
   and appearance of the area.
Reasons
5. The appeal site is a two-storey detached dwelling located on the north-east side of
   Pateley Road that currently benefits from a flat roofed garage to the side (south
   east) elevation adjacent to 4 Pateley Road (no. 4). The proposal seeks planning
   permission for a first-floor side extension (above the garage) which would see the
   first-floor addition set back, from the front elevation, by in the region of 0.67 metres
   extending across the full depth of the original dwelling with a small ground-floor
   lean to roof at the front of the garage. The proposal would be roofed by extending
   the eaves and ridge height of the host dwelling to form a matching hipped roof with
   the overhanging eaves falling on the appeal site boundary with no. 4.
6. There are several elements to the appeal proposal which also include, as outlined
   in the development description above, partial demolition of a front boundary wall to

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6013777


     create a wide dropped kerb and new parking area. The Council’s delegated report
     and, in turn, refusal reason raise no concern with regard to partial demolition of the
     front boundary wall, drop kerb and new parking area and based upon the evidence
     before me I have no reason to conclude differently on these elements. For the
     avoidance of doubt my decision will, therefore, focus upon the first-floor side
     extension above the garage in the context of the main issue.
7. Each case should be considered on its own merits, and the Gelding Borough
   Council Design Code Framework Extensions and Alterations Design Code 2024
   (the Design Code) is acknowledged. I do not find that not complying with the
   Design Code should, automatically, result in refusal but instead it should be applied
   on a site-by-site basis taking into account the individual merits of the site against
   the overarching objectives of that guidance. It is, however, a clear starting point in
   setting out the Council’s design expectations and reasoning.
8. Pateley Road is generally characterised by detached houses, interspersed with
   semi-detached properties (present on the opposite side of the road), having been
   developed in the inter-war period. The side of the road within which the appeal site
   is located is characterised by detached dwellings that are noted to have evolved, to
   some extent, from their original, near identical, design. There are a number of
   examples along Pateley Road of first-floor side extensions which have been
   constructed up to their respective side boundaries. Whilst these examples are
   acknowledged the prevailing character and building form, and indeed the quality of
   the area, is contributed to as a result of the intended spacing between properties
   which positively contribute to both the character and appearance of the area.
9. Of the extension examples I saw, along Pateley Road, I particularly noted
   properties with such extensions immediately adjacent to each other which, in terms
   of bulk, scale and massing, has resulted in a terracing effect which demonstrates
   the harm that can arise from such proposals. The notable example would include
   to 40 and 42 Pateley Road which has resulted visually terraced row at 38, 40 and
   42 respectively. I find that some of the examples of first-floor extensions in the
   locality are therefore indicative of the harm that can arise from development of this
   very nature as a result of closure of the characteristic gaps in adjacent properties.
10. In the case of the proposal that is before me, the adjacent dwelling, no. 8, has
    already been extended up to the boundary with the appeal site. The two-storey
    built form of no. 4 is also on the boundary with the appeal site. The appeal
    proposal would effectively close the remaining gap between the three properties.
    The proposal would fail to leave a gap of at least 1 metre between opposing two
    storey elevations. The impact of this would mean that the proposal would result in
    the three properties in question (4, 6 and 8) being left with no visual gap between
    them above ground floor level. This would create a building density, akin to a
    terraced row, which would fail to reflect the positive character of the area as a result
    of the current clear spacing and views that would be lost between the appeal site
    and no. 4 as a result of the proposal.
11. I acknowledge that the proposal is to be constructed above an existing garage that
    is already positioned approximately 15cm from the neighbouring boundary,
    however, the existing built form at the appeal site and either side of the appeal site
    means that there is clear, visual, separation at first floor level as a result of a lack of
    built form above the host dwelling garage. The proposal is, therefore, adding a
    storey within what is currently a visually open gap by virtue of adding a first-floor

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          2
Appeal Decision 6013777


     element above the existing garage regardless of retention of the existing ground
     floor arrangement. I do not find that the first-floor set-back would assist with
     reducing the terraced effect identified and, in this case, I find that this particular
     extension would cause unacceptable harm for the reasons outlined.
12. Whilst the eave and ridge height would run through from the main house, I do not
    find that this would, automatically, result in the proposal failing to be visually
    ancillary to the host dwelling. The set back from the front elevation of the host
    dwelling would, in this case, be combined with the extension being rendered in an
    off-white colour to the front and rear which would be a visual contrast to the existing
    brick finish (albeit I acknowledge that it is intended that the porch structure would
    also be rendered). The combination of set back from the front elevation, and the
    proposed render, would result in the proposal clearly reading as an extension that
    is ancillary to the host dwelling, and which would be appropriate in terms of the host
    dwelling itself (in isolation from the remainder of the street scene).
13. Despite my finding that the proposal would be acceptable in terms of its relationship
    to the host dwelling itself as outlined immediately above, this does not outweigh
    that the proposal would result in a terracing effect when considered within it is
    immediate context alongside the properties either side. The proposal would
    visually create a solid line of three properties with no gap above ground floor level
    due to, cumulatively, the extensions for the appeal site and immediately adjacent
    dwellings closing the remaining first-floor gap between the properties in question.
14. It is acknowledged that no other adverse impacts, or issues, were identified and a
    lack of objection is a neutral consideration. The appellant sets out that there are
    personal circumstances behind the application, however, these are not expanded
    upon within the submissions. I do not find that the actual visual harm arising from
    the proposal would be limited due to the presence of the existing garage, first floor
    set back or design. The proposal could be considered an ancillary addition to the
    host dwelling, in isolation, but would still create a terracing effect that would detract
    from the character and appearance, and visual amenity, of the area.
15. The proposal would be contrary to Aligned Core Strategies Part 1 Local Plan 2014
    Policy 10 that requires developments to make a positive contribution to the public
    realm and reinforce valued local characteristics and Local Planning Document Part
    2 Local Plan 2018 Policy 43 which sets out that planning permission will be granted
    for extensions or alterations to dwellings provided the appearance of the proposal
    is in keeping with the surrounding character in terms of height, built form and
    general design.
16. The proposal would also be contrary to the overarching objectives of the Design
    Code which, in terms of its objectives, seeks to avoid extending up to boundaries
    where this is likely to cause a terracing effect. Regardless or not of the requirement
    for a metre between side elevations where two storey development is proposed,
    the mandatory requirement ultimately seeks to avoid a terracing effect which I find
    would occur in this case for the reasons set out.
17. The proposal would also be contrary to National Decision-Making Policy DP3 which
    requires development proposals to respond to their context, so that they integrate
    with and enhance their surroundings. In this case, I find that the benefits of the
    proposal would be substantially outweighed by the adverse effects identified as a
    result of the visual terracing identified.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          3
Appeal Decision 6013777


Other Matters
18. I understand that the appellant has made contact with their local Member of
    Parliament, and I acknowledge that they understand and recognise that the MP is
    independent from the planning decision making process. Mr Payne having lodged
    an enquiry with the Council is acknowledged; however, this is not something which
    I can take into account as part of the determination of this appeal and I would
    reiterate that I have determined the proposal independently on its merits for the
    reasons set out.
19. Both parties have referred to an appeal (6000924), however, whilst I have evidently
    seen the decision letter for that due to its inclusion within the submission, no plans
    have been provided with the decision letter to enable me to assess or consider the
    specific site characteristics upon which the Inspector, in that case, came to their
    determination. On this occasion, therefore, I do not find that this appeal has had
    bearing upon my decision which I have assessed on its own merits.
20. The appellant has outlined that they are willing to adopt a flexible approach and
    revise the design of the proposal, however I must determine the proposal based
    upon the plans before me and upon which the Council have made their
    determination. Any revised proposals must, therefore, be considered as a result of
    re-submission of a new application to the Council for it to be considered on its own
    merits.
Conclusion
21. For the reasons outlined above, and taking into account all other matters raised, I
    conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

Eleni Marshall
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       4
