Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 18 September 2026
by Chris Baxter BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 01 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6013586
Land at The Oval, Bedlington, Northumberland NE22 5HS
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mario Minchella Architects against the decision of Northumberland County
     Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01331/FUL.
•    The development proposed is erection of single-storey retail unit with associated external works.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.     Since the appeal was submitted a new version of the National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework) came into effect. In light of this I have sought the
       views of the main parties in writing and comments received have been taken into
       consideration when determining this appeal.
Main Issue
3.     The main issue is the effect of the proposal on highway safety and the local
       highway network with regards to service and delivery.
Reasons
4.     The appeal site is located in an area which has a mix of uses including residential,
       retail and commercial. There are residential properties to the north and east of the
       appeal site, retail and commercial buildings to the west and to the south of the site
       there is a primary school and a healthcare facility. The surrounding highway
       network is primarily two vehicle lane wide with there being multiple traffic calming
       measures along the roads of The Oval (TO) and Steadlands Square (SS) which
       narrows the road to single vehicle width.
5.     The submitted Swept Path Analysis Plan (SPAP) shows that delivery vehicles are
       able to access and egress the appeal site using the B1331 Stead Lane and the
       roads of SS and TO. Delivery vehicles would have to manoeuvre multiple
       obstacles including the traffic calming measures and numerous junctions which
       have 90 degree bends. At the junctions on TO, the swept path requires use of the
       full width of the road. Along the straight sections of road of TO and SS the swept
       path is shown along the centreline of the roads, suggesting that delivery vehicles
       are required to use both sides of the road. At my site visit I saw numerous parked
       vehicles on the streets of TO and SS including near the traffic calming measures
       and at the junctions of TO, as well as vehicles being parked on both sides of the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6013586


       road. If larger delivery vehicles meet a parked vehicle on a junction at TO, then
       according to the SPAP it would be unlikely to make the required manoeuvre to turn
       the corner, which would cause an obstruction in the highway. Similarly, if larger
       delivery vehicles meet parked vehicles on the road, particularly around the traffic
       calming measures, and if other vehicles were travelling in the opposite direction,
       this would likely cause some conflict in the highway possibly leading to an
       obstruction. Whilst the appellant contends the SPAP takes into account constraints
       such as parked vehicles and traffic calming features, there are sections along the
       swept path where parked vehicles would be an obstacle for delivery vehicles,
       particularly larger vehicles, which could lead to obstructions in the road and be
       detrimental to highway safety.
6.     Deliveries to the appeal site, including the larger delivery vehicles, would be daily
       and described as lasting no longer than 15 minutes. The appellant states that
       deliveries would be scheduled to occur outside of peak times of operation of the
       proposed unit as well as avoiding school drop off and pick up times. This
       statement is contradicted by the appellants suggestion of a condition limiting
       deliveries between the hours of 0800 and 1800 Monday to Friday and 0800 and
       1300 on Saturdays. Whilst I note the appellant would accept a further condition to
       restrict deliveries during the school drop off and pick up times, there is minimal
       compelling evidence which provides assurances that there would be control over
       specific timings of deliveries. I am therefore unconvinced that conditions restricting
       delivery times would be enforceable. The appellant also details that the Service
       and Delivery Management Plan is an active document and that advanced
       computerised planning tools can be used for deliveries, however, this system
       seems to only provide details of when a delivery is to be made with no suggestion
       that there would be any control from the proposed retail unit as to when that
       delivery to the site should be made.
7.     The SPAP confirms that delivery vehicles can manoeuvre into the proposed
       delivery parking bay. If other vehicles are parked in the delivery bay though this
       would restrict the parking of delivery vehicles and likely result in obstructions within
       the highway. The appellant has suggested a planning condition which would
       provide suitable signage and road markings, with there also being a suggestion for
       the requirement of a Traffic Regulation Order. However, I am unconvinced as to
       whether such a condition would be enforceable and in practice whether signage
       and road markings would be sufficient to detract all motorists from parking in the
       delivery bay, particularly at peak times when parking on the surrounding streets
       would be at its highest. It is also indicated that a Stage 2 Road Safety Audit (RSA)
       would be required to secure highway works through a Section 278 agreement,
       however as a RSA has not been submitted, I am unable to determine with any
       certainty as to whether the highway works would be achievable. I note comments
       that RSAs are carried out as a post-planning matter, however, this does not alter
       my findings on this matter.
8.     From the evidence before me, I am not satisfied that delivery vehicles, in particular
       larger vehicles, can access or egress the appeal site without meeting obstacles on
       either TO or SS and therefore this would result in obstructions in the highway, that
       would be to the detriment of highway and pedestrian safety. The likelihood of
       delivery vehicles being an obstruction in the highway would increase during peak
       times of the day, including at school drop off and pick up times, when the parking
       of vehicles on the highway would be more prolific. There is minimal compelling


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6013586


       evidence to suggest that deliveries can be restricted to certain times of the day
       and that the delivery bay can remain free of unauthorised parking at all times.
9.     It is suggested that other commercial and retail operations in the area have similar
       type of delivery vehicles which use the same roads, as well as refuse vehicles and
       emergency services. Whilst there are no specific details of these other delivery,
       refuse and emergency vehicles, any larger vehicles that already use the roads
       surrounding the appeal site would just contribute further to the possibility of
       becoming an obstacle to the delivery vehicles for the proposed development and
       thereby increasing the likelihood of an obstruction in the highway.
10. Accordingly, the proposed development would have a harmful and unacceptable
    effect on highway safety and the local highway network in terms of service and
    delivery. The proposal would be contrary to Policies TRA 1 and TRA 2 of the
    Northumberland Local Plan which seeks development to provide effective and safe
    access and egress to the existing transport network.
Other Matters
11. The principle of retail development in this location has not been disputed and the
    appellant details that the proposal would be the use of previously developed land.
    The Council and most of the statutory consultees have not raised any objection to
    matters including character and appearance, living condition of neighbouring
    occupiers, noise, ecology, drainage or flooding, crime prevention, parking
    provision for the retail unit itself and accessibility and visibility of the proposed
    customer access. These matters however would not outweigh the harm I have
    found on the main issue.
12. I note the appellants constructive engagement on various matters including on the
    highway issues and I have also had regard to the Council’s change in position on
    the highway matters. Nevertheless, the Council refused the planning application,
    and I have made my decision based on the Council’s reason for refusal and the
    submitted evidence.
13. The appellant has provided a substantial list of planning conditions which they
    consider would be appropriate and make the proposed development acceptable.
    As discussed above, I do not consider all the proposed conditions to be
    enforceable and therefore they do not meet the relevant tests as set out in the
    Framework and subsequently would not make the development acceptable.
Conclusion
14. The proposal would conflict with the development plan as a whole and there are
    no other considerations, including the provisions of the Framework, which
    outweighs this finding.
15. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.



Chris Baxter
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
