Appeal Decision
by Chris Baxter BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6013638
32, Crawhall Crescent, Morpeth NE61 2RH
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Louise Fowler against the decision of Northumberland County Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/00997/FUL.
•    The development proposed is described as “demolition of garage, two storey side extension and
     pitched roof to rear offshoot”.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.     Since the appeal was submitted a new version of the National Planning Policy
       Framework (the Framework) came into effect, however there are no material
       changes in policy emphasis relevant to the substance of the appeal.
Main Issues
3.     The main issues are the effect of the proposal on (i) the living conditions of
       occupiers of 30 Crawhall Crescent with regards to outlook and overbearing effects;
       and (ii) ecological matters.
Reasons
Living conditions
4.     The proposed development would introduce a large expanse of built development
       onto the boundary with 30 Crawhall Crescent (No 30) that would appear as a
       dominant and intrusive feature when viewed from the rear windows and garden
       area of No 30. Due to the scale, design and siting of the proposed extension as
       well as the positioning of the properties, the proposal would have an overbearing
       appearance that would adversely affect the outlook of the neighbouring occupiers
       of No 30.
5.     Accordingly, the proposed development would have a harmful effect on the living
       conditions of the occupiers of No 30 with regards to outlook and overbearing
       effects. The proposal would be contrary to Policies QOP 2 and HOU 9 of the
       Northumberland Local Plan (NLP) and Policy Des1 of the Morpeth Neighbourhood
       Plan (MNP) which seeks extensions to not have a significant adverse impact on
       amenity of adjoining properties.
Ecology
6.     The Council Ecologist details that the proposals include impacts to the existing
       buildings which have not been assessed for potential to support roosting bats, and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6013638


       therefore a Preliminary Roost Assessment (PRA) is required. A PRA has not been
       submitted. Minimal evidence has been submitted which convinces me that the
       proposal would not have an adverse effect on protected species.
7.     There is insufficient evidence which indicates that the proposal would not have a
       harmful effect on protected species. The proposed development would not accord
       with Policy ENV 2 of the NLP and Des1 and Env5 of the MNP which seeks
       development proposals affecting protected species to minimise their impact
       avoiding significant harm through location and/or design.
Other Matters
8.     I have had regard to the appellants statement of case which details comments
       from the Officer report and indicating that an amended scheme could have been
       acceptable. My assessment and findings of harm is based on the plans that were
       refused by the Council.
9.     The appellant has concerns that the Council have acted unfairly in how it has dealt
       with the application including matters on amended plans, requirement for ecology
       surveys, the need for an ecology refusal reason and communication between the
       parties including early engagement and constructive working. These matters,
       however, do not alter my findings and the harm I have found on the main issues.
Conclusion
10. The proposal would conflict with the development plan as a whole and there are
    no other considerations, including the provisions of the Framework, which
    outweighs this finding.
11. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.



Chris Baxter
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
