 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 3 September 2026
 By G Powys Jones FRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 15 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6013278
 162 Norwood Road, Southall, UB2 4JS
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as
     amended) against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr Muhammad Rafiq against the decision of the Council of the
     London Borough of Ealing.
 •   The application Ref is 261358HH.
 •   The development proposed is formation of vehicle crossover; and installation of a dropped
     kerb.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural and preliminary matters
2. The Council’s description of the proposal as used in its decision notice has been
   adopted since it more fully and accurately describes the proposal.
3. The property is located within the Norwood Green Conservation Area (CA). The
   Council does not raise a heritage objection, and I share its view and the reasons for
   not objecting on this score.
Main Issue
4. This the effect of the proposal on pedestrian safety.
Reasons
5. The appeal property is a dwelling forming part of a short terrace of residential
   properties on the southern frontage of Norwood Road (A3005), a busy
   thoroughfare. The two properties at either end of the terrace have a parking facility
   in their front gardens accessed by means of crossovers. The two central houses
   have no parking facilities on-site, and the appellant proposes providing such a
   facility in front of his house. The whole of the front garden is currently hard
   surfaced.
6. The Council states in its sole reason for refusal that ‘...the application fails to
   identify the presence of the guardrail or assess its function.’ This is a reference to
   a lengthy guardrail which is sited on the edge of the footway, partly in front of the
   appeal property and adjacent to a light controlled pedestrian crossing. However,
   whilst the originally submitted drawings did not show the guardrail, it is shown on



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
    Appeal Decision 6013278


       Drawing Ref 162NR-301-01P21, a drawing submitted during the Council’s
       consideration of the application.
7. It appears to me that this drawing was submitted in response to comments raised
   by the Council’s Conservation Officer on being consulted relating to landscaping
   and boundary definition. The drawing shows the proposed car space next to the
   boundary wall shared with No 160, at right angles to the carriageway. It shows
   pedestrian visibility splays either side; a dwarf wall to be erected along the
   remainder of the front garden’s frontage, with soft landscaping proposed behind the
   dwarf wall and alongside the boundary shared with No 164.
8. I am reasonably experienced in reading drawings, and what the drawing conveys to
   me is that it is intended that any car in the car space shown would be driven in and
   out of the space at right angles to the carriageway using a cross over yet to be
   formed. If that were the case, a substantial section of the guardrail would need to
   be removed.
9. However, the appellant claims that is not the case. He maintains that the intention
   is to utilize the gap between the traffic light post and the guardrail for the most part,
   and that only a small section of the guardrail would be removed. If this were the
   case, to enter or leave the site, any car intending to use the space depicted on the
   drawing would need to be manoeuvred awkwardly diagonally along the footway, to
   avoid the dwarf wall.
10. The guardrail performs an obvious safety function - that of separating pedestrians
    from traffic. During my visit, around lunchtime, I saw that the pedestrian crossing
    was in regular use. I also saw that just along from the appeal property at the end of
    the short terrace is the entrance to Wolf Fields Primary School. Alongside its main
    vehicular entry gates are two pedestrian gates. I strongly suspect that the
    guardrails are in place in part to protect primary aged children, particularly those
    using the pedestrian crossing, as they walk to and from school.
11. To my mind, the vehicular manoeuvres arising from the appellant’s proposal
    depicted in the drawing referred to, as I interpret it, or as the appellant interprets it,
    would both put pedestrian safety at risk, including that of small children. Such
    manoeuvres2 would interfere with the safe use of the footway and pedestrian
    crossing. Accordingly, a clear conflict arises with those provisions of policy T4 of
    the London Plan (LP) and policy 1.1 of the Ealing Core Strategy requiring Ealing to
    be a safe place to live and for development proposals not to increase road danger.
12. Judging from the content of the officer report, it appears to me that the appellant is
    probably justified in contending that his medical conditions were not fully
    considered by the Council in arriving at its decision. In this regard, a letter from his
    doctor has been produced, which lists his medical problems, diets and medications.
    I therefore understand the reasons why the appellant would ideally wish to have a
    parking facility close to his front door. However, his personal circumstances need
    to be balanced against the risks and potential danger arising to pedestrians,
    including small children, which would arise if this proposal were permitted.
13. I have had due regard to the Public Sector Equality Duty (PSED) set out under
    s149 of the Equality Act 2010, but the risks and potential danger caused by the

1
    This drawing is listed in the Council’s decision notice.
2
    And the removal of a lengthy section of guardrail on my interpretation of the drawing


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                       2
 Appeal Decision 6013278


     proposal outweigh its benefits in terms of eliminating discrimination against persons
     with the protected characteristics of impairment and/or disability.
14. I therefore conclude that it is proportionate and necessary to dismiss the appeal
    since I find the proposed development would dangerously put the safety of
    pedestrians, including small children, at risk.
15. No other matter raised is of such strength or significance as to outweigh the
    considerations leading me to my conclusions.

G Powys Jones
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
