 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 30 August 2026
 by J Somers BSocSci (Planning) MA (HEC) MRTPI IHBC
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 21 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6013309
 50 Melrose Avenue, Sutton Vesey, Sutton Coldfield Birmingham B73 6NS
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
     to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs Sharma against the decision of Birmingham City Council.
 •   The application reference is 2026/01329/PA.
 •   The development proposed is described as a ‘Erection of two storey side extensions, single storey
     side and rear extensions, raising the main roof ridge by 500mm to allow for new roof and loft
     conversion with dormer windows to rear and roof canopy to front.’

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. I have taken the description of the development from the Council’s Decision Notice
   as this provides more detail as to the elements requiring planning approval. I note
   that the Appellant’s Appeal Statement also includes the Council’s description.
3. The Council’s Decision Notice contains three reasons for refusal which all relate to
   the proposed design and appearance of the scheme. As all of the reasons for
   refusal relate to the same topic and design policies and intertwine with each other,
   for the avoidance of doubt, I will deal with all of the reasons for refusal together.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development upon the existing building
   and the character and appearance of the locality.
Reasons
5. The appeal site lies along Melrose Avenue which is part of planned residential
   expansion close to Sutton Park around the beginning of the twentieth century. Like
   most speculative housing planned at this time, there is an emphasis of
   spaciousness, with large rear gardens, setbacks from the front and sides of the
   properties with front gardens and gaps in and around dwellings which emphasise a
   status and spaciousness. Within the area there is a clear emphasis on vegetation
   with vegetated front gardens and hedging, small grass verges between the road
   edge and footpaths, with the tops of trees in rear gardens also being visible
   between gaps as one walks along the street. Many of the dwellings have been built
   at similar times and have an arts and crafts inspired design which carries a rather
   functional form of housing, with hipped roof forms, with forward projection from the
   side, with large two storey bow window. Designs along the street are largely
   homogenous with similar heights, floorplans and setbacks with the original dwelling

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate            1
 Appeal Decision: 6013309


     being able to be appreciated. Many of the dwellings retain large chimney stacks,
     clay roof tiles, feature hanging tiles to front facades, and are constructed in a
     red/brown brick with some dwellings incorporating render to the first floor. These
     are some of the elements that reinforce the positive qualities that contribute to local
     distinctiveness and the character and appearance of the area.
6. I disagree with the Appellant’s Statement of Case (SoC) that the character is one of
   accepted enlargement and adaptions, as clearly there are some that are better
   received than others. There have been a number of extensions along the street,
   some being more successful than others, where many of the extensions are
   subservient and maintain the positive qualities of local distinctiveness and the form
   of the existing dwelling. There have however been elements like uPVC windows
   and doors, removal of chimney stacks, large extensions which detract from the
   character and appearance of the area; however, these are not part of the overriding
   positive aspects that contribute to the character of the area.
7. The appeal site represents one of the original detached dwellings as part of
   expansion of the area during the early-mid twentieth century. The dwelling retains
   many of the original features of the estate with two large chimney breasts, cat-slide
   roof to the rear, hipped roof with forward projecting gable with large bow windows,
   red-brown brick and render to the first floor. The dwelling retains the similar setback
   found along the street with small single storey garage which has an emphasis on
   spaces in and around the dwelling.
8. In undertaking extensions and alterations to existing dwellings, the Birmingham
   Development Plan (DP) Policy PG3 is a design-led policy which seeks that
   development achieve a number of design principles such as reinforcing a positive
   sense of place and local distinctiveness and responding to the site conditions and
   local area context, amongst others. The policy is supported by the Birmingham
   Design Guide Principles Document (BDG) which provides guidance and design
   principles around five design themes – The Birmingham ID, Streets and Spaces,
   Landscape and green infrastructure, Healthy Living and Efficient and future ready.
9. I note that the Reasons for Refusal refer to Development Management in
   Birmingham Development Plan Document (DPD) Policy DM2 which concerns
   amenity and living conditions, of which were not objected to from the Council’s
   decision. As the policy does not appear to be concerned with character and
   appearance and the main issues of this decision, I have not considered this policy
   further within this letter.
10. The proposal would be very large to the extent that the positive elements of the
    existing design would not be recognisable. The elements contributing to the
    positive qualities of character such as chimney breasts and cat-slide roof would be
    removed, with the dwelling being remodelled and centred with the front projection
    to the centre rather than the side. Whilst the existing roof was proportionate to the
    form of the existing dwelling, the increasing of the ridge by 500mm and the
    resultant elongation of the ridge would be very noticeable and gives the front
    façade a very top-heavy appearance. Given the overall height, depth and massing
    of the proposed extension in relation to the existing dwelling, it would be a
    dominant form of development. The extension has an awkward juxtaposition to the
    existing building in that the extension would elongate and accentuate the massing
    and visual bulk of the building, giving an oversized and dominant appearance when
    considering the smaller and functional form of the existing dwelling and those

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         2
    Appeal Decision: 6013309


       dwellings surrounding that are experienced together within the Melrose Avenue
       street scene.
11. I can appreciate the design intention that seeks to maximise the use of land and
    spaces, however this to me is largely unsuccessful and architecturally inauthentic
    and detracts from the positive qualities that contribute to character and appearance
    from the additional bulk and massing which is quite dominant in terms of its depth,
    width and massing. Moving to the rear of the property, the large projecting rear
    dormer window has an overcomplicated form and appearance which appears as an
    ‘add-on’ rather than an integrated element of the overall design. The extension
    would therefore not be subservient to the existing building nor be experienced as
    an extension, but rather a dominant component and largely new dwelling
    developed in isolation of the surrounding context. The extension would in turn harm
    the character and appearance of the existing building, and the local distinctiveness
    of the surrounding locality.
12. I acknowledge a number of examples of extensions and dormer windows1 have
    been submitted as evidence of extensions; however, their relevance to this
    application is unclear as they do not represent similar sized extensions that have
    the design elements that are problematic within this application. They do however
    demonstrate that each of the applications are considered on their merits and that in
    accordance with the DP Policy PG3 that applications are required to assess the
    existing building and surrounding context. As such, the examples given do not
    provide sufficient justification for the proposed scheme.
13. Taken as a whole, and in conclusion of this matter, in this particular circumstance,
    the proposed extensions would be incongruous in this location as a result of
    design, massing and visual bulk, and not reflective of the positive characteristics of
    local distinctiveness and appearance of the area. The development would cause an
    incongruous element within the street scene which would cause detriment to the
    functional architectural authenticity of the existing dwelling and of the street scene.
    Consequently, the proposal would be contrary to the DP Policy PG3 which is
    supported by the BDG, as described previously.
Other Matters
14. I note representations from interested parties with regard to harm to living
    conditions, drainage and surface water problems; parking, retaining wall structural
    integrity, concerns around existing enforcement and conduct of the Appellant.
    Matters relating to retaining walls and boundaries are civil issues and not part of
    planning considerations. The conduct of the Appellant regarding previous planning
    enforcement is not a planning matter that is able to be considered in this
    determination. The Council have not raised any concerns with regards to parking,
    surface water or living conditions. Given that the proposal fails on design, I have
    not needed to delve into these additional issues around living conditions.
15. I note discussion in the Appellant’s SoC around the belief that the BDG was used
    as policy rather than guidance. Planning policies do not need to be overly
    prescriptive and list every situation or instance for assessment, as it would be
    impossible to do so. That said, just because the Policy doesn’t refer to elements
    like ‘subservience,’ or ‘proportionate,’ this is a generally accepted way as detailed

1
    No.s 51, 57, 68, 72, 89 Melrose Place, and examples provided in the accompanying letter


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                     3
 Appeal Decision: 6013309


     in the BDG of assessing how extensions can comply with the policy. The Council
     were justified in the way that they assessed the scheme, with the proposal being
     found to be contrary to DP Policy PG3.
16. I note discussion in the Appellant’s SoC with regards to a fallback position, whereby
    the property could be enlarged under the provisions of the General Permitted
    Development Order 1995 (GDPO). An assessment against the DP Policies and the
    GDPO are not the same, and the scheme proposed as a whole could not be
    constructed within the confines of the GPDO. As such the presence of a fall back
    position does not lead me to consider this as a material consideration of the
    proposed scheme that warrants a decision other than in accordance with the
    development plan.
17. I acknowledge and appreciate the comments from the Appellant in their personal
    statement which accompanies the SoC regarding their personal needs, their
    specific situation and justifications for the proposed increase of space to cater for
    the care needs of a resident with mobility impairments. I have treated this situation
    as a material consideration to this proposal. Having reviewed these personal
    circumstances, I feel that there may be other ways of accommodating the
    Appellant’s needs which may be more compliant with the policies of the
    development plan. There are consequently no material considerations that warrant
    a decision other than in accordance with the development plan.
Conclusion
18. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the appeal is dismissed.

J Somers
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       4
