Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 1 September 2026
by A Caines BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 17 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6013856
Willowcroft, Stonepit Lane, Gristhorpe, Filey YO14 9PT
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr and Mrs P Gale against the decision of North Yorkshire Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/03912/FUL.
•    The development proposed is described as remodelling of property including formation of new
     hipped roof arrangement incorporating dormer windows to provide first floor accommodation;
     erection of balcony at rear with undercover canopy.

Decision
1.     The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.     A revised National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
       17 August 2026. The main parties were given the opportunity to comment on the
       changes introduced by the revised Framework, and I have taken their responses
       into account in determining the appeal.
Main Issue
3.     The main issue is the effect of the development on the character and appearance
       of the dwelling and surrounding rural area.
Reasons
4.     The appeal property is a detached bungalow located within the countryside.
       It occupies an elevated position and is surrounded by agricultural fields, trees
       and hedgerows, which gives the immediate setting a distinctly rural character.
5.     Policy DEC1 of the Scarborough Borough Local Plan (2017) (the SLP) seeks
       development that responds positively to local context, having regard to matters
       including scale, form, height, materials and architectural detailing. Whilst
       Policy ENV6 principally addresses new development within the countryside, it also
       requires proposals to be compatible with their surroundings and to protect the
       character and appearance of the countryside. Similar objectives are reflected in
       the Council's Residential Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document (2022)
       (SPD), which expects extensions and alterations to respect the scale and form of
       the original building and respond positively to the characteristics of the site and
       surrounding area.
6.     The existing bungalow is of simple form and modest scale, with a relatively low
       profile, uncomplicated roofscape and brick finish. As a result, it has a restrained
       presence within its countryside setting and does not appear unduly conspicuous.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6013856


7.     The proposal would involve a substantial remodelling of the dwelling. In addition to
       the ground floor extensions, it would incorporate a roof lift of around 2 metres, a
       steeper roof pitch, hipped roof ends, several large dormer windows, a first-floor
       balcony and a rear canopy. The existing brick elevations would also be replaced
       with a painted render finish. Taken together, these changes would significantly
       transform the character of the dwelling. The enlarged roof form, prominent
       dormers, balcony and rendered elevations would create a building of considerably
       greater scale and visual presence than the existing bungalow. Whilst it would
       remain clearly identifiable as a dwelling, it would no longer exhibit the modest and
       understated qualities that currently allow it to assimilate into its rural surroundings.
       The increased height and bulk of the roof in particular would be readily apparent,
       especially in views from the south.
8.     I acknowledge that good design need not replicate existing buildings and that
       contemporary approaches can make a positive contribution to local character.
       However, the appeal property is experienced predominantly within a landscape of
       open fields, trees and hedgerows. In that context, the proposed remodelling would
       introduce a more visually assertive and suburban form of development. The
       combination of enlarged rendered elevations, a dominant roofscape, sizeable
       dormers and a first-floor balcony would be at odds with the restrained character
       currently exhibited by the dwelling and would appear incongruous within its rural
       setting. Moreover, little substantive evidence has been provided to demonstrate
       how the design has been informed by the characteristics of the local area or how it
       would reinforce local distinctiveness.
9.     I recognise that the proposal would not result in the loss of landscape features,
       changes to landform, or encroachment into undeveloped countryside.
       Nevertheless, the countryside setting forms an important part of the context in
       which the development would be experienced. By reason of its increased scale,
       prominence and suburbanising design elements, the proposal would fail to respect
       the rural context in which it would be experienced and would detract from the
       character and appearance of the area.
10. The appellant draws attention to larger dwellings and other developments in the
    wider area, including at Cliff House Farm. I have also had regard to the previous
    planning permission granted in 2010 for alterations including a roof lift and
    additional accommodation. However, those matters do not alter my findings. The
    acceptability of development depends upon the particular characteristics of the
    proposal and its relationship with its immediate surroundings. The existence of
    other developments elsewhere, or a different unimplemented scheme, does not
    demonstrate that the appeal proposal would be compatible with the character of
    this site and its setting.
11. Drawing these matters together, I find that the development would fail to respond
    positively to the site's rural context and would neither respect nor reinforce local
    character. The resulting harm to the character and appearance of the dwelling and
    its rural surroundings would conflict with Policy DEC1 of the SLP and with the
    design-related objectives of Policy ENV6.
12. Whilst I have had regard to Policy ENV7 of the SLP, I have not identified any
    separate landscape harm beyond that arising from the proposal's effect on
    character and appearance and the dwellings relationship with its rural setting.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6013856


Planning Balance
13. The development would provide improved and modernised living accommodation
    for the occupiers of the dwelling. It would also be likely to offer some enhancement
    to the building's energy performance. Whilst these are benefits of the proposal,
    they would primarily benefit the occupants of the appeal property and would not
    result in significant wider public benefits. Consequently, I attach limited weight
    to them.
14. Against those benefits, the development would harm the character and
    appearance of the dwelling and its rural surroundings. As such, it would conflict
    with policies DEC1 and ENV6 of the SLP.
15. The Framework identifies the extension and alteration of existing buildings outside
    settlements as a form of development that may be acceptable in principle and
    seeks to facilitate the transition to a low carbon future. However, that support is not
    unconditional. The Framework also places significant importance on achieving
    well-designed development that responds positively to local context and integrates
    successfully with its surroundings.
16. For the reasons set out above, the proposal would fail to respond positively to its
    context and would therefore conflict with Policy DP3 of the Framework. Given the
    importance attached to achieving well-designed places, I attach considerable
    weight to this conflict and the harm which arises from it. Furthermore, Policy S5(2)
    of the Framework identifies conflict with national-decision making policies requiring
    refusal as a circumstance in which the benefits of development are likely to be
    substantially outweighed by its adverse effects.
17. Having regard to the Framework as a whole, including the presumption in favour of
    sustainable development, I find that the limited benefits of the proposal would be
    substantially outweighed by the harm I have identified. Accordingly, the proposal
    would not represent sustainable development.
Conclusion
18. For the reasons given, I conclude that the proposal conflicts with the development
    plan when read as a whole. The material considerations, including the Framework,
    do not outweigh that conflict or indicate that a decision should be made other
    than in accordance with the development plan. Accordingly, the appeal should
    be dismissed.

A Caines
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
