Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 16 September 2026
by Eleni Marshall BSc (hons) MSc FRICS FAAV MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6013877
57 Lincoln Road, Walsall, WS1 2DW
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
    to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Tahaira Latif against Walsall Metropolitan Borough Council.
•   The application Ref is 26/0320.
•   The development proposed is proposed first floor front extension; first floor rear extension, changes
    to the roof, including a roof height increase to accommodate a loft conversion and rear dormer.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. Since the determination of this application, and submission of this appeal, the
   Government issued the new revised version of the National Planning Policy
   Framework 2026. On this occasion I do not consider there any need to revert to
   the main parties regarding this change. The new policies for decision making do
   not substantially alter matters relating to the main issues that are the subject of this
   appeal.
3. I have utilised the Council’s description of the proposal as it describes the proposal
   more concisely than that on the original application form.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are the impact of the proposal upon i) the host dwelling, wider
   street scene and character and appearance of the area and ii) highway and
   pedestrian safety.
Reasons
Host dwelling, wider street scene and character and appearance of the area
5. The appeal site is a two storey, semi-detached, property with a hipped roof and
   front sloping catslide roof that forms part of a symmetrical pair with 59 Lincoln
   Road. The immediate row of dwellings within which the host dwelling stands are
   characterised by two designs of semi-detached dwellings with their symmetry and
   uniformity, in terms of basic architectural features, contributing positively to the
   character and appearance of the existing street scene. Whilst there are some
   detached dwellings, of differing design, the characteristics of the semi-detached
   dwellings themselves, as pairs, are notable as part of the street scene.
6. Based upon my site visit, and as set out within the evidence before me, some
   dwellings within the locality have undergone extension and alteration, however,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6013877


     where such works have been undertaken, including changes to the material palette,
     the symmetry and rhythm of the pairs of dwellings has been clearly retained in
     almost all cases. In addition, it is notable that extensions and alterations have been
     predominantly to the rear or side. There are no examples of an increase in roof
     height by in the region of 1 metre for one half of a semi-detached pair in order to
     accommodate sufficient headspace in the roof to achieve a rear dormer.
7. The cumulative extensions at 73 and 75 Lincoln Road respectively are
   acknowledged but I find that these are indicative of the harm that can arise from
   development of this nature. Furthermore, the appeal site itself is further along
   Lincoln Road and stands clearly within a row of semi-detached dwellings consistent
   with two key designs sharing architectural features. It is this immediate locality
   within which the proposal would be viewed and appear visually uncharacteristic.
8. The design would retain a front gable that would correspond with the neighbouring
   property, and the eaves height of the roof would not be altered. Despite this, the
   increase in ridge height combined with the loss of the catslide roof would
   significantly, and unacceptably, unbalance the pair of semi-detached dwellings that
   the host dwelling is part of. The proposal would introduce a convoluted design
   which would fail to integrate with the existing simple design of the host dwelling
   which is a characteristic of the locality as outlined. It would, therefore, appear
   incongruous and out of character with the immediate and wider street scene.
9. It is acknowledged that the proposal is an amended design of the proposed
   extensions to reduce them compared to the previously withdrawn application with a
   change to the intended roof design. Whilst the appellant’s acknowledgement of,
   and attempts to respond to, officer feedback is noted, the proposal that is before
   me would still create an incongruous feature which would be negatively prominent
   at both first floor and roof level resulting in significant adverse impact to the host
   dwelling and street scene.
10. Residential properties in the area are acknowledged, as outlined above, to have
    undergone extension and alteration, however, I find that figure 1 within the
    appellant’s statement of case is demonstrative of general retention of symmetry
    and original roof structure to the front elevations of the dwellings in question and
    that the extensions and alterations have not resulted in such varying architectural
    style and approaches that would justify the proposal.
11. The appellant makes reference to the proposals being more sympathetic than
    would otherwise be achievable under (unspecified) permitted development rights. I
    place limited weight upon this statement in this case given, for example, the
    limitations under standard householder permitted development rights with regard to
    not exceeding the highest part of the existing roof. I do not find, therefore, that the
    proposal would be more sympathetic than that achievable under permitted
    development in that regard. As submitted the proposal would result in the loss of
    both the characteristic symmetry and catslide roof, as well as raising the ridge
    appearing unrelated to the surrounding development and, in particular, the attached
    dwelling. This would in significant harm to the character and appearance of the
    area and would fail to integrate with the existing simple design of the host dwelling
    and its semi-detached pair.
12. The proposal would be contrary to Walsall Unitary Development Plan 2005 (UDP)
    saved Policies GP2 and ENV32 which together require developments to make a


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
Appeal Decision 6013877


     positive contribution to the quality of the environment taking into account visual
     appearance as well as seeking to refuse poorly designed proposals which fail to
     properly take account of the context, surroundings or local character of the area.
     The proposal would also be contrary to Black Country Core Strategy 2011 (CS)
     Policy CSP4 which requires development to demonstrate a clear understanding of
     local distinctiveness, Policy ENV2 which requires proposals to preserve and
     enhance local character and Policy ENV3 which seeks to ensure proposals
     understand and respond to the identity of each place with high-quality design.
13. The proposal would also be inconsistent with the guidance set out within the
    Designing Walsall Supplementary Planning Document for Urban Design
    (2008/Revised 2013) which seeks to ensure new development must be designed to
    respect and enhance local identity and National Decision-Making Policy DP3 which
    requires proposals to respond to their context so that they integrate with and
    enhance their surroundings. It is acknowledged that the proposal is acceptable in
    other regards as listed within the appellant’s grounds of appeal, however, the
    benefits of the proposal would, in this case, be substantially outweighed by the
    adverse effects identified when considered on balance against the National
    Decision-Making Policies in the Framework.
Highway and Pedestrian Safety
14. A parking plan has been submitted which shows, as per the labelling on that plan, 3
    parking spaces. The services identified within appendix 2 of the appeal statement,
    are acknowledged in terms of walking distance. It is acknowledged that the
    proposal does not seek to alter the existing parking arrangement at the site,
    however, the proposal does seek to extend the host dwelling to create a 4
    bedroomed dwelling – an addition of one bedroom. UDP Policy T13, in that regard,
    sets out a requirement for 3 spaces per unit for 4-bedroom houses compared to 2
    spaces per unit for a 3-bedroom house. The age of this policy is acknowledged;
    however, it is still part of the Local Plan and is broadly consistent with the
    Framework in its objective to avoid unacceptable impact on highway safety.
15. Notwithstanding that the parking provision would remain unchanged as a result of
    the proposals, I have strong concern as to the usability of the spaces and the
    appeal site boundary shown. Looking at the proposed site plans the width of the
    space labelled as parking space 1 exceeds the width of the actual access that is
    available within the confines of the red line boundary due to the presence of the
    brick pillar to the front wall boundary. This means, therefore, that access to the site
    to utilise the parking provision as shown could not be accommodated within the red
    line boundary and, therefore, within land within the ownership of the appellant. It
    would appear from the plans, and my site visit, that there is a requirement to cross
    over the boundary of the adjacent property (55 Lincoln Road). On this basis it
    would appear, at the very least, that there is a procedural concern with the
    ownership certificates due to the original application stating that the (then) applicant
    is the sole owner of all the land to which the application relates on this basis.
16. The combination of the factors outlined above mean that I find that the current
    submission raises concern as to the acceptability of the proposed parking plan.
    There may be opportunities to utilise on-street parking, however, at the time of my
    site visit (albeit I appreciate this is only a snapshot in time) I had to park a short
    distance away from the appeal site in order to obtain a space as required on-street.
    Even if I had agreed with the appellant that the proposal would be acceptable due

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
Appeal Decision 6013877


     to not representing a change in existing parking layout and/or provision the appeal
     would still be dismissed on the basis of my findings relating to the first issue.
     Furthermore, I have concerns as to the procedural correctness of the ownership
     certificates due to the requirements of the proposal with regard to neighbouring
     land outside the red line boundary as identified.
17. The proposal, as currently submitted, would be contrary to UDP Policy T7 that
    seeks to satisfy the car parking standards set out in UDP Policy T13. UDP Policy
    T13 seeks to secure, and maintain, adequate levels of off-street parking to avoid
    highway safety issues that can be caused by the proliferation of on-street parking
    as well as seeking to ensure no adverse effect on highway safety. In addition,
    National Decision-Making Policy TR6 reiterates that development proposals should
    be refused if they would have an unacceptable impact on highway safety.
Other Matters
18. I note third party comments received during the application process including one
    confirming no objection albeit it is noted by the Council to have been dated prior to
    the application. This does not, however, outweigh the issues that I have identified
    as set out above and is a neutral consideration.
Conclusion
19. For the reasons outlined above, and taking into account all other matters raised, I
    conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

Eleni Marshall
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       4
