Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 September 2026
by Mr R Walker BA HONS DIPTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6013087
39 Cowling Brow, Chorley PR6 0QE
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Joe Cox (Belmont Consultancy Ltd) against the decision of Chorley Borough
     Council.
•    The application Ref is 25/01250/FUL.
•    The development proposed is change of use of a 2 bedroom dwelling to a 5 bedroom HMO
     (retrospective).

Decision
1.    The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for change of use of a
      2 bedroom dwelling to a 5 bedroom HMO (retrospective) at 39 Cowling Brow,
      Chorley PR6 0QE in accordance with the terms of the application, Ref
      25/01250/FUL, subject to the conditions in the attached schedule.
Preliminary Matters
2.    The proposed use has commenced therefore I am considering the appeal
      retrospectively. Since the appeal was submitted, the Government has published a
      revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework). The
      main parties had opportunities to comment on any implications for the appeal of
      this change as part of the normal appeal process. As such, I am satisfied that no
      prejudice would be caused by my consideration of the appeal in light of the revised
      Framework (2026).
3.    I have been referred to the emerging Central Lancashire Local Plan (ECLLP),
      which is at a reasonably advanced stage. However, it is not yet adopted, and I do
      not know the outcome of the examination and any modifications that may result.
      As such, and in accordance with Policy DM4 of the Framework, I give little weight
      to the policies of the ECLLP.
Main Issues
4.    The main issues are:
           •    the effects of the development on highway and pedestrian safety in the area
                with particular reference to vehicular parking;
           •    The effects of the development on the living conditions of the occupiers of
                the neighbouring property with particular reference to noise and
                disturbance; and
           •    Whether the layout provides acceptable living conditions for occupiers of
                the development.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6013087


Reasons
Highway and pedestrian safety
5.    The appeal site lies on the corner of Cowling Brow and Browling Street. The area
      is characterised by predominantly residential properties interspersed with some
      commercial premises. Many of the surrounding properties have no off-street
      parking and, with no parking restrictions in place, park on the streets.
6.    At the time of my morning site visit there was on-street parking occurring along
      Cowling Brow and Browling Street and in the surrounding streets. However, there
      was also spaces available. Where there were parked vehicles, the carriageways
      were sufficiently wide to enable other vehicles, including larger vehicles, to pass.
7.    Evidence has been provided as part of the appeal showing cars parked partly on
      the footway and during my site visit, I also observed such practices. Most cars
      parking partially on the footway still left space such that they would not have
      obstructed pedestrians or anyone with a single pushchair or wheelchair. In this
      regard, whilst there were a very small number of parked vehicles obstructing the
      footway, considering the amount of parking spaces available and the width of the
      roads it strikes me that this was likely a personal choice made by those drivers
      rather than due to a lack of alternatives.
8.    My site visit represented a snapshot in time, and the level of parking would likely
      be different in the evenings and weekends. However, there is no substantive
      evidence before me regarding the capacity of on-street parking or that the existing
      parking situation has led to any incidents.
9.    There would be demand for parking associated with the property either as a single
      dwellinghouse or a five bedroom House in Multiple Occupation (HMO). In this
      regard, I have not been referred to a specific standard for a HMO but I accept that
      the parking demand would be increased due to the individual lifestyles of
      occupiers of a HMO in contrast with a single household where shared trips would
      be more common. However, any increase would be modest, given the number of
      bedrooms proposed and other modes of travel available. In this regard, even with
      an increase in parking demand I do not consider that this would lead to a
      significant adverse effect on highway or pedestrian safety.
10. To conclude on this matter, the development would not lead to an unacceptable
    effect on highway and pedestrian safety in the area with particular reference to
    vehicular parking. As such, I find no conflict with the requirements of Policies ST4
    or BNE1 of the Council’s Local Plan (2015) when taken together and in so far as
    they relate to this main issue. These say, amongst other things, that planning
    permission will be granted for new development provided that the residual
    cumulative highways impact of the development is not severe and it would not
    prejudice highway safety, pedestrian safety, or the free flow of traffic. These
    policies are broadly consistent with Policy TR3(1c) of the Framework, which says
    that any significant adverse impacts from the development on the transport
    network (in terms of capacity and congestion), or on highway safety, should be
    mitigated to an acceptable degree using a vision-led approach.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6013087


Living conditions – neighbouring properties
11. The appeal premises is a corner property fronting onto a fairly busy road with
    some commercial premises as well as residential properties. The entrance doors
    of the appeal premises are set away from the attached neighbouring property, as
    is the side entrance gate, such that the comings and goings of occupiers of the
    HMO and associated visitors within the context of the surrounding land uses would
    not be of a level that would result in an unacceptable harm to the living conditions
    of the neighbouring properties.
12. Whilst the rear yard borders directly to the side of a terraced house, there are no
    side window openings on this neighbouring property. The rear yard would also
    provide sufficient space for rubbish bins, reducing the likelihood of conflicts with
    neighbours around waste storage.
13. I accept that there would be an increased level of activity associated with five
    unrelated adults in contrast to a C3 use where there would be a greater level of
    shared activities. However, whilst the level of activity would likely be greater, at five
    adults I am not convinced that the level would be significantly greater than a C3
    use.
14. Given the attached nature of the neighbouring property and the age of the building,
    on the evidence before me I have no reason to doubt the representations made
    regarding noise within the appeal premises being heard at the adjoining property.
    In this regard, I accept that there can be no cast iron guarantee that problems of
    noise and disturbance will not arise from the HMO use, as this will depend on the
    particular group of occupiers. However, such an argument would also apply to a
    C3 dwelling.
15. The Council has suggested conditions to secure a detailed Management Plan and
    Sound Insulation Scheme in the interests of reducing the potential for harm to
    residential amenity and antisocial behaviour. Subject to such conditions I am
    satisfied that the appeal scheme, and the level of increased activity that would
    likely occur, would not result in unacceptable effects.
16. To conclude on this main issue, the proposal would not unacceptably harm the
    living conditions of the occupiers of existing properties with particular reference to
    noise and disturbance. As such, I find no conflict with the requirements of CS
    Policy 6 or Policy BNE1 of the Council’s Local Plan. These say, amongst other
    things, that planning permission will be granted for new development where the
    proposal would not cause an unacceptable degree of noise disturbance to
    surrounding land uses. These policies are consistent with Policy DP3 of the
    Framework. This says that development should, amongst other things, support
    healthy, mixed, vibrant and integrated communities, which will function well over
    the lifetime of the development, by incorporating a range of uses and tenures,
    employing features which promote social interaction, and which are robust,
    durable and easy to look after.
Living conditions – future occupiers
17. The proposed layout has the communal kitchen, dining and living room located
    centrally within the property with a window directly onto the footway. Having a
    main habitable room facing directly onto a footway is not an unusual arrangement
    in terraced properties. The use of the footway is such that pedestrians would

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6013087


         typically walk past and so any overlooking would be fleeting and not prolonged.
         Moreover, this room functions as a communal space in a HMO and the bedrooms,
         which function as the private spaces for the occupiers, are not direct onto the
         footway ensuring an acceptable level of privacy is maintained overall.
18. Concerns have been raised regarding the size of bedrooms. In this regard, I have
    been referred to the space standards associated with the HMO licensing regime,
    which is separate to the planning regime. I have also been referred to the
    Nationally Described Space Standard1 but this does not provide guidance for
    HMOs. It is therefore a matter of planning judgement whether the proposed HMO
    would include sufficient internal living space and, in this regard, comply with the
    development plan.
19. Bedrooms one, two and three are not uniform or regular shaped and I recognise
    that they are at the smaller end of the spectrum with some constraints to their
    layout. However, I have no reason to question the overall area indicated on the
    plans and given their size, along with the size of the communal room, the layout
    would not give rise to cramped living conditions overall.
20. Bedroom Two is located directly onto the private rear yard, and the bins would not
    be directly near this window nor in direct line of sight. The bicycles would be, but a
    reasonable distance is maintained such that it would still have a positive outlook.
    Whilst there would be comings and goings at the rear door and in the yard, the
    front door would also be used so activity would not be concentrated only at the
    rear door. In this regard, and considering the modest number of rooms, the degree
    of activity is not likely to be so high to be disturbing.
21. To conclude on this matter, the layout provides acceptable living conditions for
    occupiers of the development. As such, I find no conflict with the requirements of
    CS Policy 6 and BNE1 of the Council’s Local Plan, when taken together and in so
    far as they relate to this main issue. As set out previously these policies are
    consistent with Policy DP3 of the Framework.
Other Matters
22. Even with other HMOs nearby there is little before me to indicate that there is an
    overconcentration of such premises and the nature of the use and level of
    occupation of the property is compatible with the character of the area. Although
    the application is submitted retrospectively, there is no substantive evidence of
    intentional unauthorised development in the submission before me. As such, that
    the scheme was submitted retrospectively does not weigh against the appeal.
23. Policy S3 of the Framework establishes the presumption in favour of sustainable
    development and, in so far as it relates to this appeal, this means that the scheme
    should be considered against Policy S4 of the Framework. This states, amongst
    other things, that development proposals within settlements should be approved
    unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse
    effects, when assessed against the national decision-making policies in the
    Framework.
24. In this instance, I have not identified any unacceptable harm in the main issues or
    conflicts with national decision-making policies in the Framework. As such, the

1
    Technical housing standards – nationally described space standard


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  4
Appeal Decision 6013087


      development should be approved in accordance with Policies S3 and S4 of the
      Framework.
Conditions
25. I have adapted the Council’s suggested conditions where necessary and in the
    interests of precision, enforceability, and brevity. I have imposed a condition (1)
    specifying the relevant drawings and to require that the development is carried out
    in accordance with them as this provides certainty.
26. A condition requiring the cycle parking provision to be installed (2) is necessary to
    ensure alternative sustainable transport modes are available. Conditions requiring
    the submission of a management plan (3) and sound insulation scheme (4) are
    necessary to protect the living conditions of future and neighbouring occupiers.
    These conditions are imposed to ensure that the required details are implemented,
    and in the case of conditions 3 and 4 submitted, approved and implemented so as
    to make the development acceptable in planning terms.
27. There is a strict timetable for compliance because permission is being granted
    retrospectively, and so it is not possible to use a negatively worded condition to
    secure the approval and implementation of the details before development takes
    place. I have adapted the Council’s suggested conditions to ensure that the
    development can be enforced against if the details are not submitted for approval
    within the period given by the conditions, or if the details are not approved by the
    local planning authority or the Secretary of State on appeal, or if the details are
    approved but not implemented in accordance with an approved timetable.
28. I have also included a condition to ensure that the number of occupiers is
    controlled to that which is applied for in the interests of the living conditions of the
    occupiers of the development and the adjoining property.
Conclusion
29. To conclude, the development accords with the development plan when read as a
    whole and there are no material considerations that indicate the development
    should be determined other than in accordance with it.
30. For the reasons given above the appeal should be allowed.

Mr R Walker
INSPECTOR


                                           Schedule of Conditions
    1) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
       following approved plans and documents: Dwg Ref: 01.25063; 08.25063;
       09.25063; 10.25063; 11.25063; 12.25063; and 13.25063.

    2) Unless within three months of the date of this decision the cycle parking
       provision shown on the approved plans is completed and made available the
       occupation of the building as a HMO shall cease until such time as the cycle
       parking provision is made available. The cycle parking provision shall thereafter


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         5
Appeal Decision 6013087


         be kept free of obstruction and available for the parking of cycles only, at all
         times.
    3) The use hereby permitted shall cease within 28 days of the date of failure to
       meet any one of the requirements set out in i) to iv) below:
          i)   Within 3 months of the date of this decision the following details
               (hereafter referred to as the Management Plan) shall have been
               submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority:
                  • Tenant induction procedures; Refuse and recycling management;
                     Noise and anti-social behaviour controls; Property maintenance
                     arrangements; Contact details for the manager/owner; and
                     Complaint handling procedures.
          ii) If within 11 months of the date of this decision the local planning
               authority refuse to approve the Management Plan or fail to give a
               decision within the prescribed period, an appeal shall have been made
               to, and accepted as validly made by, the Secretary of State.
          iii) If an appeal is made in pursuance of ii) above, that appeal shall have
               been finally determined and the submitted site development scheme
               shall have been approved by the Secretary of State.
          iv) The approved Management Plan shall have been carried out and
               completed in accordance with the approved details and shall thereafter
               be retained.
              In the event of a legal challenge to this decision, or to a decision made
              pursuant to the procedure set out in this condition, the operation of the time
              limits specified in this condition will be suspended until that legal challenge
              has been finally determined.
    4) The use hereby permitted shall cease within 28 days of the date of failure to
       meet any one of the requirements set out in i) to iv) below:
          i)   Within 3 months of the date of this decision the following details
               (hereafter referred to as the Sound Insulation Scheme) shall have been
               submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority:
                  • The scheme shall provide details for the insulation of the building
                     to prevent excessive ingress and egress of noise between all
                     bedrooms and communal areas; and the attached property. The
                     scheme shall be informed by an acoustic assessment undertaken
                     by a suitably qualified acoustic consultant.
                  • A timetable for implementation.
          ii) If within 11 months of the date of this decision the local planning
               authority refuse to approve the Sound Insulation Scheme or fail to give a
               decision within the prescribed period, an appeal shall have been made
               to, and accepted as validly made by, the Secretary of State.
          iii) If an appeal is made in pursuance of ii) above, that appeal shall have
               been finally determined and the submitted site development scheme
               shall have been approved by the Secretary of State.
          iv) The approved Sound Insulation Scheme shall have been carried out
               and completed in accordance with the approved details and shall
               thereafter be retained.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   6
Appeal Decision 6013087


              In the event of a legal challenge to this decision, or to a decision made
              pursuant to the procedure set out in this condition, the operation of the time
              limits specified in this condition will be suspended until that legal challenge
              has been finally determined.
    5) The HMO hereby permitted shall not be occupied by more than 5 persons at any
       one time.
                                           End of Conditions




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      7
