Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 28 September 2026
by K Dryden BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 02 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6013769
Basement and Ground Floor, 56 St Giles’, Oxford OX1 3LU
   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
   The appeal is made by Regent’s Park College, Oxford against the decision of Oxford City Council.
   The application reference is 26/00282/FUL.
   The development proposed is change of use of basement and ground floor from use falling within
    Class E(a) of the Use Classes Order (as amended) to use for non-residential education (Use Class
    F1).

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. The evidence provided indicates that the appeal property, 56 St Giles’, is a Grade II
   listed building. I have a statutory duty under Section 66(1) of the Planning (Listed
   Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (the Act) to have special regard to the
   desirability of preserving listed buildings, their settings and any features of special
   architectural or historic interest that they possess. The significance and special
   interest of the building as a designated heritage asset is derived, in part, from its
   age, historic fabric and architectural interest. However, as no physical alterations
   are proposed, the development would preserve the listed building, its setting and its
   significance. Consequently, I find no conflict with the aforementioned statutory duty
   and no further consideration of this matter is required.
3. Furthermore, the appeal site lies within the Oxford Central (City and University)
   Conservation Area (CA). I am therefore vigilant of my duty imposed under Section
   72(1) of the Act to pay special attention to the desirability of preserving or
   enhancing the character or appearance of the CA. As no external alterations are
   proposed, my assessment will focus on whether the proposed change of use would
   preserve or enhance the character of the CA.
4. The parties have made reference to the Oxford Local Plan 2045 (the Emerging
   Plan). The evidence before me indicates that the emerging plan has not yet been
   adopted. Consequently, its policies, whilst material considerations, cannot at this
   stage be afforded full weight in decision making. I am therefore required to
   determine this appeal in accordance with the development plan, unless material
   considerations indicate otherwise, having regard to Section 38(6) of the Planning
   and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004. In this respect, the relevant saved policies of
   the Oxford Local Plan 2036 (2020) (OLP) form the principal basis for my decision.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6013769


Main Issue
5. The main issue is whether the proposal would be acceptable with regard to the loss
   of Use Class E1 floorspace at basement and ground floor level, having regard to
   the vitality of the city centre, and whether the proposed development would
   preserve or enhance the character of the CA.
Reasons
6. The appeal property comprises a prominent corner building located at the junction
   of St Giles’ and Pusey Street, with its principal elevation fronting St Giles’. At the
   time of my site visit, the ground floor and basement were occupied by a bookshop
   operating within Use Class E(a), with members of the public visiting the premises.
7. Whilst the appeal property is not located within a primary or secondary shopping
   frontage, and therefore OLP Policy V2 which relates to shopping frontages in the
   city centre is not directly relevant to the appeal, it lies within the defined city centre
   boundary. Policy V1 of the OLP seeks to support the vitality of defined centres and
   states that planning permission will be granted for town centre uses which are
   defined as retail, leisure, entertainment, office, arts, culture and tourism within the
   defined city, district and local centre boundaries.
8. Although the policy does not set out specific criteria relating to the loss of an
   existing town centre use, I note that the ground floor and basement of the appeal
   property are currently occupied by an active retail use falling within Use Class E(a).
   Moreover, no substantive evidence has been provided to demonstrate that the
   continued use of the premises for commercial purposes is unviable or otherwise
   problematic. I also note the representations from interested parties, which indicate
   that the bookshop serves as a valued local facility for nearby residents.
9. The appellant draws my attention to the economic and social benefits of the
   proposed educational use as a middle common room and submits that college
   events may be made available to the wider community. However, from the
   evidence before me, including the description of development, the proposal would
   comprise a Class F1(a) use for the provision of education. Moreover, the proposed
   educational use does not constitute a town centre use as defined in OLP Policy V1,
   nor would it constitute a main town centre use as defined in the glossary to the
   Framework.
10. Additionally, Policy TC2 of the Framework sets out that in considering proposals for
    development in town centres, substantial weight should be given to the benefits of
    supporting the overall vitality and viability of the centre, including where this can be
    achieved through the diversification of uses (provided this would not conflict with
    policies in the development plan for specific locations); and through improving or
    retaining access to local shops and other facilities which provide day-to-day
    services for the local community. Whilst I have had regard to the social and
    economic considerations identified by the appellant, the proposal would
    nevertheless result in the loss of an occupied retail use that contributes to the
    range of services available within the city centre. Consequently, I find that the
    proposal would reduce the range of facilities available to the wider community and


1
    The Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended).



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate               2
Appeal Decision 6013769


     would conflict with the Framework and development plan objective of supporting
     the vitality of the city centre.
11. Policy V1 further requires that the town centre use is appropriate to the scale and
    function of the centre and reflects its distinctive character. The appeal site is
    located within the CA, the significance of which is derived from its exceptionally rich
    historic environment, the architectural quality of its buildings, its historic street
    pattern and public spaces. The Oxford Central (City and University) Conservation
    Area Appraisal (CAP) identifies the appeal site as being within the College
    Architecture Character Zone and adjacent to Regent’s Park College, which is
    accessed from Pusey Street. The appeal property’s principal elevation fronts St
    Giles’, within the Principal Streets Character Zone. The CAP describes this area as
    comprising one of the historic routes into the city and forming part of its principal
    shopping streets. At my site visit, I noted that whilst the properties immediately to
    the north of the appeal site were not in commercial use, the appeal property forms
    part of a terrace fronting St Giles’ where commercial uses remain present at ground
    floor level. In this context, the active retail use of the appeal property contributes
    positively to the character of this part of the city centre and, consequently, to the
    significance of the CA.
12. Given the location of the appeal property fronting St Giles’, whilst no physical
    alterations to the building are proposed, the change of use of the ground floor from
    a retail use to an education use would represent a significant change to the
    character and function of the premises in this prominent location. This is of
    particular relevance given its position adjacent to an area identified within the CAP
    as one of the city’s historic shopping streets.
13. The Council has commented that the proposal would be acceptable in respect of its
    effect on designated heritage assets, and the appellant submits that the proposal
    would not cause harm to the visual amenity of the area and would have a neutral
    impact. The appellant also states that the large shopfront could be adapted to
    ensure that the building remains visually open to St Giles’, although such matters
    would be subject to any necessary future consents. However, these considerations
    do not alter my finding that the change of use of the ground floor from a commercial
    premises with an active ground floor frontage to a largely private, educational use
    would have a harmful effect on the character and significance of the CA.
14. I am also mindful that the CAP states under Theme 13, that the influence of the
    colleges on the character and appearance of the city has not been wholly positive.
    It notes that the recent expansion of student numbers has been accommodated in
    a variety of ways, including the use of shops adjoining university precincts, and that
    in some instances this has had an adverse effect on the character of the CA.
    Having regard to these considerations, I find that the proposed educational use of
    the ground floor would erode the retail character and vitality of the area. Given that
    St Giles’ is identified as an historic shopping route within the city, I find that the
    proposal would harm the character and significance of the CA.
15. Policy HE5 of the Framework requires proposals affecting heritage assets to be
    accompanied by an assessment of the significance of the assets affected and the
    likely effect of the development upon that significance. In this regard, it is the
    impact on significance, rather than the scale of development itself, that is of primary
    importance. Whilst Policy HE9 of the Framework recognises that not all elements of
    a conservation area necessarily contribute to its significance, the proposal would

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6013769


     detract from the character of the area, eroding the contribution made by the
     commercial use of the premises to the significance of the CA.
16. Under the terms of the Framework, the proposal would result in a low level of harm
    to the significance of the heritage asset. It is noteworthy that even a low level of
    harm to the significance of a designated heritage asset carries considerable
    importance and weight. Policy HE6 of the Framework establishes that when
    considering the potential effect of a development proposal on the significance of a
    designated heritage asset, substantial weight should be given to its conservation.
    Where a development proposal would harm the significance of a designated
    heritage asset, the effect on the asset and its significance should be weighed
    against any public benefits resulting from the proposal.
17. I have had regard to the public benefits identified by the appellant, including the
    economic and social benefits arising from the academic and educational sector,
    particularly the University of Oxford, to the city and the wider UK economy. I also
    acknowledge that the provision of a middle common room for graduate students at
    the adjoining college would provide additional facilities that would support the
    academic experience and personal well-being of the college community.
    Furthermore, I note that the appeal property occupies a prominent location that
    may be of benefit for visiting academics.
18. These benefits are not disputed. However, I have not been provided with evidence
    that quantifies the economic benefits that would arise specifically from the proposal
    before me. Whilst the appellant states that the existing middle common room is
    unsuitable and inaccessible to those with mobility and other access requirements,
    and that limited suitable floorspace exists within the wider college estate, I have not
    been provided with substantive evidence demonstrating that alternative options
    have been fully explored or that the proposal represents the only reasonable
    solution. Nor have I been provided with sufficient evidence to explain why the
    existing facilities could not be adapted to meet identified needs.
19. Moreover, whilst the appellant suggests that the premises may also be used for
    conferences, meetings or cultural events, involving not only students from St
    Regent’s Park College but also the wider community, limited detail has been
    provided in this regard. I note that the description of development relates to an
    educational use and does not include the provision of a community facility as
    defined within the glossary to the Framework. It is therefore my judgment that the
    scheme’s public benefits, when considered in cumulative terms, attract moderate
    weight that would not outweigh the considerable importance and weight I ascribe to
    the harm. The proposal therefore conflicts with the Framework in so far as it seeks
    to ensure that heritage assets are conserved in a manner appropriate to their
    significance.
20. For the above reasons, I therefore conclude that the loss of Use Class E floorspace
    at basement and ground floor level would have a harmful effect on the vitality of the
    city centre and would fail to preserve or enhance the character of the CA. This is
    contrary to the expectations of the Act and OLP Policy DH3 which requires
    development to respond positively to the significance, character and distinctiveness
    of the heritage asset. I also find conflict with Policy V1 of the OLP which supports
    defined town centre uses within the city, district and local centre boundaries,
    reflecting its distinctive character.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
Appeal Decision 6013769


Other Matters
21. There is disagreement between the parties regarding the accessibility of the
    basement area for those with mobility issues and the level of natural light it
    receives. However, I note that any internal physical alterations would require
    assessment through an application for listed building consent. Nevertheless, as I
    am dismissing the appeal for other reasons, this matter is not determinative of my
    decision and would be a matter to be addressed between the parties in the event of
    any future application.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
22. Policy S3 of the Framework states that decisions on development proposals should
    apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development. The development would
    be located within a settlement, where Policy S4 indicates that development should
    be approved, unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by
    any adverse effects, when assessed against the Framework’s national decision-
    making policies.
23. The development would provide additional educational floorspace for an adjoining
    college. This would result in both social and economic benefits. Notwithstanding the
    importance and weight placed on the delivery of educational uses, the proposal
    would result in harm to the vitality of the centre and to the character and
    significance of the designated heritage asset (CA). This harm is of considerable
    importance and weight and is not outweighed by public benefits.
24. Taking these points together, the benefits of granting planning permission would be
    substantially outweighed by adverse effects, when assessed against the
    Framework’s decision-making policies. Consequently, the proposal conflicts with
    the development plan and there are no material considerations of sufficient weight
    to indicate otherwise. Therefore, I conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.




K Dryden
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   5
