 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 17 August 2026
 by SJ Desai BSc MSc MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 1 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6013483
 136 Uxbridge Road, Hampton Hill, Richmond Upon Thames TW12 1BG
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Axelrod against the decision of the Council of the London Borough
      of Richmond Upon Thames.
 •    The application Ref is PA26/0605.
 •    The development proposed is replacement of an existing single storey attached double garage with a
      two-storey side extension with loft conversion.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on 17
   August 2026. However, I am satisfied that the policy approach relevant to this
   appeal has not fundamentally changed and that no party has been prejudiced by its
   publication. Accordingly, I have had regard to the current version of the Framework
   in reaching my decision.
Main Issue
3. The main issue is the effect of the proposed development upon the character and
   appearance of the host dwelling and the surrounding area.
Reasons
4. The appeal property is a two-storey semi-detached dwelling on the north-eastern
   side of Uxbridge Road. It forms the end property within a short group of broadly
   similar post-war dwellings comprising Nos.130-136 Uxbridge Road. The property
   has an existing single-storey double garage to its side and benefits from a relatively
   generous gap to neighbouring development to the north.
5. There is considerable variety in the age, scale and architectural form of
   development within the wider surroundings. Nevertheless, Nos.130-136 have a
   discernible relationship through their broadly similar form, siting and proportions.
   Although the appeal dwelling and 134 Uxbridge Road (No.134) comprise a semi-
   detached pair, they are not experienced solely or principally as an isolated
   symmetrical composition. Rather, the stronger visual relationship is with the wider
   group. That group has also been altered over time, including through two-storey
   side additions at No.132 and No.134. Consequently, strict symmetry or uniformity is
   not a defining characteristic of this part of the street scene.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6013483


6. The proposal would demolish the existing single-storey double garage and replace
   it with a two-storey side extension. At ground-floor level, the extension would
   broadly follow the existing garage footprint and would continue to project forward of
   the main dwelling. At first-floor level, its front elevation would be broadly flush with
   that of the original dwelling. However, the roof of the extension would be set below
   the main roof ridge.
7. The Council's House Extensions and External Alterations Supplementary Planning
   Document 2015 (the SPD) advises that side extensions should not dominate the
   original scale and character of a dwelling and provides guidance concerning widths
   and setbacks. The proposal would depart from aspects of that guidance. However,
   the SPD is guidance and the proposal must be assessed having regard to the
   particular characteristics of the site and its effects on the host dwelling and
   surrounding area.
8. In this case, the appeal dwelling occupies the end of the group and benefits from
   generous space to its side. A substantial gap would remain to neighbouring
   development to the north, such that there would be no unacceptable terracing
   effect. Although the extension would substantially increase the width of the
   dwelling, I do not consider that it would overwhelm its original form. The existing
   garage already gives the property a broad ground-floor footprint, while the
   generous side spacing provides capacity to accommodate the additional first-floor
   mass. The lower ridge would maintain an appropriate hierarchy between the main
   dwelling and the extension.
9. Nor would the extension result in an unacceptable imbalance in the street scene.
   While it would be larger than the side additions at Nos. 132 and 134, that difference
   would be seen in the context of the appeal property's end position, greater side
   spacing and the existing extensions to the group. In those circumstances, it would
   not appear incongruous. A substantial street tree and other established vegetation
   would also further reduce the visual impact of this part of the proposal.
10. I therefore find that, notwithstanding its departure from some of the dimensional
    guidance in the SPD, the two-storey side extension would not cause unacceptable
    harm to the character and appearance of the host dwelling and surrounding area.
11. The proposal would also introduce substantial rear roof extensions across the roof
    of the original dwelling and the proposed side extension. Their scale would be
    appreciably greater than the existing rear dormer at No. 134. The SPD advises that
    roof extensions should not dominate the original roof, that a significant area of the
    existing roof should normally remain visible beneath and to either side of a dormer,
    and that two smaller dormers may be more successful than one large dormer.
12. The appellant describes the proposal as two separate dormers. However,
    irrespective of whether they are regarded individually or collectively, I find that the
    relationship between them would appear awkward and visually dominant. Their
    differing scale and proportions, combined with their close proximity, would result in
    competing forms of development across the roof slope. Rather than appearing as
    discrete and subordinate additions, they would together create a substantial
    expanse of built form at roof level, detracting from the form and proportions of the
    dwelling.
13. Although views from the public realm would be limited, the rear roofscape
    nevertheless forms part of the character and appearance of the dwelling and its

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision 6013483


     immediate surroundings and would be readily perceptible from adjoining gardens
     and neighbouring properties. The limited public visibility of the roof extensions does
     not therefore negate the harm I have identified.
14. I have considered the examples of dormer additions within the wider area. These
    demonstrate that roof extensions are an established feature locally. However, the
    evidence does not demonstrate that they are directly comparable to the particular
    scale, form and relationship of the roof extensions before me. Their existence
    therefore does not alter my assessment of the specific design and effects of this
    proposal.
15. The appellant also refers to the ability to construct a dormer on the roof of the
    existing dwelling under permitted development rights. However, any such dormer
    would be confined to the existing dwelling, whereas the proposal before me would
    introduce substantially more extensive roof development across both the original
    dwelling and the proposed side extension. The fallback would therefore have a
    materially lesser effect on the scale and composition of the rear roofscape.
    Consequently, this potential fallback option does not overcome the harm I have
    identified.
16. I recognise that the SPD is guidance and should not be applied rigidly. However, in
    respect of the proposed roof extensions, I have seen no convincing evidence of
    site-specific circumstances or other material considerations that would justify
    departing from its relevant design guidance. The appeal decision and other
    examples referred to by the appellant therefore do not alter my findings in this
    respect.
17. While I have found no unacceptable impact in respect of the two-storey side
    extension element of the proposal, I conclude that the proposed roof extensions
    would cause unacceptable harm to the character and appearance of the host
    dwelling and surrounding area. The proposal would therefore conflict with Policy 28
    of the Richmond upon Thames Local Plan ‘The best for our borough’ 2024-2039
    (2025), which, amongst other things, requires development to be of high design
    quality and compatible with local character, including in respect of its proportions
    and form. It would also conflict with the relevant design guidance of the SPD, which
    seeks to ensure that development responds positively to the character of existing
    buildings and their surroundings.
Other Matters
18. I acknowledge that the proposal would provide additional accommodation and
    make more effective use of the existing property. These benefits attract limited
    weight and would not outweigh the harm I have identified.
19. A neighbouring occupier has raised concerns regarding the potential effect on a
    tree within the front of the site. The Council's Arboricultural Officer considered that
    any effects could be appropriately managed through an Arboricultural Method
    Statement. Had the proposal otherwise been acceptable, this could have been
    secured by condition. I have no substantive evidence to reach a different
    conclusion.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
 Appeal Decision 6013483


Conclusion
20. For the reasons given above, the development conflicts with the development plan
    and there are no material considerations of sufficient weight to indicate that the
    proposed development should be determined otherwise than in accordance with
    the development plan. The appeal should therefore be dismissed.

SJ Desai
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      4
