Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 11 September 2026
by R C Shrimplin MA(Cantab) DipArch RIBA FRTPI FCIArb MCIL
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30 September 2026


Appeal Reference: 6013846
73 Mulberry Crescent, Hillingdon, West Drayton UB7 9AQ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
• The appeal is made by Mr. J. Singh against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
    Hillingdon.
• The application reference is 29405/APP/2026/636.
The development proposed is described in the application form as follows: “Erection of single storey rear
extension, following the demolition of conservatory to dwellinghouse”.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for “Erection of single
   storey rear extension, following the demolition of conservatory to dwellinghouse”, at
   73 Mulberry Crescent, Hillingdon, West Drayton UB7 9AQ, in accordance with the
   terms of the application (reference 29405/APP/2026/636), subject to the conditions
   set out in the attached Schedule of Conditions.
Preliminary points
2. The ‘National Planning Policy Framework’ was revised in August 2026 but, in this
   instance, the issues most relevant to the appeal remain unaffected by the revisions
   that have been made to it. I am therefore satisfied that there is no requirement to
   seek further submissions on the revised Framework, and that no party would be
   disadvantaged by such a course of action. In this appeal, I have had regard to the
   most recent version, of course.
Main issues
3. The first main issue to be determined in this appeal is the effect of the proposed
   development on the residential amenities of neighbours (whether unacceptable
   harm would be caused by loss of light and outlook). The second is the effect of the
   proposed development on the character and appearance of the host building and
   its surroundings.
Reasons
4. The appeal site is located in an extensive residential development in West Drayton,
   with roads laid out in a meandering pattern and an estate layout that makes use of
   wide grassy verges and open spaces, including some trees, to create a pleasant
   suburban townscape.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision: 6013846


5. Number 73 Mulberry Crescent is set back from the road behind an area of open
   space, as one of a terrace of two-storey houses. Being located at the eastern end
   of the terrace, it is aligned with its attached neighbour at number 71 but is set
   behind number 75. The house has previously been extended by the addition of a
   conservatory at the rear, but this has recently been demolished in connection with
   an alternative extension scheme. The appeal site has a longer back garden than
   other properties in the area.
6. It is now proposed to erect a single storey extension across the rear elevation of
   the dwellinghouse, following the demolition of the conservatory.
7. The adopted Development Plan includes ‘The London Plan’ (dated 2021). Policies
   in ‘The London Plan’ stress the importance of good design in the urban
   environment, notably Policies D3 and D6, which focus on good design, including
   protecting neighbours’ amenities.
8. In the ‘London Borough Of Hillingdon Local Plan Part 2 Development Management
   Policies’ (dated 16 January 2020), Policy DMHD 11 again emphasises the
   importance of good design and the need to protect residential amenities, while
   Policy DMHD 12 focusses on the public realm, including the need to respect
   established townscape character. Policy DMHD 1 specifically applies similar
   considerations to proposed “Alterations and Extensions to Residential Dwellings”.
9. This approach in the Development Plan also reflects provisions in the revised
   version of the ‘National Planning Policy Framework’ which, like its predecessor,
   aims at “achieving well-designed places”.
10. The proposed extension would be set apart from the neighbouring property at
    number 75, on account of the existing separation between the buildings. It would,
    however, be built up to the boundary with number 71, the adjoining property in the
    residential terrace. There is an existing conservatory at the rear of the house at
    number 71, also built up to the mutual boundary.
11. The proposed extension at number 73 would be constructed alongside the
    neighbouring conservatory and would project further into the rear garden (by about
    two metres). Even so, the conservatory would retain its relationship with its own
    garden and would receive adequate daylight for its future use. The projection of
    the new extension at number 73 would not be so significant as to cause undue
    overshadowing or an unacceptable impact on the neighbours’ outlook.
12. Moreover, the single-storey extension would be subordinate to the existing house
    and would have no material impact on the streetscene (being located at the rear of
    the existing two-storey house). Thus, it would not cause undue harm to the
    character or appearance of either the host building or its wider surroundings.
13. The appeal scheme would amount to a modest extension to the existing dwelling,
    but it would provide useful additional space and would, thereby, improve the stock
    of residential accommodation in the locality, albeit in a very limited way. I have
    concluded that the project would not cause unacceptable loss of light or outlook for
    the immediate neighbours, nor would it cause unacceptable harm to the character
    and appearance of the surroundings. Thus, it would not be in conflict with the
    Development Plan as a whole, or with national planning policy, and it is acceptable
    in planning terms.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      2
Appeal Decision: 6013846


14. In short, I am persuaded that the scheme before me can properly be permitted and,
    although I have considered all the matters that have been raised in the
    representations, I have found nothing to cause me to alter my decision.
15. I have, however, formed the opinion that conditions are necessary, to define the
    planning permission and to ensure that quality is maintained.



Roger C. Shrimplin
INSPECTOR




                                  SCHEDULE OF CONDITIONS


    1)    The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
    date of this decision.
     2)     The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
     the following approved drawings:
            drawing number 01/06 (Location and Block Plans);
            drawing number 02/06 (Existing Elevations and Ground Floor Plan);
            drawing number 03/06 (Proposed Elevations and Ground Floor Plan).
     3)    The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
     development hereby permitted shall match those used in the existing building.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
