 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 21 September 2026
 by J D Westbrook BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date:01 October 2026


 Appeal A Ref: 6013035
 50 Newark Crescent, Ealing, NW10 7BA
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Daniel Collison (Connect Construction and Maintenance Limited) against the
      decision of the Old Oak and Park Royal Development Corporation.
 •    The application Ref is 25/0223/FULOPDC.
 •    The development proposed is a Change of Use from Class C3 (dwellinghouse) to Class C4 (House
      in Multiple Occupation).

 Appeal B Ref: 6013036
 60 Newark Crescent, Ealing, NW10 7BA
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Daniel Collison (Connect Construction and Maintenance Limited) against the
     decision of the Old Oak and Park Royal Development Corporation.
 •   The application Ref is 25/0224/FULOPDC.
 •   The development proposed is a Change of Use from Class C3 (dwellinghouse) to Class C4 (House in
     Multiple Occupation).




Decisions
1. Appeal A is dismissed.
2. Appeal B is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
3. The changes of use in both of these cases have already taken place and the
   proposals are, therefore, of a retrospective nature.
4. The appellants have indicated that whilst separate appeals have been submitted,
   they have produced a single appeal statement to address them together because
   they concern materially similar proposals at properties within the same terrace,
   involving the same appellant, and raising the same principal issues of planning
   judgment. For the same reason, I have produced a single decision letter covering
   both appeals, and have referred individually to one or other of the two proposals
   only where necessary because of differences in circumstances.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6013035 & 6013036


Main Issues
5. The main issues are the effects of the proposed change of use on:
    •   the housing market and housing provision in the area covered by the Old Oak
        and Park Royal Development Corporation (OPDC), and
    •   the living conditions of the occupiers of nearby housing in the Newark Crescent
        area, by way of noise and disturbance.
Reasons
6. The appeal properties are both mid-terraced houses, situated on the southern side
   of Newark Crescent. Newark Crescent forms part of the Wesley Avenue estate,
   lying to the west of North Acton Road and located some 500 metres south west of
   Harlesden Station. The estate includes Wesley Avenue, Harold Road and Newark
   Crescent, all of which comprise terraced houses of largely similar design.
7. Both of the appeal properties have been converted from houses into HMOs with
   6 persons in each. It would appear that both were converted at a similar time and
   both now have 3 rooms on the ground floor, 2 rooms on the first floor, along with a
   communal kitchen/diner, and a larger attic room. All rooms include an en-suite and
   a kitchenette area. There is a garden area at the front of each property and another
   garden at the back. In each property, direct access to the rear garden is only
   possible through the two private rooms at the back of the house. From the
   information available to me, it would appear that No 50 has had its loft converted by
   the appellants in order to create the attic room, while No 60 already had a loft
   conversion, but has had a new single-storey extension at the rear of the property in
   order to create two rooms as part of the change of use. The layouts in both houses
   are now nearly identical.
The housing market and housing provision
8. The OPDC contends that, in each case, the change of use is unacceptable in
   principle as the HMO development will give rise to the loss of a family-sized home
   and would increase the number of HMOs in a location which already has a higher
   than average proportion of such properties. The proposal therefore fails to
   contribute to the delivery of a mixed and inclusive neighbourhood.
9. The Wesley Avenue estate, along with 4 other residential areas in the OPDC area,
   is an Article 4 Direction Area. The 5 areas were designated as such in November
   2023 and the effect is to remove Permitted Development (PD) rights for changes of
   use from Use Class C3 (house) to Use Class C4 (HMO). The Direction was made
   following a study of housing provision in the Development Corporation area, which
   found that there are pockets of well-established existing residential neighbourhoods
   within the OPDC boundary, including the Wesley Estate, and that it is these areas
   in particular where there is the risk that standard residential dwellings suitable for
   families will be lost to HMO accommodation.
10. The appellants contend that there is no clear indication of what might constitute an
    over-concentration of HMOs in any area, and I acknowledge that contention.
    However, local planning policies, including Policy H10 of the London Plan and
    Policy H3 of the OPDC Local Plan (LP), stress the need for additional family
    housing. In addition, the ODPC Annual Monitoring Report for 2024/2025 indicates


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
 Appeal Decision 6013035 & 6013036


     that the level of provision of new family housing units is below OPDC’s 25% family
     housing target.
11. I acknowledge that there is also a need for HMO provision across Greater London,
    and that development plan policies such as Policy H9 of the London Plan, and
    Policy H7 of the LP refer to protection of existing stock. However, there are no
    specific policies relating to conversion of existing housing to new HMOs, and I
    consider that the loss of units of existing family housing in a local situation where
    provision of new units is currently below target and in neighbourhoods where there
    is already an above average level of HMO provision, is generally undesirable.
    Moreover, it would appear that the level of HMOs in the area may, in fact, be under-
    estimated by reason of imprecise definitions and recording of different types of
    occupancy in various statistical documents.
12. The appellants also note that the existence of an Article 4 Direction which revokes
    PD rights for change of use from Class C3 to Class C4 does not necessarily mean
    that all such changes of use should therefore be refused. That is so, but I have
    taken into account the circumstances of the location in these cases. The Wesley
    Estate is situated within a large concentrated employment area, where it might be
    expected that there would be a strong demand from families for accommodation
    close to employment opportunities. There are already a number of HMOs within the
    estate and, whilst I have considered each of these cases on its own merits, I am
    aware that there are two similar proposals before me at properties in close
    proximity within the same terrace, involving the same appellant, and raising the
    same main issues. In such circumstances, I consider that the loss of two family-
    sized houses in such close proximity on the same street would be harmful to the
    housing mix within the estate.
Living conditions
13. The OPDC contends, in each case, that the change of use to a six-bedroom HMO
    will result in a development that materially harms the living conditions of local
    residents of the Wesley Estate with regard to noise, intensity of use and anti-social
    behaviour. Policy D5 of the LP indicates that new development should not cause
    unacceptable harm to the amenity of existing uses.
14. The appellants make note that there have been no reported incidents of harm to
    amenity or of anti-social behaviour from the HMOs since occupation. However, I
    have no information as to when the HMOs were first occupied and so this period
    may be relatively short.
15. While noise and anti-social behaviour are not guaranteed results of use of a
    property as an HMO, there is evidence of increased likelihood of such issues from
    Metropolitan Police data produced in 2021/2022, which indicates that there is a
    concentration of call-outs in and around those areas where there has subsequently
    been establishment of an Article 4 Direction, including the Wesley Estate. I have no
    reason to suppose that issues of noise or anti-social behaviour would necessarily
    be associated with the appeal properties, but the combination of 2 HMOs within a
    few metres of each other would be likely to significantly increase this possibility,
    and would certainly result in a concentrated and increased intensity of use, with
    associated potential for disturbance to the amenity of nearby residents.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
 Appeal Decision 6013035 & 6013036


Other Matters
Quality of accommodation
16. The OPDC does not contend that the quality of the accommodation provided in the
    HMOs is unsatisfactory and, from my site visit, I have no reason to suppose that
    the properties have been poorly converted or that they are not currently well
    managed. I also note that the appellants have produced a professional reference
    from the City of Westminster Council, who provide clients for HMO provision,
    expressing satisfaction with their partnership alongside Connect Property Lettings
    and Management Ltd, which I take to be a related company to that of the
    Appellants. However, I have no details as to whether the City of Westminster have
    provided, or have any responsibility for, the current occupiers, who may or may not
    be from within the local population of the OPDC area, neither have I had sight of
    any management plan specifically covering the two appeal properties.
17. While the properties appear to have been converted to a generally high standard,
    reference by the appellants to having met relevant space standards are somewhat
    confusing, since the London Borough of Ealing Standards (2025), which apparently
    apply in these cases, refer to space for bedrooms with kitchen facilities, but
    inclusion of an en-suite is not expressly dealt with. In addition, reference to the
    Government’s ‘Technical housing standards – nationally described space standard’
    would not appear to apply in the circumstances of an HMO.
18. In this matter, therefore, and given that I have no evidence that the properties have
    yet been given a licence by the Licensing authority, I have not taken the issue of
    quality of the provision of accommodation as a relevant issue in these cases.
Inaccurate information
19. The appellants contend that inaccurate information was given to them when
    undertaking procedural searches of the properties and when checking on the
    existence of Article 4 Directions. It would appear that inaccurate information was, in
    fact, given by the London Borough of Ealing with regard to the existence of the
    Article 4 Direction covering the Wesley Estate, and the appellants state that this
    should have been a material consideration when considering the applications.
20. In considering the timeline of events in the purchase, conversion and letting of the
    properties, there are a number of anomalies. The Article 4 Direction was
    established in November 2023 and the Appellants state that the properties were
    purchased in early 2024. The appellants claim that searches were carried out under
    due diligence ‘prior to and in connection with their acquisition and occupation’.
    However, from information supplied by the appellants, it would appear that the
    dates of the Official Certificates of Search are not until February and April 2025.
    The Replies to Standard Enquiries of Local Authority have the same dates and
    were sent by the London Borough of Ealing (LBE), which is not the Local Planning
    Authority for Newark Crescent. The replies from LBE make it clear, in Section 1.2,
    relating to planning designations and proposals. that the property is “in the area
    covered by the Old Oak and Park Royal Development Corporation” and the website
    address for the ODPC was supplied.
21. A subsequent check specifically regarding the existence or otherwise of an Article 4
    Direction relating to the appeal properties was sent to LBE in October 2025,
    although LBE was not the appropriate authority, and this would have been known

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       4
 Appeal Decision 6013035 & 6013036


     by the appellants since February 2025, following the earlier correspondence
     referred to above. It is regrettable that incorrect information was received, but I note
     that a more detailed and accurate response was supplied by the OPDC later that
     month, by which time, apparently, the HMO was already in unauthorised use.
22. Under the circumstances, and given the timeline and the information before me, I
    do not consider in this case that the incorrect information given by LBE represents
    a material consideration that should have been taken into account by the OPDC
    when considering the appellants’ planning applications.
Outdated policies and data
23. The appellants contend that information that informed the OPDC decisions were
    based upon outdated policies and data. I acknowledge that some of the information
    used by the OPDC in formulating its policy on Housing dates back to the 2011
    Census. However, there have been a number of other reports produced with more
    varied and up-to-date information, including a Strategic Housing Market
    Assessment, an Evidence Study relating to HMOs and Article 4 Directions, and an
    Authority Monitoring Report (2024-2025), all of which maintain the need to protect
    Family-type housing and prevent loss of such housing to HMO conversions.
Retention of housing stock
24. Finally, the appellants contend that the conversion of the properties into HMOs
    would not reduce the housing stock, since they could be converted back to family
    housing in the future. However, the degree of change that has taken place, with the
    addition of 6 kitchenettes, 6 en-suites and a separate kitchen diner, would render
    conversion back to a single family house extremely difficult, expensive and
    potentially non-viable. I do not consider this to be a valid or practical position.
Conclusion
25. In conclusion on both appeals, I find that the conversion of the appeal properties
    from C3 housing to C4 HMOs would result in adverse effects on the housing mix
    within the OPDC area and would be harmful to the overall housing market and
    housing provision. On this basis, it would conflict with Policy H3 of the LP.
26. With regard to living conditions, I find that the conversions would be harmful to the
    amenity of the local residents of the Wesley Estate by way of likely noise and
    disturbance due to intensification of usage, particularly given the proximity of the
    two HMOs to one another along the same section of street. On this basis, it would
    conflict with Policy D5 of the LP.
27. I have considered each case on its own merits and also the likely impact of a
    combination of two conversions in close proximity. I dismiss both appeals.



J D Westbrook
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         5
