 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 2 September 2026
 by J Evans BA(Hons) AssocRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 10 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6013211
 Pipers Hill, Highcliffe Crescent, Seaton, Devon EX12 2PS
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Gibbins against the decision of East Devon District Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/0636/FUL.
 •    The development proposed is described as proposed loft conversion including raised ridge, dormer
      window, cladding and alterations to fenestration.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. I have used the description of the development from the appeal form and the
   decision notice as I consider this better reflects the proposal before me.
3. During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
   (the Framework) was published in August 2026. Both the Council and the
   Appellants were invited to submit comments, if appropriate, to the changes which
   form part of the revised Framework which have relevance to the appeal.
Main Issue
4. The main issue is the effects of the appeal proposal on the character and
   appearance of the area.
Reasons
5. Highcliffe Crescent is located to the northern side of the B3172 which rises up from
   the centre of Seaton heading out towards Beer. The general characteristics of the
   immediate area are of the C20 expansion of the settlement, albeit there are also
   some exceptions to such along the B3172.
6. Highcliffe Crescent consists mostly of spacious two storey detached dwellings.
   Whilst there are individual differences in the design and detail from plot to plot,
   there is nonetheless a broad consistency in the characteristics of the properties on
   the Crescent.
7. Pipers Hill, the appeal property, is a two-storey detached dwelling currently with a
   part hipped roofed design. The proposal, amongst other matters, would replace the
   hip ends with gable elevations, raise the ridgeline and provide for a single dormer
   window to the rear.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6013211


8. During my site visit, I observed that several surrounding properties already have
   gabled ends. They also sit on a sloping topography, so ridgelines naturally vary in
   height and create a staggered roofscape. It therefore seems to me that in this
   context, adapting the roof to a gabled form, with a modest increase in the ridgeline
   would not appear unduly out of place with the surrounding properties. With that
   said, I do have some concerns with the proposed use of materials, such as the use
   of cedral cladding to the new gabled sections, it seems to me that a rendered finish,
   or similar, following the finish and appearance of what exists already on the
   property would be more appropriate. This is a matter that could have potentially
   been addressed through a planning condition, if I had been minded to allow the
   appeal.
9. However, the proposed rear dormer window, due to its overall size which would
   take up the majority of the roof slope, would appear as a bulky and dominant
   feature that would be at odds with the rooflines of the surrounding built form to
   Pipers Hill. This element of the proposal would be in part visible from the street
   scene and would be openly viewed from a number of vantage points to the north,
   such as along West Acres, whereby the rear elevations of some of the properties
   along Highcliffe Crescent, including Pipers Hill, are prominent on the skyline. From
   such locations, the dormer window would appear incongruous and would unduly
   draw the eye as a result.
10. I appreciate there are other dormer windows in the area some of which have been
    highlighted to me by the appellants. But none of these are perceived in the same
    context as Pipers Hill, and they relate to properties of a differing style and overall
    appearance and are not as visually prominent as the dormer proposed would be.
    Therefore, these other examples do not lead me to reach a different conclusion on
    the proposal before me.
11. Consequently, for the reasons I have set out above, the proposed development
    would appear incongruous and would detract from the character and appearance of
    Pipers Hill and the surrounding area. It would therefore conflict with Policy D1
    (Design and Local Distinctiveness) of the East Devon Local Plan 2013-2031 and
    Sections 12 and 14 of the Framework, which amongst other matters, whilst seeking
    to make effective use of land require that proposals: respect the key characteristics
    and special qualities of the area in which the development is proposed; relate well
    to the scale, massing, density, height, fenestration and materials of buildings in
    their context; respect local distinctiveness; and are visually attractive as a result of
    good architecture.
Other matters
12. An objection was received from a neighbouring occupier regarding the potential for
    overlooking of their property from the proposed rear dormer window. However, due
    to the separation distances and topographical relationships involved I am satisfied
    that the proposal would not lead to any significant adverse effects upon the living
    conditions of occupiers of nearby residential properties.
13. The appellants have also raised concerns about a suggested inconsistency of
    views of differing planning officers involved in planning decisions relating to the
    appeal property. However, procedural matters relating to how the application was
    determined are not matters for me to consider through my appeal decision.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        2
 Appeal Decision 6013211


Conclusions
14. The appeal proposal would have a detrimental effect on the character and
    appearance of Pipers Hill and the wider area.
15. As a result of these negative effects, the proposal is in my view unacceptable, and
    contrary to the development plan, when read as a whole. There are no material
    considerations that would justify a decision contrary to the provisions of the
    development plan, in this case.
16. For all of the above reasons, having regard to all matters raised, I conclude that the
    appeal should be dismissed.

J Evans
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
