 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 10 September 2026
 by Jonathan Price BA(Hons) DipTP DMS MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 16 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6013583
 57 Vale View Road, Sproughton, Ipswich IP8 3FS
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Mark Hedges-Quinn against the decision of Babergh District Council.
 •    The application Ref is DC/26/00967.
 •    The development proposed is two-storey extension to the rear of the property.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a two-storey
   extension to the rear of the property at 57 Vale View Road, Sproughton, Ipswich
   IP8 3FS, in accordance with the terms of the application DC/26/00967 and subject
   to the following conditions:
     1) The development hereby permitted shall begin no later than three years from
        the date of this decision.
     2) The development hereby permitted shall accord with the following drawings:
        plans - proposed 26100-110 P1, plans - existing 26100-100 P1, proposed site
        plan 26100-011 P1, existing site plan 26100-010 P1.
     3) Prior to development proceeding above slab level, a scheme of biodiversity
        enhancement measures shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the
        local planning authority. These measures shall include the following: a) detailed
        designs and/or product descriptions for biodiversity enhancements; and b)
        locations, orientations and heights for biodiversity enhancements on
        appropriate drawings. The approved measures shall be implemented as
        approved prior to occupation of the extension hereby approved and thereafter
        retained.
Preliminary Matter
2. The Government published the revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) on 17 August 2026, after this appeal was made. Although this makes
   substantial amendments, its policies over achieving well-designed places remain
   generally consistent with those of the previous version. With regard to the issues in
   this appeal, it has not been found necessary to seek the further views of parties
   over this recently published Framework.
Main Issues
3. The effects of the proposal on:


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6013583


    •   the character and appearance of the area and
    •   the living conditions of neighbouring occupiers, with particular regard to outlook.
Reasons
Character and appearance
4. Number 57 is part of a newly-built estate of houses. The density of development
   here is relatively high, with the dwellings fronting closely onto the public footway
   and having quite small back gardens. Occupying a corner plot, No 57 fronts closely
   at two storeys onto both Vale View Road and its service access. The two-storey
   extension would be of no greater height than the existing house and, being
   enclosed behind an existing L-shaped plan, inconspicuous in either of the frontage
   street scenes.
5. The outcome would be a larger house, with an additional bedroom but smaller back
   garden. The Council’s refusal relates to this amounting to harmful over-
   development. However, its development plan policies do not prescribe maximum
   plot occupancy ratios, minimum garden sizes or any other specific criteria to assess
   this scheme against. Although the house would become larger and be left with a
   smaller back garden, this outside space would remain of a useable size. Any harm
   to the overall character and appearance of the area through alleged over-
   development would not manifest itself visually to any material degree, given the
   discreet position of the extension behind the existing front façades.
6. For these reasons, the proposal would not cause any material harm to the
   character and appearance of this area of newly-built housing. The scheme provides
   the high-quality of design necessary to respond to and safeguard its existing
   context, through being compatible with its location and appropriate in terms of
   scale, mass, form, siting, design and materials. It therefore complies with policies
   LP24 and LP03 of the Babergh and Mid Suffolk Joint Local Plan Part 1 (LP) in
   respect of the design of residential extensions. By the same token, the proposal
   satisfies the design considerations set out in Policy SPTN15 of the Sproughton
   Neighbourhood Plan.
Living conditions
7. In respect of the proposal’s effects on the occupational living conditions at the two
   neighbouring houses, the Council’s concern relates only to the matter of outlook.
   The next door houses have blank gables abutting the plot containing No 57, so
   would not readily view the extension from internal rooms. Set against the existing
   rear elevations of the house, with matching materials and a roof hipping down from
   the highest ridge point, the extension would not appear visually intrusive from either
   these adjacent neighbours’ back gardens, where it would be seen above and
   beyond an intervening detached garage. By no stretch of the imagination can this
   proposal be considered to have an unacceptably overbearing impact on the outlook
   from either of these neighbouring dwellings as to be of any material harm to
   present living conditions. Consequently, the scheme satisfies LP Policy LP03, as it
   would not unacceptably affect the amenities of neighbouring occupiers.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate     2
 Appeal Decision 6013583


Conclusion
8. Conditions are necessary which impose the standard three-year time period for
   commencement and, in the interests of certainty, establish the approved drawings.
   The recently revised Framework introduces national decision-making policy N2
   over improving the natural environment. Amongst other requirements to contribute
   positively in this regard, and support nature’s recovery, development proposals
   should include features which support priority or threatened species. Incorporating
   a swift brick in the construction would seem the most appropriate feature in this
   case. A condition requiring this or alternative measures, which the appellant is
   amenable to, would be reasonably necessary to both satisfy Framework policy N2
   and gain the support of LP policies SP09 and LP16.
9. Subject to these three conditions, the proposal would comply with the development
   plan as a whole, as well as the revised Framework. I therefore conclude the appeal
   succeeds.

Jonathan Price
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
