 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 01 September 2026
 by Nicola Davies BA DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 14 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6013427
 Roscrea, Vicarage Lane, Egham, SURREY TW20 8NW
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Marc Roberts against the decision of Runnymede Borough Council.
 •   The application Ref is RU.26/0240.
 •   The development proposed is a first floor side extension.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a first floor side
   extension at Roscrea, Vicarage Lane, Egham, Surrey TW20 8NW in accordance
   with the terms of the application, Ref RU.26/0240, subject to the following
   conditions: -
     a)      The development hereby permitted shall begin no later than three years from
             the date of this decision.

     b)      The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
             the following approved plan: AD5102 Sheet 2 (proposed).

     c)      The development hereby permitted shall be constructed in accordance with
             the materials stated on the planning application form.

     d)      Before the first occupation of the extension hereby permitted, the first floor
             window(s) front (east elevation) and rear (west elevation) of the first floor side
             extension hereby permitted shall be fitted with obscured glazing (at Pilkington
             Glass Level 4 or equivalent) and any part of the window(s) that are less than
             1.7 metres above the floor of the room in which they are installed shall be
             non-opening and fixed shut. The window(s) shall be permanently retained in
             that condition thereafter.


Preliminary Matter
2. A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) has
   been published since the planning application was determined by the Council. I
   have had regard to the revised Framework in reaching my decision.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6013427


Main Issue
3. The main issue raised by this appeal is the effect of the proposed development on
   the living conditions of existing adjoining occupiers at Mead Close.
Reasons
4. The rear gardens of Nos. 3, 5 and 7 Mead Close share a garden boundary with
   Roscrea. The rear gardens of Mead Close have a northern aspect and face the
   side elevation of Roscrea.
5. My attention has been drawn to a refusal of planning permission in 2014 however
   the officer’s report explains that the proposal that is before me is of reduced height
   and length. Furthermore, that proposal was considered against a previous
   development plan.
6. The height of the proposed roof would be lower than that of the existing roof. The
   length of the extension would not be as long as that of the existing dwelling. The
   size and scale would have a modest relationship to that of the existing dwelling. I
   accept that the proposal would bring built development closer to adjoining
   neighbours at Mead Close, however, the extension would be viewed by neighbours
   against the backdrop of the existing taller roof of the dwelling. As such, I consider
   the size and scale of the proposed development would be acceptable.
7. Consequently, I do not find that the first-floor side extension would have a visually
   overbearing or dominant impact upon the living environment of existing
   neighbouring occupiers such that would create an un-neighbourly form of
   development that would increase a sense of enclosure for existing neighbouring
   occupiers.
8. For these reasons, I conclude that the proposed development would not harm the
   living conditions of existing adjoining occupiers at Mead Close. As such, the
   proposed development would comply with Policy EE1 of the Runnymede Local
   Plan and the provisions of the Framework. That policy seeks, amongst other
   matters, development to ensure no adverse impact on the amenities of the
   occupiers of neighbouring property. This accords with the revised Framework that
   seeks to achieve well-designed places.
Other Matters
9. There is neighbouring concern that the proposal would represent an
   overdevelopment on the site, detract from the character and appearance of the
   area, would impose upon neighbouring occupiers’ amenity and cause disturbance
   during construction works.
10. The proposal would be a modest extension to the existing dwelling. As such, this
    would not represent an overdevelopment of the site. Concern is also raised to the
    potential of the proposal to unbalance the proportions of the existing dwelling and
    be a dominant structure out of keeping with surrounding properties. I acknowledge
    that this is an already large dwelling. Nonetheless, the proposal would be
    subservient to the host dwelling. The local planning authority’s officer report sets
    out that the proposal would accord with its Design Supplementary Planning
    Guidance having regard to the character and appearance of the area. I have no
    substantive reason before me to come to a different view in respect of these
    matters.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
 Appeal Decision 6013427


11. An additional ground floor window has been inserted within the southern elevation.
    However, the local planning authority advises that this ground floor south facing
    window has been installed under permitted development and, as such, would not
    have required the specific grant of planning permission.
12. A new east facing window would provide light to a dressing room. This is not a
    habitable room. The proposed west facing window to the master bedroom would
    be a secondary window for this room. The local planning authority consider these
    windows should be obscure glazed if planning permission is forthcoming. This can
    be controlled by an appropriately worded planning condition (condition 4). No first
    floor windows are proposed within the flank elevation that might create overlooking
    and condition 2 will require the development to be undertaken in accordance with
    the approved plans.
13. The proposed extension would be to the north of properties within Mead Close.
    Given the orientation of the proposed development with existing neighbouring
    properties the proposal would not cast a shadow over neighbouring properties rear
    gardens or result in a reduction in natural light to these properties.
14. There may be some disturbance from construction noise and/or dust. However, the
    impacts of construction works would be relatively short lived and any disturbance
    that might arise would be of a temporary nature. On the evidence that is before me
    I do not find any clear indication that substantial noise and/or dust arising from the
    proposed development would occur that would bring the proposal into conflict with
    Policy EE2 of the Runnymede Local Plan.
Conditions
15. I have considered the planning conditions put forward by the Council in light of DM6
    of the Framework and the Planning Practice Guidance. In addition to the standard
    time limit condition and in the interests of certainty it is appropriate that there is a
    condition requiring the development be carried out in accordance with the approved
    plans. In the visual interests of the locality a condition requiring the materials to
    accord with those set out within the planning application form is necessary. To
    avoid overlooking an obscure glazing condition is required that includes restrictions
    to the window openings in the interests of the living conditions of neighbouring
    occupiers.
Conclusion
16. For the reasons set out above, and subject to the conditions listed above, this
    appeal should be allowed.



Nicola Davies
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
