Appeal Decisions
Site visit made on 15 September 2026
by J Hills MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6013695
Pavement o/s Clarendon House, 3 Heavitree Road, Exeter EX1 2JW
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Safia Rana-Jaswal of BT Telecommunications PLC against the decision of
     Exeter City Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/0641/FUL.
•    The development proposed is erection of 1no. BT Street Hub and associated removal of existing BT
     payphones.


Appeal Ref: 6013697
Pavement o/s Clarendon House, 3 Heavitree Road, Exeter EX1 2JW
•    The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended) against a refusal to grant express
     consent.
•    The appeal is made by Safia Rana-Jaswal of BT Telecommunications PLC against the decision of
     Exeter City Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/0642/ADV.
•    The development proposed is described in the application as “erection of 1no. BT Street Hub and
     associated removal of existing BT payphones”.


Decisions
1.    Appeal A is dismissed.
2.    Appeal B is dismissed.
Preliminary matters
3.    As set out above, there are two appeals on the site. I have considered each
      proposal on its own individual merits. However, the electronic communication hub
      and advertisement are inextricably linked in each case. Therefore, to avoid
      repetition I have dealt with the two appeals together.
4.    In relation to Appeal B, the Town and Country Planning (Control of
      Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 confine the assessment to matters of
      amenity including the presence of any feature of historic, architectural, cultural or
      similar interest and public safety, taking account of material factors. The Planning
      Practice Guidance confirms this approach. No objection has been raised on the
      grounds of public safety and on review of the evidence before me, I agree with this
      and as a result I do not need to address this further. While the development plan
      policies referred to by the Council in their decision notice are not determinative, I
      have taken them into account as a material consideration.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decisions 6013695 & 6013697


5.    The description of development in the application form and banner heading above
      for Appeal B differs from that provided on the Council’s decision notice. The
      appellant has used similar wording to the Council in their appeal form, and I am
      content that this more accurately reflects what has been proposed. I have
      determined the appeal on the basis that express consent is sought for 2 x 75" LCD
      advertisement screens, one on each side of the proposed Street Hub. While
      descriptions also differ for Appeal A, I have determined it on the basis of what has
      been proposed in the application.
6.    On 17 August 2026, the Government published a new National Planning Policy
      Framework (the Framework). Both parties have had the opportunity to comment
      on its implications for their respective cases. I have considered the new
      Framework in my determination of the appeal.
Main issues
7.    In light of the above, the main issue for Appeal A is the effect of the proposal on
      the character and appearance of the area including the setting of listed buildings
      and whether it would preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the
      Lower Summerlands Conservation Area (CA). In relation to Appeal B, the main
      issue is the effect of the proposal on the visual amenity of the area.
Reasons
Appeal A Character and appearance
8.    The appeal site is located next to the CA which is tightly drawn and represents a
      mixed suburban area of historic architecture close to the city. It contains some
      listed buildings, including a number within an adjacent terrace at Eaton’s Place
      about 10m from the proposed communications hub. The significance of these
      listed buildings derives from their well-preserved, 3 storey, 1840’s design detailing.
      There is a statutory duty to pay special regard to the desirability of preserving their
      setting. Additionally, when considering the potential effect of a development
      proposal on the significance of a designated heritage asset, substantial weight
      should be given to the asset’s conservation.
9.    The appeal site comprises a wide area of pavement outside Clarendon House, on
      Heavitree Road, Exeter. The development would include a free-standing structure
      located on part of the wide pavement that is closest to the main road. There are
      some bollards as well as a waste bin in this vicinity. However, the hub would be
      set apart from most other street furniture that is positioned on the opposite side of
      a busy road. Here there is a bus stop, road signs, and what appeared to be a large
      digital screen.
10. Although it is said to be of a slimmer profile than some existing payphone boxes,
    the hub would be almost 3m tall and about 1.23m wide. While positioned to the
    side of the pavement, its separation from other street furniture would draw the eye,
    rather than blend in, as asserted. Moreover, when approaching by foot towards the
    gable end of the highly visible listed building at No 5 Eaton’s Place (No 5), its
    relatively large scale would stand proud as an unusual and incongruous
    foreground feature. Notwithstanding the presence of taller, modern buildings, it
    would add visual clutter to this part of the pavement.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decisions 6013695 & 6013697


11. Given the separation distances between the appeal site and the rest of the CA, the
    effect on it would be neutral. However, even with the removal of the kiosk on a
    different street, darker borders and reduced lighting at night, the proposal would
    diminish the quality of experience of the listed building and terrace as a whole.
    Consequently, it would generate a moderate degree of harm to the setting and
    significance of No 5. In these circumstances it is necessary to weigh this harm
    against the public benefits.
12. The self-funded hub would be powered by renewable carbon-free energy and
    could house air quality or traffic sensors. Additionally, it would offer free Wi-Fi for
    shoppers visiting nearby modern commercial frontages, and 876 hours of free
    council advertising per year. The obligation to provide telephony services is
    understood, as is the substantial weight the Framework attaches to the benefits of
    improving network coverage. However, Framework Policy CO1 also recognises
    that proposals should be sited and designed to minimise their visual impact. In
    these particular circumstances, the substantial weight given to the harm to the
    setting of the listed building outweighs any such public benefits.
13. With regard to Appeal A, while it would have a neutral effect on the CA and not
    conflict with Policy C1 of the Exeter Local Plan First Review (LP), it would
    nevertheless harm the character and appearance of the area and the setting of a
    listed building. As such, the development would be in conflict with Policy CP17 of
    the Exeter City Council Core Strategy (CS) and LP policies C2, C3, DG1 and DG8.
    Amongst other things, these seek a high standard of sustainable design that
    complements or enhances Exeter’s character; where proposals should have
    regard to the desirability of preserving the setting of listed buildings or architectural
    value of locally important buildings and relate well to the character and
    appearance of the area and surrounding townscape.
14. The Council’s decision notice references CS Objectives 8 and 9. However, it is not
    clear from the evidence that these would have the force of policy. Nevertheless,
    the aforementioned policies follow the thrust of these objectives which together
    aim to protect the historic townscape and reinforce local distinctiveness.
Appeal B
15. Given my findings above regarding the proposal's scale, siting, and contribution to
    visual clutter within the context of the historic environment, I conclude that the
    double-sided 75” advertisement would be harmful to visual amenity in the area. In
    accordance with the Regulations, I have considered the provisions of the
    development plan so far as they are relevant to Appeal B. CS Policy CP17 and LP
    policies DG1 and DG8 seek to protect visual amenity and as such, are relevant in
    this case. Given the harm to visual amenity, the scheme would conflict with these
    policies.
Other matter
16. I have had regard to the large number of cases submitted in respect of similar
    development proposals. These are all in different areas where site specific
    circumstances are not shown to be exactly the same. I have determined these
    appeals on the basis of the information before me and my own observations.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decisions 6013695 & 6013697


Conclusion
17. Despite having a neutral effect on the CA, the proposal in Appeal A would conflict
    with the development plan as a whole and the advertisement in Appeal B would
    harm visual amenity. There are no other considerations, including the provisions of
    the Framework, which outweigh these findings. Therefore, for the reasons given,
    the appeals are dismissed.



J Hills
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
