Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 17 September 2026
by Eleni Marshall BSc (hons) MSc FRICS FAAV MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 28 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6013317
Lodge Farm, The Sheeling, Overton, Ibstock, Leicestershire, LE67 6PD
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
    to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Elaine Cantwell against North West Leicestershire District Council.
•   The application Ref is 26/00196/FUL.
•   The development proposed is proposed single storey extension to existing dwelling and provision for
    a new parking area.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed, and planning permission is granted for proposed single
   storey extension to existing dwelling and provision for a new parking area at Lodge
   Farm, The Sheeling, Overton, Ibstock, Leicestershire, LE67 6PD in accordance
   with the terms of the application Ref: 26/00196/FUL and the plans submitted with it
   subject to the following conditions:
     1) The development hereby permitted shall be commenced before the expiration of
        three years from the date of this permission;
     2) The development hereby permitted shall be maintained in accordance with the
        following approved plans: location plan 27 01 26 drwg no 001 Rev A, proposed
        site plan 09 02 25 drawing no 002 Revision A, proposed elevations 02 02 26
        drawing no 006 and proposed floor plans 27 01 26 drawing no 004;
     3) Prior to their installation/use on site details/samples of the materials to be used
        in the construction of the external surfaces, windows and doors of the extension
        hereby permitted shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the local
        planning authority. The development shall be carried out in accordance with the
        approved details/samples.
Procedural Matters
2. Since the determination of this application, and submission of this appeal, the
   Government issued the new revised version of the National Planning Policy
   Framework 2026 (the Framework). The appellant has provided a supplementary
   document/further commentary relating to these changes which I have taken into
   consideration.
3. I have utilised the Council’s description of the proposal as it describes the proposal
   more concisely.
4. This appeal is accompanied by an application for costs. This is subject to a
   separate decision.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6013317


Main Issue
5. The main issue is the impact of the proposal upon the character and appearance of
   the existing converted dwelling and its plan form.
Reasons
6. The appeal site stands within an agricultural and rural landscape where the Council
   outline that traditional agricultural buildings are typically of brick and tile
   construction and of simple linear form with some being arranged in a courtyard
   such as the adjacent properties at former Lodge Farm. The host dwelling is a
   converted brick and slate tiled farm building of linear form comprising two
   connected single storey elements with one having larger proportions. The
   conversion of the building, by virtue of planning permission 13/00284/FUL, has
   retained the simplicity of the built form, utilising the footprint of the original building
   as well as utilising existing openings. The host dwelling does, overall, reinforce the
   rural character of the building and clearly reads as an agricultural conversion.
7. The proposal that is before me seeks planning permission for an extension that
   would project centrally from the existing linear building, in a south westerly
   direction, which would create a T-shape. The top of the T-shape, of the extension
   itself, would represent the largest element of the extension and would have
   proportions to match the larger element of the host dwelling at a length of in the
   region of 6.7 metres. The eaves and ridge height would match that of the larger
   part of the existing building presenting a side gable of similar proportions. The
   extension would be connected to the host dwelling by a link extension which would
   be in the region of 5 metres with a width in the region of 4.2 metres and a shallower
   roof pitch with the ridge set below the ridge of the existing dwelling.
8. Both parties are in agreement that the proposal would represent an extension of
   subservient scale in terms of footprint (as a single storey extension to a single
   storey dwelling). National Decision-Making Policy S5 relates to the principle of
   development outside settlements. It states that certain forms of development
   should be approved outside settlements as set out within the list from a) to j)
   (inclusive). The listed developments should be approved, unless the benefits of
   doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed
   against the National Decision-Making Policies in the Framework. Of relevance to
   this appeal is S5 1 c) ...extension, alteration… of an existing building, provided that
   the existing building is of permanent and substantial construction, is lawful in
   planning terms, and any extension or alteration would not result in a
   disproportionate increase in size compared to the existing building.
9. For the purposes of this assessment the Framework defines, in footnote 25, the
   existing building to be assessed as the property as existing on the date of the
   publication of the Framework. The host dwelling, as it stands, is therefore the
   existing building for the purposes of this assessment and it is evident that the
   building is of permanent and substantial construction and lawful in planning terms.
   Based upon the evidence before me I do not find that the proposal would result in a
   disproportionate increase in size compared to the existing building. Based upon
   National Decision-Making Policy S5 therefore, the proposal should be approved,
   unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by any adverse
   effects, when assessed against the National Decision-Making Policies in the
   Framework.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         2
Appeal Decision 6013317


10. The Council’s refusal reason is based upon their assessment finding that the T-
    shaped design would be at odds with the simple linear form of the existing building
    and appear as an incongruous addition. The centrality of the proposed projection is
    stated to add to inappropriateness as an incongruous form which would detract
    from the traditional character and appearance of the host dwelling and fail to secure
    a sensitive addition to the historic plan form. The design of the proposal would, to
    an extent, be at odds with the existing linear form, however, I do not find that this
    would be inappropriate. The overall design and use of materials would result in
    sufficient contrast that would enable the original, historic, linear form to be clearly
    legible as part of the evolution and extension of the site as proposed.
11. I consider the proposal to be in proportion with the host dwelling and of a character
    and design which, whilst of a differing design and proposing alternative materials,
    would be subservient to the host dwelling providing a clear legibility and separation
    between old and new. In this case, the appellant has provided clear, and
    consistent, commentary as to the design philosophy and in this case the proposal
    provides an efficient central connection appropriate to the existing accommodation
    and avoids weakening the architectural hierarchy as a result of attempts to
    reproduce historic brickwork, openings or detail which would likely, comparably,
    obscure the chronology of the host dwelling and any extensions.
12. The elevations of the proposal would be finished externally with timber cladding
    with a slate roof covering, for the larger section, and metal sheet cladding to the link
    section. The Council outline that metal sheeting was present on the smaller section
    of the building historically but consider the use of timber cladding to not respect the
    character of the building given its traditional brick and tile construction. Whilst I
    acknowledge that the proposed timber cladding would be a contrast to the existing
    brick elevations for the reasons set out above, I find that this alternative material,
    still appropriate for a rural area, would positively provide clear legibility between old
    and new preserving the significance of the originally converted building.
13. The fenestration within the extension would be varied, however, I do not find that
    the inconsistency would be inappropriate given that proposed extension is to be
    more contemporary in design. The fenestration would be out of keeping with the
    simplicity of the approach to fenestration used in the conversion of the original
    building, however, the fenestration in the conversion was specifically designed to
    utilise existing openings and I find that the contrast in fenestration positively
    contributes to the overall proposal reading as a modern, later, addition to the
    original form. The existence of an alternative design does not in itself justify refusal
    and for the reasons set out, consideration should be given as to whether the
    proposal would give rise to unacceptable planning harm. In this case, for the
    reasons set out, I find the clear legibility and separation between old and new to be
    acceptable and appropriate. I do not find that the benefits of the proposal would be
    substantially outweighed by any adverse effects.
14. I note commentary regarding planning permission having been granted for a
    detached car port position to the north of the dwelling; however, this was ultimately
    discussed in relation to potential alternative locations for an extension during the
    course of the application. Notwithstanding this I have considered the proposal as is
    submitted before me on its own merits and consider the matter relating to the
    detached car port to be of limited merit in any case due to finding the proposal
    acceptable in the context of the host dwelling for the reasons set out above.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         3
Appeal Decision 6013317


15. Condition 4 of the original planning permission is stated by the Council to restrict
    the enlargement, improvement or alteration of the dwelling but ultimately such
    conditions are generally applied to prevent alteration of a building beyond the
    control of the Council through utilisation of permitted development rights. It does
    not prevent, or control, all future development which are to be subject to a specific
    application, and grant of, planning permission as appropriate depending on the
    merits of each case. Overall, I consider the proposed extension to be appropriately
    subservient in scale and one which would provide clear visual legibility between old
    and new. This legibility would respect the traditional character and appearance of
    the existing converted dwelling and its plan form.
16. The proposal would be consistent with North West Leicestershire Local Plan 2021
    Policy D1 which requires developments to be based upon a robust opportunities
    and constraints assessment and be informed by a comprehensive site and
    contextual appraisal. The proposal would also be consistent with the overarching
    objectives of the Good Design for North West Leicestershire Supplementary
    Planning Document 2026 which requires extensions to support the host building,
    respond to the broader character of the building and have sympathy with elements
    of the building as well as seeking to promote high-quality design.
17. The proposal would also be consistent with the overarching objectives of the
    revised Framework with particular regard to National Decision-Making Policy S5
    and National Decision-Making Policy DP3 which requires development proposals to
    respond to their context so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings
    (with this policy also being clear that this should not preclude innovation or change
    where appropriate).
Other Matters
18. As confirmed within the development description the proposal also includes
    provision for a new parking area. The Council’s refusal reason is specific in being
    based upon the proposed single storey element and does not raise any issue with
    the provision of a new parking area. Based upon the information before me, and
    my site visit, I have no reason to conclude differently on this element.
19. The Council state that the amended application site area includes some land that
    was not included within the original application site. As noted by the Council, a red
    line application area does not necessarily determine curtilage. For the avoidance
    of doubt, I would clarify that the inclusion of the red line boundary in the plans to be
    conditioned in allowing this appeal does not, in any way, allude to acceptance of
    the red line boundary as determining the curtilage for the site going forward.
Conditions
20. The Council’s questionnaire does not suggest any new conditions. A time condition
    is attached to comply with Section 51 of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase
    Act 2004. A condition requiring the development to be in accordance with the
    approved plans is required to control and define the development which is granted
    consent. A materials condition requiring submission of samples of external
    materials proposed, including windows and doors, is required to ensure an
    appropriate finish notwithstanding the details indicated to date on the plans and
    application form.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        4
Appeal Decision 6013317


Conclusion
21. For the reasons outlined above, and taking into account all other matters raised, I
    conclude that the appeal should be allowed subject to conditions.

Eleni Marshall
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       5
