 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 15 September 2026
 by C J Leigh BSc(Hons) MPhil MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 25 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6014009
 64 Howarth Road, Abbey Wood, London, SE2 0UP
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr Tarlochan Dhaliwal against the decision of the Council of The Royal
     Borough of Greenwich.
 •   The application Ref is 26/0769/HD.
 •   The development proposed is the demolition of an existing side garage and rear extension and
     erection of a two storey side and rear extensions.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the demolition of an
   existing side garage and rear extension and erection of a two storey side and rear
   extensions at 64 Howarth Road, Abbey Wood, London, SE2 0UP in accordance
   with the terms of the application ref 26/0769/HD, subject to the following conditions:
     1)      The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
             the date of this decision.
     2)      The materials to be used in the construction of the external surfaces of the
             development hereby permitted shall match those used in the existing
             building.
     3)      The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
             the following approved plans: 64/HR/2025/01 Rev D, 64/HR/2025/02,
             64/HR/2025/03.
Main issue
2. The main issue in this appeal is the effect of the proposed development on
   character and appearance of the surrounding area.
Reasons
Character and appearance
3. The appeal property is an end of terraced house within a residential area. To the
   north of the property are the rear gardens of houses on McLeod Road, which run
   perpendicular to Howarth Road. Howarth Road slopes down to the north, and the
   land also rises on the eastern side of the road which results in those houses set at
   a notably higher level. The general pattern of development is two storey housing,
   though the houses on the eastern side appear taller due to the rising land. Within
   that pattern there is considerable variation in the appearance of properties, due to
   what has evidently been a high degree of alterations and extensions to houses over

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6014009


     the years. Houses along McLeod Road close to the appeal property have also seen
     alterations and extensions.
4. Policy DH1 of the Royal Greenwich Local Plan: Core Strategy with Detailed
   Policies (2014) seeks to ensure all development is of a high quality of design.
   Policy DH(a) requires proposals for residential extensions to meet certain criteria,
   and the supporting text to that Policy states that further design guidance will be
   provided in a supplementary planning document (SPD). The Royal Borough
   Greenwich Urban Design Guide SPD was adopted 2023 and sets out design
   principles for planning applications, including residential extensions. The SPD
   explains that it is a material consideration to be used in determining planning
   applications.
5. The existing garage to the side of the property would be demolished and a two
   storey side extension erected on the same building line as the existing garage, and
   the full depth of the property. The SPD provides guidance on side extensions and
   says that they must be designed so as to avoid a terracing effect, or the loss of the
   open character between properties (paragraph i.78). Principle I.3.2 of the SPD
   requires side extensions to be secondary in scale in relation to the existing building,
   to fit comfortably below the ridge and slope of the existing building, and be set back
   by a minimum of 0.5m.
6. The side extension would be set back from the existing front elevation by 0.4m, and
   have a ridgeline 0.16m lower than the existing ridge. In this instance I consider the
   step-down in the ridge is suited to the property and the wider area, and the small
   deficiency from the 0.5m guidance is acceptable. The house is at the end of a long
   terrace of much-altered housing on a hill, where there are considerable differences
   in fenestration and articulation of the frontage to the street. The set-back and
   degree of reduction in the ridge height would fit appropriately within this altered
   street scene and the drop in levels. The size, dimensions and form of the extension
   would clearly appear secondary to the existing building to which it is attached,
   which is seen in the context of that long terrace. Matching materials are shown to
   the extension.
7. The side extension would thus be seen as a later addition to the house, distinctly
   subordinate to the property. Furthermore, the property and the extension would
   adjoin the open area to the north, which has a spacious character in this urban
   area, and this relationship would mean there is no terracing effect or loss of open
   character; the objective of the SPD for two storey side extensions.
8. The existing single storey rear extension would be demolished. The proposed
   extension at the rear would be full width at ground floor. Principle I.3.3 of the SPD
   says that a depth of 3.6m is typically considered appropriate, but can be longer.
   The Council raise no objection to the width or depth of this element of the rear
   extension, and I concur it would not be intrusive to the area or be dominant to the
   building.
9. The extension to the rear includes a two storey element. Paragraph i.97 of the SPD
   states that two storey extensions are acceptable, and that the width, height and
   orientation must be carefully considered to avoid impacting on neighbouring homes
   and gardens. Principle I.3.4 sets out further guidance with the objective of ensuing
   extensions do not overwhelm the existing building. This includes maintaining
   appropriate distances between the roof of the extension and the eaves of the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
 Appeal Decision 6014009


     building, with double storey extension on two storey buildings not normally
     supported, and by seeking to ensure an extension is no more than half the width of
     the plot.
10. The drawings show at first floor the extension would be 4m wide, with the width of
    the existing house being around 6.2m. However, the house is to be extended, and I
    have commented above the side extension is acceptable. I consider it reasonable
    to take that intended extension into account when appraising the first floor rear
    extension, as it is clear from the appellant’s submissions and the detailed drawings
    and floorplans that the intention is to build all aspects of the scheme together as an
    extension to the house. The width of the extended building would be around 8.4m,
    which is also the width of the plot, and the proposed rear two storey extension
    would be less than half that width.
11. Although Principle I.3.4 says that double storey extensions on two storey buildings
    are not normally supported, in this instance I consider the addition acceptable.
    There would be sufficient space around the extension to ensure it does not
    dominate the rear elevation, with eaves matching the house and a pitched roof
    height notably lower than the building. The scale of the extension would not
    overwhelm the existing building and not impact upon neighbouring homes, or the
    garden area. The location of the extension to the rear of the house would not
    impact on the character of the wider area and which, as noted, is one where there
    have been numerous changes over the years.
12. A small front porch extension at ground floor is proposed. This would be a minor
    change to the building, which would fit comfortably within the varied street scene,
    which has seen similar small extensions.
13. I have considered the proposed extensions to the property as a whole, in the
    context of this particular property, its location, the topography, and relationship to
    other houses and to an open garden area. It is my overall conclusion on the main
    issue that the proposals would satisfy Policy D3 of the London Plan (2021), and
    Policies DH1 and DH(a) of the Core Strategy that seek to ensure a high standard of
    design. The extensions would be consistent with the objectives and design
    standards set out in the SPD. Thus, the extensions would also satisfy Policy DP3 of
    the National Planning Policy Framework that requires proposals to respond to their
    context and integrate with their surroundings.
Other matters
14. The height and depth of the single storey rear extension would not be imposing to
    the outlook from neighbouring properties. The distance retained to the boundaries
    of the property from the first floor rear extension would similarly ensure no
    overbearing impact, or loss of light. The distance from the side extension to the
    McLeod Road properties is sufficient to ensure no overbearing impact. The Council
    found no objection on these matters.
15. I note comments from third parties relating to the possible proposed uses of the
    property. The application submitted to the Council was for extensions to the
    existing house and I have determined this appeal on that basis.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
 Appeal Decision 6014009


Conditions and conclusion
16. I have attached the standard conditions requiring matching materials to ensure a
    satisfactory appearance to the development, and specifying the approved drawings
    in the interests of precision.
17. For the reasons given above I conclude the proposed development is consistent
    with the development plan. The appeal is allowed.

C J Leigh
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    4
