 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 1 September 2026
 by Sarah Colebourne MA, MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date:25 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6014560
 31 Mansfield Road, Daybrook, Nottinghamshire, NG5 6AJ
 •   The appeal is made under Regulation 17 of the Town and Country Planning (Control of
     Advertisements) (England) Regulations 2007 against a refusal to grant express consent.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr R Harrison against the decision of Gedling Borough Council.
 •   The application Ref is 2026/0174.
 •   The advertisement proposed is described as a ‘Division of the existing retail unit into three shop
     units, create a dwelling at first floor and install an advertising sign'.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary matters
2. The proposal was submitted under the Town and Country Planning (Control of
   Advertisement) (England) Regulations 2007 (as amended). The Council’s decision
   notice refers to the proposal as ‘Installation of internally illuminated signboard with
   an area of 18sqm’. As the proposal for the division of the unit and a dwelling at first
   floor was submitted as a separate planning application that has since been granted
   permission, I have dealt with this appeal on the basis of the description in the
   decision notice, ie for the proposed sign only.
3. The Regulations require that decisions are made only in the interests of amenity
   and public safety, taking account of any material factors. The government’s
   Planning Practice Guidance (the PPG) reiterates this approach.
4. The Council’s decision refers to the National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework). Since the application was determined, a revised Framework was
   published in August 2026. The parties were notified and asked for comments.
Main issue
5. The main issue in this appeal is, therefore, the effect of the proposed advertisement
   on amenity.
Reasons
6. The Advertisement Regulations state that factors relevant to amenity include the
   general characteristics of the locality. Policy DP3 in the Framework seeks to
   ensure that proposals create well designed places. The Council’s officer’s report
   refers to Policy LPD 32 of its Local Planning Document 2018 which seeks to ensure
   that proposals do not have a significant effect on visual amenity and is material in
   this case.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6014560


7. The appeal site contains a modern retail unit of a single storey with a two storey
   element to the rear and a forecourt to the front. It is located on the busy A60
   opposite a junction, between a retail park of large units and an area of mainly
   traditional buildings, many of which are smaller scale commercial premises. Other
   small scale premises are located opposite the site. Whilst there are some
   residential uses in the area, it has a predominantly urban, commercial character.
   This is reflected in the many signs and advertisements in the area, of varying types
   and sizes.
8. The appeal building has a deep fascia sign across the width of the building that
   faces the A60 and a large wall mounted sign on its side elevation that faces an
   adjoining retail unit car park. Those signs are not included within this application
   and are shown on the plans as indicative only. The proposed sign would comprise
   a freestanding, internally illuminated board attached to a plinth, with an overall
   height of some 5m high and a width of some 6m, the sign measuring some 3m by
   6m. It would replace an existing smaller freestanding sign and would be located on
   the southern, side boundary of the site adjacent to a wall and fence, close to the
   footway and facing in a northerly direction.
9. The rear of the sign would not be seen clearly in the approach from the south along
   the A60 during the summer months when roadside trees would provide good
   screening but in winter months it would be more apparent and would also be seen
   from the access road into the retail park. From there, it would not be unduly
   dominant in the street scene because it would not face in that direction and would
   be seen at a distance and against a backdrop of taller buildings.
10. From the north and north east however, it would not be screened by any trees and
    would be seen clearly from the junction of the A60 and Nottingham Road,
    appearing more obtrusive in the street scene. Whilst I noted that this is a very busy
    area with numerous signs and street lighting, many of the larger signs in and
    around the retail park are not seen until the appeal site has been passed when
    travelling in this direction. The other commercial signs seen in this approach at a
    car showroom and builders’ merchants are different types of signage and not
    directly comparable. From the junction, it would be higher than the main single
    storey part of the appeal building and due to its siting on land that is higher than
    that of the supermarket building seen in the backdrop at the retail park, it would
    appear taller than that building. As such, it would appear disproportionate in size
    and scale to its immediate surroundings and its illumination and changing static
    images, notwithstanding the control of brightness and timing of display in line with
    advertising best practice, would exacerbate its presence to an unacceptable degree
    during both day and night time. The sign would, therefore, conflict with the
    development plan policy LPD 32 as well as with the Framework and the PPG.
11. I saw only one other comparable digital sign in the immediate area at 71 Mansfield
    Road, some 200m north of the appeal site. I have had regard to the appeal
    decision for that sign which was allowed but that differs significantly from what is
    proposed here because it is fixed to the gable end of a two storey building and is
    not located opposite a busy junction. That does not, therefore, persuade me to
    alter my findings in this case. I have also noted that another similar sign proposed
    at a similar type of location further to the north at 238 Mansfield Road was
    dismissed at appeal for amenity reasons (ref APP/N3020/Z/24/3354719).



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
 Appeal Decision 6014560


Conclusion
12. I conclude then that the proposed sign would, therefore, result in significant harm to
    the amenity of the area and the appeal should be dismissed.



Sarah Colebourne
Inspector




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
