 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 22 September 2026
 by Nicola Davies BA DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date:30 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6014199
 66 Scott Road, Tilgate, Crawley, West Sussex RH10 5DD
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr Moghyss Javaid against the decision of Crawley Borough Council.
 •   The application Ref is CR/2026/0081/FUL.
 •   The development proposed is for a single storey front extension.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for a single storey front
   extension at 66 Scott Road, Tilgate, Crawley, West Sussex RH10 5DD in
   accordance with the terms of the application, Ref CR/2026/0081/FUL, subject to
   the following condition: -
     1)      The development hereby permitted shall be retained in accordance with the
             approved plans: Location Plan; 2523 EZ01; 2523 EZ02 and 2523 EZ03.
     2)      Within three months of the date of this decision, a rainwater storage facility
             (water butt or similar) with a minimum net capacity of 0.3m³ (300 litres) shall
             be installed and connected to the roof drainage serving the single storey front
             extension. The rainwater storage facility shall thereafter be retained for the
             lifetime of the development.
Preliminary Matters
2. A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) has
   been published since the planning application was determined by the Council. I
   have had regard to the revised Framework in reaching my decision.
3. I have taken the description of proposed development from the Council’s decision
   notice as this clearly and succinctly describes the act of development only.
4. The planning application form indicates that the development has already taken
   place and I was able to view the front extension at the time of my visit.
Main Issue
5. The main issue raised by this appeal is the effect of the proposed development on
   character and appearance of the host dwelling and the street scene.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6014199


Reasons
6. The appellant has directed me to a previous planning permission (REF:
   CR/2009/0051/FUL) that granted front, side and rear single-storey extensions at
   the property. The Council officers report confirms that the side and rear elements
   of that planning permission were built out, however the front extension has not.
   The officer report further comments that the proposal that is now before me differs
   to that of the 2009 front extension, however it is not explained why. I saw side and
   rear additions in place at my visit. It would appear to me that as the 2009 planning
   permission has been implemented it remains extant that the front extension could
   be erected at the site. This is a relevant consideration.
7. The appellant has provided measurements and other details to illustrate the
   comparisons between the appealed development and that of the 2009 granted
   scheme. The projection beyond the frontage for both schemes is 1.5m and the
   heights are almost the same. However, the current frontage is wider having a width
   of 3.9m for the northern element, as opposed to 3.3m of the previous scheme, and
   2.0m for the southern element. Nonetheless, the southern element is said to reflect
   the previous porch footprint.
8. The appellant comments that the approved details of the 2009 permission can be
   viewed on the Council’s website but I have not been provided with the approved
   plans or documents relating to that case. Nonetheless, it appears to me that an
   extended frontage of similar resulting size and form could have taken place as an
   alternative to what has been erected at the site, although the one that has been
   erected is marginally wider at its northern part.
9. I acknowledge the local planning authority’s concern in regard of the differing
   forward projections from the frontage and differing overall roof heights and pitches
   of the development that is before me. However, the extensions, although being
   different, do not appear so overtly visually awkward such that detracts from the
   appearance of the host property.
10. The front addition extends across more than one third of the width of the original
    dwelling and this would be contrary to the recently adopted guidance set out in the
    Householder Development Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) 2026.
    Notwithstanding this, on the evidence that is before me a development of similar
    size and nature could have been erected at the frontage of this property despite the
    local planning authority’s concerns relating to the width, scale, massing and
    prominent siting of the extension. Whilst that development would have been
    considered against a different development plan context, it remains a consideration
    pertaining to this case.
11. I acknowledge that the recently adopted SPD recognises that in streets
    characterised by original repeated features, including flat-roofed porches, such
    uniform features should be retained. However, I am mindful that the 2009
    permission would alter the frontage appearance of the dwelling that would interrupt
    the uniformity of the Scott Road street scene and this is a relevant consideration.
12. Consequently, having regard to the planning history and the relatively modest
    change to the frontage of the dwelling and the appearance of the development
    being acceptable, I do not find visual harm arises from this development.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      2
 Appeal Decision 6014199


13. For these reasons, I conclude that the development does not harm the character
    and appearance of the host dwelling and the street scene. As such, the
    development would comply with Policies DD1 and CL2 of the Crawley Borough
    Local Plan. These policies seek, amongst other matters, development to
    complement the existing setting and character of the area. This aligns with the
    revised Framework’s objective to achieve well-designed places.
Conditions
14. I have considered what planning conditions would be necessary in light of Policy
    DM6 of the revised Framework and the Planning Practice Guidance. In the
    interests of certainty, it is appropriate that there is a condition requiring the
    development to be retained in accordance with the approved plans. The site is
    within Flood Zone 2 and is at medium risk of fluvial flooding. To safeguard
    occupants and prevent flooding elsewhere a rainwater storage facility condition is
    necessary and follows the recommendations of the Council’s Flooding and
    Drainage Officer.
Conclusion
15. Having regard to the above the appeal should be allowed.

Nicola Davies
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate      3
