 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 22 September 2026
 by Nicola Davies BA DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date:30 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6014666
 Lerryn, West Strand, West Wittering, WEST SUSSEX PO20 8AU
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr David Hearn against the decision of Chichester District Council.
 •   The application Ref is WW/26/00676/DOM.
 •   The development proposed is the addition of a rear dormer window facing the sea within the main
     roof.


Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for an addition of a rear
   dormer window facing the sea within the main roof at Lerryn, West Strand, West
   Wittering, West Sussex PO20 8AU in accordance with the terms of the application,
   Ref WW/26/00676/DOM, subject to the following conditions: -
     a) The development hereby permitted shall begin no later than three years from
        the date of this decision.
     b) The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
        following approved plans: A_10_002 REV 03; A_10_112 REV 03; A_10_115
        REV 03; A_10_210 REV 03; A_10_310 REV 04; A_10_311 REV 04; and PP-
        14802458 V1.
     c) The development hereby permitted shall be constructed in accordance with the
        materials stated on the planning application form.
Preliminary Matter
2. A revised version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) has
   been published since the planning application was determined by the Council. I
   have had regard to the revised Framework in reaching my decision.
Main Issue
3. The main issue raised by this appeal is the effect of the proposed development on
   the character and appearance of the host property and the area.
Reasons
4. The design of dwellings in the area are varied, each being of individual style, and in
   some cases, are of an eclectic appearance. My attention has been drawn to the
   appearance of existing properties close by. Moongate has dormers within its rear

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6014666


     roof scale. White Marley has roof projections comprising fenestration. Landfall has
     elements that create the appearance of a three storey dwelling. As such, there are
     dwellings in the area that have the appearance of being three storey properties.
     Whilst the area has been described as rural, the appeal site is located within
     existing linear development along the sea frontage and the proposal would be seen
     within the context of this built development and the roof forms of those properties.
5. The roof dormer would be lower than the ridge height of the host dwelling and
   would have a central position within the rear roof slope. Whilst it would project from
   the roof this would not be to the extent of those projections below at ground and
   first floor levels. As such, the proposal would represent a modest addition to the
   dwelling at roof level. Its size would not appear to visually compete with the host
   dwelling as the majority of the rear roof slope would remain as such. Whilst its
   design may not reflect that of a traditional dormer within the roof, the area is of
   varied character and, as such, the appearance of the roof addition with its
   fenestration and crown style roof form would not appear overly conspicuous within
   this context.
6. For these reasons, I conclude that the proposed development would not harm the
   character and appearance of the host property and the area. As such, the
   proposed development would comply with Policies P1, P2, P7 and NE11 of the
   Chichester Local Plan. These policies seek, amongst other matters, development
   to be of high design quality and be designed to positively respond to the original
   architecture of the host building and other locally distinct forms. This accords with
   the revised Framework that seeks to achieve well-designed places with
   development proposals responding to their context.
Conditions
7. I have considered what planning conditions would be necessary in light of Policy
   DM6 of the revised Framework and the Planning Practice Guidance. In addition to
   the standard time limit condition and in the interests of certainty it is appropriate
   that there is a condition requiring the development to be carried out in accordance
   with the approved plans. In the visual interests of the locality a condition requiring
   the materials to accord with those set out within the planning application form is
   necessary.
Conclusion
8. For the reasons set out above, and subject to the conditions listed, this appeal
   should be allowed.



Nicola Davies
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
