Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 September 2026
by Gary Deane BSc (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 01 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6014028
48 Topfield Road, Manchester M22 9QN
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
    against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Mr Yogendra Mohottala against the decision of Manchester City Council.
•   The application reference is PLA-2026-000396.
•   The development is a retrospective application for rear conservatory.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural matters
2. The proposed development is complete. It appears to be broadly in accordance
   with the plans.
3. A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published on
   17 August 2026. It replaces the previous version that is cited in the reasons for
   refusal. As the Framework is a material consideration, I have had regard to it in
   reaching my decision. The Framework does not raise any new matters that are
   determinative to the outcome of this appeal.
Main issues
4. The main issues are the effect of the development firstly, on the character and
   appearance of the host dwelling and its surroundings; and secondly, on the living
   conditions of the occupiers of 50 Topfield Road with particular regard to visual
   impact and privacy.
Reasons
Character and appearance
5. The appeal property is a mainly 2-storey end terrace house that has been extended
   and externally altered. It lies within an estate style residential area within which
   there is some variety to the scale, design, type and appearance of dwellings.
6. The new conservatory attaches to the back wall of the existing rear addition, and
   projects into the rear garden of No 48. Taken together, the existing extension and
   new conservatory result in a substantial rearward projection from the original rear
   wall of the host dwelling. Their combined depth is far greater than 3.65 metres,
   beyond which Policy DC1 of the Unitary Development Plan for the City of
   Manchester (UDP) states that rearward extensions will not normally be approved.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6014028


7. The new conservatory is also considerable in width, extending across a major part
   of the rear elevation of No 48. The combined depth, width and mass of the new
   conservatory and the existing rear extension cause them to visually dominate the
   rear of the host dwelling, unduly distort its scale and proportions, and detract from
   its character and appearance.
8. The new conservatory is not readily visible from public vantage points given its
   position at the back of No 48, away from the road. It therefore has little effect on
   the public realm. Nevertheless, the development is evident from the rear of
   neighbouring properties, notably 50 Topfield Road, which is attached to the appeal
   dwelling. From this vantage point in particular, the new conservatory appears as
   an overly large and visually prominent addition that relates poorly to the visual
   character of the host dwelling and its immediate surroundings. It appears as an
   obtrusive and unsympathetic addition even when seen among the varied built form
   that is a characteristic of the local area.
Living conditions
9. The side elevation of the new conservatory is set back from, although still close to,
   the shared rear boundary with No 50. Although single storey in height, the upper
   part of the development projects noticeably above the timber fence that marks this
   common boundary, as does the rear extension to which it attaches.
10. Given the considerable depth of built form adjacent to this boundary, and its
    proximity to it, the existing extension and new conservatory have a visually
    dominant and enclosing presence for the occupiers of No 50. This is most
    pronounced when seen from the patio and garden closest to this neighbouring
    house and its ground-floor rear window.
11. Although I saw that a more open aspect from these locations remains towards the
    far end of the garden, this does not materially reduce the unduly enclosing effect
    experienced closest to the house. I therefore find that the development has an
    overbearing effect on the living conditions of the occupiers of No 50.
12. At my site visit, I saw that the upper panels in the side elevation of the new
    conservatory were obscurely glazed, which limited views towards the rear garden
    of No 50. If this type of glazing were to be retained, which could be secured by a
    condition, there would be no significant loss of privacy to the occupiers of No 50,
    whether through actual or perceived overlooking.
Conclusion on the main issues
13. On the main issues, I conclude that the development causes significant harm to the
    character and appearance of the host dwelling and its immediate surroundings. It
    also has an overbearing effect on the living conditions of the occupiers of No 50.
14. Accordingly, the development conflicts with Policies DM 1 and SP 1 of the
    Manchester Core Strategy Development Plan Document, UDP Policy DC1 and
    Policy JP-P1 of the Places for Everyone Joint Development Plan Document. These
    policies seek to ensure that development is appropriate in scale, has regard to the
    character of the local area, and safeguards residential amenity.
15. The new conservatory is also contrary to Policy DP3 of the Framework. This policy
    requires development to respond to its context so that it integrates with and
    enhances its surroundings.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
Appeal Decision 6014028


Planning balance and conclusion
16. I have taken account of the benefit to the appellant of the additional
    accommodation provided within the conservatory. However, it does not outweigh
    the significant harm that I have identified.
17. The development therefore conflicts with the development plan when read as a
    whole. There are no material considerations which indicate that the decision
    should be taken otherwise than in accordance with the development plan. I
    therefore conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

Gary Deane
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate    3
