Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 24 September 2026
by Alexander O’Doherty LLB (Hons) MSc MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 25 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6014625
65A Bedford Road, Reading RG1 7EX
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr Chris Tong against the decision of Reading Borough Council.
•    The application Ref is PL/26/0588.
•    The development proposed is rear elevation dormer extension and internal alterations.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matter
2.    A new National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework) was published in
      August 2026. Having regard to the main issue in this appeal as set out below, the
      Framework does not raise any new matters which are determinative to the
      outcome of this appeal.
Main Issue
3.    The main issue is the effect of the proposed development on the character and
      appearance of the area.
Reasons
4.    The appeal site comprises a building located on the corner of Bedford Road and
      Stanley Street, with a 2-storey portion to its front (with accommodation in its roof
      space) and a single-storey projecting element to its rear. The 2-storey portion of
      the building forms part of a terrace comprising buildings of a broadly consistent
      scale and massing. Although some of the roof forms of these buildings now exhibit
      large rear dormer extensions (such as at 35 and 37 Bedford Road), equally
      several buildings within the terrace contain much smaller dormers which do not
      dominate their host property. The Design Guide To House Extensions
      Supplementary Planning Document (adopted 2021) (SPD) notes that Reading has
      a few examples of dormers of excessive size which demonstrate how harmful this
      type of extension can be. I observed that this was the case at certain properties in
      the vicinity of the site.
5.    Whilst the proposed rear dormer extension would be set marginally below the roof
      ridge, it would span across almost the whole width of the rear roof of its host
      property. Due to its height, width, and depth, it would appear as a very large and
      bulky feature which would unduly dominate its host property. This would be at
      odds with the guidance given in the SPD which provides that, amongst other
      things, dormer windows should be set within the roof slope and be in proportion

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6014625


      with the scale of the rest of the house in terms of overall size. The shape of the
      proposed 2 rear windows on the dormer would noticeably differ from the shape of
      the existing rear windows at first floor level, which would exacerbate the harm
      identified to the appearance of the host property.
6.    Due to the site’s prominent corner location, the proposed rear dormer extension
      would appear as an overly-large and incongruous feature in the street scene. The
      host property’s positive contribution to the character of the area by way of its
      massing, the 2-storey portion of which is presently in-keeping with the rest of the
      terrace in this respect, would be undermined. Harm to the character and
      appearance of the area would result.
7.    I therefore find that the proposed development would have an unacceptable and
      harmful effect on the character and appearance of the area. It would conflict with
      Policy CC7 of the Reading Borough Local Plan (adopted 2019) which provides
      that, amongst other things, all development must be of high design quality that
      maintains and enhances the character and appearance of the area of Reading in
      which it is located.
Planning Balance and Conclusion
8.    The proposed development would provide for an improved and enlarged level of
      accommodation on site. As these benefits would mainly be private in nature, they
      merit little weight in support of the proposed development. On the other hand, the
      proposed development would not integrate with and enhance its surroundings,
      contrary to policy DP3(1) of the Framework, which is the overriding consideration
      in this case. Overall, none of the relevant material considerations indicate that this
      appeal should be decided otherwise than in accordance with the development
      plan.
9.    For the reasons given above, having considered the development plan as a whole,
      the approach in the Framework, and all other relevant material considerations, I
      conclude that the appeal should be dismissed.

Alexander O’Doherty
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
