 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 15 September 2026
 by N McGurk BSc (Hons) MCD MBA MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 25 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6014032
 684 Forest Road, Walthamstow, Waltham Forest, E17 3ED
 •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •   The appeal is made by Mr Mohammed Ayyub against the decision of the Council of the London
     Borough of Waltham Forest.
 •   The application Ref is 260763.
 •   The development proposed is a single storey wraparound rear extension.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matters
2. The description of the development proposed is taken from the Council’s decision
   notice and the appellant’s statement. The description of development provided on
   the application form was “4.3m side/rear extension at 2.4m height of eaves and
   3.0m total height of extension with 4x Velux rooflights.”
3. The Council’s reason for refusal refers to the Residential Extensions and
   Alterations Supplementary Planning Document (2010 SPD), which has since been
   superseded by the Residential Alterations and Retrofit Supplementary Planning
   Document (2026 SPD).
4. The Council and the appellant both refer to pre-application consultation. Whilst the
   appellant amended his proposals further to pre-application advice, the Council
   considered that the proposal was insufficiently revised to overcome its concerns
   and the planning application was refused.
Main Issue
5. The main issue in this case is the effect of the proposed development on the living
   conditions of neighbours, with regard to outlook and daylight.
Reasons
6. The appeal property is a two storey mid-terrace dwelling with a long garden to the
   rear. It is located opposite a large college in a mixed-use area, along Forest Road,
   a busy highway.
7. The appeal dwelling is set back from the road behind a wide pavement, a low
   boundary wall and a front garden. To the rear, the terrace within which the appeal
   dwelling is situated is characterised by the presence of two storey outriggers and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
    Appeal Decision 6014032


       long gardens. The gardens afford the rear of the appeal dwelling a sense of
       greenery, openness and tranquillity. During my site visit, I observed that gardens
       rise up relatively steeply to the rear due to the topography of the area.
8. The Council’s adopted guidance, previously set out in the 2010 SPD and now
   referred to in the 2026 SPD, identifies that extensions projecting beyond 3m in
   depth can result in overbearing impacts and loss of outlook to neighbouring
   occupiers, particularly where excessive height and continuous built form are
   introduced close to shared boundaries; and that infilling the rear “L-shape” of a
   property can create a harmful tunnel-like effect and become overly dominant to
   neighbouring occupiers.
9. The proposed development would comprise a single storey wraparound rear
   extension. This would project considerably beyond the existing two storey rear
   outrigger and would reach a substantial height adjacent to the shared boundary
   with Number 686 Forest Road.
10. I find that the considerable height and projection of the proposal would combine
    with its immediate proximity to the rear of No 686 such that it would appear to loom
    above the rear of this neighbouring dwelling to an overbearing degree. It would
    draw the eye and would appear as an overly dominant feature when seen from the
    rear of No 686.
11. The proposed development would extend across the full width of the appeal
    property, such that the wraparound extension would adjoin the shared boundary
    with Number 682 Forest Road. The appeal dwelling sits higher than No 682 to the
    rear and this would have the effect of increasing the height of the proposal’s flank
    wall as experienced from No 682 and would serve to reduce any mitigating effect
    arising from the stepped-down design of the proposal along this shared boundary.
12. Taking everything into account, I find that the combination of height, projection and
    immediate proximity of the proposed development would create an oppressive
    tunnel-like effect and an undue sense of enclosure when seen from the ground
    floor of No 682.
13. The broadly southerly orientation of the rear gardens along this side of Forest Road
    and the single storey nature of the extension would mean that the additional
    overshadowing of neighbouring properties would not in itself be so harmful as to
    warrant dismissal of this appeal. However, this does not address the harm I have
    identified above in respect of outlook and sense of enclosure, which arises
    principally from the depth, height and continuous form of the extension along both
    shared boundaries, rather than from its effect on daylight or sunlight.
14. Taking all of the above into account, I find that the proposed development would
       harm the living conditions of the occupiers of Nos. 682 and 686 Forest Road, with
       regard to outlook. This would be contrary to the National Planning Policy
       Framework; to Policy 57 of the Waltham Forest Local Plan LP1 (2024)1; and to the
       Council’s Residential Alterations and Retrofit Supplementary Planning Document
       (2026), which together amongst other things, seek to protect residential amenity.




1
    Waltham Forest Local Plan LP1 (2024).


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          2
 Appeal Decision 6014032


Other Matters
15. In support of his case, the appellant draws attention to the single storey rear
    extension at No 688 Forest Road as evidence that similar development can be
    introduced without harm to neighbouring amenity. However, the appellant notes
    that the planning history of this property has not been established and that No 688
    occupies an end-of-terrace location. There is no substantive evidence to
    demonstrate that the circumstances relating to this other development are so
    similar to those of the appeal before me as to provide for direct comparison. In any
    case, I have found that the proposed development would result in significant harm
    and this is not something that is outweighed by the presence of another
    development elsewhere.
16. I have had regard to the evidence submitted concerning the mobility difficulties
    experienced by a member of the appellant’s household and the resulting need for
    improved ground floor living and bathing accommodation. This is a material
    consideration to which I am sympathetic. However, it is not apparent from the
    evidence before me that the proposed development is the only means by which
    necessary additional accommodation could be provided. I find that the harm
    identified above is so significant as not to be outweighed by this benefit and hence
    the conclusion below.
Conclusion
17. For the reasons given above, the appeal does not succeed.

N McGurk
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
