Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 25 August 2026

by S. Hartley BA (Hons) Dist.TP (Manc), DMS, MRTPI, MRICS
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 8 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6014250
3 Booth Terrace, Dean House Lane, Luddenden, Sowery Bridge, Calderdale
HX2 6TJ
• The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against
  a refusal to grant planning permission.
• The appeal is made by Charlotte Jackson against the decision of Calderdale Metropolitan
  Borough Council.
• The application Reference is 26/00306/HSE.
• The development proposed is a single storey extension to the front.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Procedural Matter
2. On 17 August 2026, the Government published a revised National Planning Policy
   Framework (the Framework). This is a relevant material planning consideration of
   ‘critical importance’ from a decision-making point of view. In respect of the main
   issues, the Framework has not materially changed the assessment in this appeal,
   and it has not been necessary for me to consult the main parties upon it.
Main Issues
3. The appeal property is located within the Green Belt.
4. The main issues are therefore (i) whether the proposed development is
   inappropriate development within the Green Belt; (ii) the effect of the development
   upon the character and appearance of the area; (iii) the effect upon the Special
   Landscape Area; iv) the effect upon heritage assets and (v) if the proposal is
   inappropriate development in the Green Belt, whether the harm, by reason of
   inappropriateness and any other harm, is clearly outweighed by other
   considerations so as to amount to very special circumstances to justify
   development.
Reasons
Whether inappropriate development
5. GB6 of the Framework states that inappropriate development is, by definition,
   harmful to the Green Belt, and should not be approved except in very special
   circumstances. However, Policy GB7 permits certain exceptions, and which are not
   to be regarded as inappropriate development in the Green Belt. One exception, at
   GB7:1(b), is for ‘the reuse, extension, alteration or replacement of an existing
   building, provided that the existing building is of permanent and substantial

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6014250


     construction, is lawful in planning terms, and any extension or alteration will not
     result in a disproportionate increase in size compared to the original building’.
6. Footnote 40 to the Framework defines ‘original building’ as ‘a building as it existed
   on 1 July 1948 or, if constructed after 1 July 1948, as it was built originally ‘.There
   is no evidence before me that the original dwelling has been extended to date.

7. On my site visit, I was able to see that the building is of permanent and substantial
   construction and I have no reason to believe that it is not lawful. A report by a
   structural engineer, prepared on behalf of the appellant, notes that the building is in
   ‘ a good structural condition ‘ subject to the correction of certain defects. There is
   no suggestion that the proposed extension is required in order to correct the
   specified defects.

8. The Framework does not include a definition of what constitutes a disproportionate
   addition over and above the size of the original building. Furthermore, I have not
   been referred to any development plan policy or local guidance which defines what
   is a disproportionate addition.

9. The local planning authority (LPA), in its officer report, considers that ‘the single-
   storey extension would have a gross external area of 7.2 sq.m, and the GEA of the
   original building is around 34 sq. m over two floors. There would be an increase in
   area of around one fifth. This extension would not be considered to be
   disproportionate in the context of the existing dwelling’.

10. While I cannot be certain about the quoted dimensions, on my site visit I was able
    to assess the extent of the proposed extension in relation to the existing dwelling in
    volumetric and visual terms. I find that the proposal would not constitute a
    disproportionate addition to the original building.

11. Therefore, I conclude that the proposal would not amount to inappropriate
    development in the Green Belt as it would meet an exception as outlined in GB7 of
    the Framework.

Character and appearance
12. The host property forms part of a two-storey, stone built terrace with a double
    pitched roof. The terrace has a uniform original design, with unbroken roofs,
    common eaves and ridge lines, and with small amenity spaces in front of them
    facing directly onto the highway. Several of the dwellings in the row have small
    porch additions, though these do not extend across the full width of their houses.
    The common use of external materials and the general symmetry of the terrace,
    despite the small additions, adds distinctively and positively to its character and
    appearance and that of the area.
13. The proposed development is for a single storey, front extension which would be
    constructed across the whole frontage of the dwelling. The appellant considers that
    the proposed development, by its floor area, would be little different to what is
    allowed in the General Permitted Development Order for font porches. However, in
    my judgement, by its size and length, it would have a significantly harmful effect
    upon the pleasing rhythm of the terrace, and would interrupt its building line,
    adversely exceeding the size of the more acceptable small porches which already
    exist elsewhere on the terrace. While the use of natural stone to match the host

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         2
Appeal Decision 6014250


    property would be a mitigating factor, it would not compensate sufficiently to
    overcome these adverse effects.
14. The appellant has referred to an approval for a front extension to a dwelling at
    Beckside Shelf within the Borough. However, the approval relates to a modern
    dwelling forming part of a pair of semi-detached dwellings, very different to the
    terrace to which the appeal property forms a part. In any event, I have determined
    the appeal based upon its individual merits.

15. Therefore, I conclude that the proposed development would adversely affect the
    character and appearance of the area and, therefore, would not accord with policy
    BT1 of the Calderdale Local Plan 2018/19-2032/33 (LP) or with the Calderdale
    Placemaking and Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document 2024 (SPD), or
    with DP3 of the Framework, all of which require development to be of good design
    which respects or enhances the existing buildings and surroundings.

Landscape character

16. There is an overlap between an assessment of the character and appearance of
    the host property and the terrace of which it forms a part, and the Special
    Landscape Area (SLA) within which it is located.

17. The appeal site is listed within that part of the SLA known as Luddenden Dean
    Landscape Character Area, characterised by its rural environment including
    traditional stone-built settlements and farm buildings.

18. The SLA covers a large geographic area and where individual developments might
    be considered to make only a small change to its landscape character. However, in
    my judgement, the general scarcity of buildings means that small changes are
    more visually prominent than in other more densely developed parts of the SLA. I
    consider that in the case of the appeal proposal, there would be a minor, adverse
    impact upon the landscape character of the SLA.

19. Therefore, I conclude that the proposed development would cause harm to the
    Special Landscape Area and would not accord with Policy GN4 of the LP which
    aims to ensure that development does not adversely affect the scenic quality of the
    SLA, and those elements which contribute to its significance.

Heritage assets

20. Section 66 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990
    requires that in considering whether to grant planning approval for development
    which affects a listed building or its setting, special regard shall be had to the
    desirability of preserving it or its setting or any features of special architectural or
    historic interest which it possesses.
21. Broadfold Hall (LB) is an imposing Grade II Listed Building (LB) located within an
    extensive, private, landscaped setting and which visually enhances the building.
    The proposed development is approximately 240 metres from the LB, and by its
    limited size, location and intervening distance, would have no effect upon its
    setting.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          3
Appeal Decision 6014250


22. No. 2 Lower Holme House is a Grade II LB, located amongst a small cluster of
    stone built properties in a roadside setting, all of which adds visually to the
    significance of the LB. As with the effect upon the setting of Broadfold Hall, the
    appeal proposal, by its limited size, location and its intervening distance of
    approximately 313 metres, would have no effect upon its setting.
23. The LPA also considers that, by its age and design, the terrace itself is an asset of
    local heritage value. However, I have no objective information before me to justify
    that the appeal site is indeed of historical, cultural or other heritage importance.
    Moreover, there is no report by the Council’s Conservation officer and I am not
    aware of any other heritage assessment which might support the view of the LPA in
    terms of its heritage importance or significance.
24. Therefore, I conclude that there is no evidence to support the contention that the
    property is a non-designated heritage asset. In addition, as I have found that there
    would be no effect upon the LBs, the proposed development would accord with LP
    Policy BT1 and HE5 of the Framework which require development to take account
    of its impact upon heritage assets and to avoid harm to them.
Conclusion
25. While I have found that the proposed development would not be inappropriate in
    the Green Belt and would not adversely affect any heritage asset, I have concluded
    that it would adversely affect the character and appearance of the dwelling, the
    terrace and the SLA. These latter matters are of overriding concern which outweigh
    those other issues.

26. There are no material planning considerations that indicate that the application
    should be determined other than in accordance with the development plan.
    Therefore, the appeal should be dismissed.

S. Hartley
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        4
