 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 2 September 2026
 by J Evans BA(Hons) AssocRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 10 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6014276
 127 North Street, Axminster, Devon EX13 5QH
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr David Henderson against the decision of East Devon District Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/0520/FUL.
 •    The development proposed is described as the erection of garage/store to front of property on
      north/west elevation.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. The application form confirms that the appeal proposal has been completed and
   this was evident to me during my site visit. Section 73A of the Town and Country
   Planning Act 1990, as amended (the Act) makes allowance for the submission of a
   planning application for development which has been carried out before the date of
   the application. I have determined the appeal on that basis.
3. I have used the description of the development from the appeal form and the
   decision notice with minor variations as I consider this better reflects the proposal
   before me. However, I have removed the wording ‘retrospective’ from the
   description as this does not constitute a form of development as per Section 55 of
   the Act.
4. During the course of the appeal the revised National Planning Policy Framework
   (the Framework) was published in August 2026. Both the Council and the Appellant
   were invited to submit comments, if appropriate, to the changes which form part of
   the revised Framework which have relevance to the appeal.
Main Issue
5. The main issue in this case is the effects of the appeal proposal upon the character
   and appearance of the area.
Reasons
6. The appeal property (No.127) is located towards the northern end of North Street
   which is characterised by broadly linear runs of mostly mid C20 two storey
   dwellings set back from the street by intervening front gardens, some of which are
   utilised for off-street parking.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6014276


7. The proposal relates to a large single storey timber clad garage/store positioned
   adjacent to the public highway, which is visible from along North Street when
   approaching from the south and is openly visible from Lynch Close and the play
   area opposite No.127 to the west.
8. The garage/store is noticeably different in characteristics to what is found in other
   front gardens in the area. This is as a result of its overall size, massing and
   positioning directly adjacent to the highway. Whilst I appreciate that the
   garage/store has now been finished in green, which has to some extents softened
   its appearance, the garage/store still appears as an unusual and incongruous
   feature when viewed from the surrounding area. Also, due to its positioning tight to
   No.127’s site boundaries, there is no opportunity to provide suitable boundary
   enclosures next to the pavement or to the side, to help reduce its visual
   prominence.
9. Consequently, for the reasons I have set out above, the proposed development
   appears incongruous and detracts from the character and appearance of No.127
   and the surrounding area. It therefore conflicts with Strategy 6 (Development within
   the built up area boundary) and Policy D1 (Design and Local Distinctiveness) of the
   East Devon Local Plan 2013-2031 and Section 14 of the Framework, which
   amongst other matters, require that proposals: respect the key characteristics and
   special qualities of the area in which the development is proposed; relate well to the
   scale, massing, density, height, fenestration and materials of buildings in their
   context; are compatible with the character of the site and its surroundings; respect
   local distinctiveness; and are visually attractive as a result of good architecture.
Conclusions
10. The appeal proposal has a detrimental effect on the character and appearance of
    No.127 and the wider area.
11. As a result of these negative effects, the proposal is in my view unacceptable, and
    contrary to the development plan, when read as a whole. There are no material
    considerations that would justify a decision contrary to the provisions of the
    development plan, in this case.
12. For all of the above reasons, having regard to all matters raised, I conclude that the
    appeal should be dismissed.

J Evans
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
