Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 September 2026
by J Hills MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6014952
Higher Collybeer Farm, Spreyton, Devon EX17 5BA
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by J Mawle of Odstone Storage Ltd against the decision of West Devon Borough
     Council.
•    The application Ref is 1315/26/FUL.
•    The development proposed was originally described as “erection of B8 storage unit”.


Decision
1.    The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for erection of 4 B8
      storage units at Higher Collybeer Farm, Spreyton, Devon EX17 5BA in accordance
      with the terms of the application, Ref 1315/26/FUL, subject to the conditions in the
      attached schedule.
Preliminary matter
2.    An updated version of the National Planning Policy Framework (the Framework)
      was issued in August 2026. The main parties have had an opportunity to comment
      on the relevance of any changes and so, no prejudice has occurred.
3.    The application was readvertised as a proposal for 4 B8 units. The appellant is
      content for the application to be assessed in this way, and I have therefore used
      this description in the main decision above.
Main issue
4.    The main issue is whether the site is a suitable location for the development
      having regard to the provisions of local and national policy.
Reasons
5.    The proposed building would be positioned roadside of a large access drive that
      serves an adjacent B8 unit. It is in the countryside and while isolated from any
      settlement, the appeal site is physically well-related to this existing development. A
      wide access off a busy ‘A’ road would be utilised and within that context, it is very
      unlikely future occupiers would use transport modes other than private vehicles.
6.    Policy TTV1 of the Plymouth & South West Devon Joint Local Plan (LP) sets out
      the Council’s settlement hierarchy which seeks to focus new employment towards
      the main towns with their broad range of services. Economic development is only
      permitted in the countryside where it would support the principles of sustainable
      development set out in policies SPT1, SPT2, TTV1, TTV26, and DEV15. In the

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6014952


      round, these policies promote sustainable transport modes as well as the
      expansion of rural businesses.
7. LP Policy TTV26 seeks to protect the special characteristics and role of the
   countryside, including its best and most versatile agricultural land. Part 1 of it deals
   with exceptional circumstances whereby isolated development will be permitted.
   None of these circumstances are applicable to the appeal proposal. Criterion 2(iv)
   states that development proposals should, where appropriate, respond to a proven
   agricultural, forestry or other occupational need that requires a countryside location.
8. Although the appellant submits that the existing storage business is
   oversubscribed, there is little reason why such units could not, in principle, be
   located in a settlement. Even so, the proposal would remain physically and
   functionally related to an existing rural enterprise. Although such development is
   not inherently dependent upon a countryside location, the proposal seeks to
   expand an established business operating by the appeal site. In that context, the
   proposed location is a logical consequence of that expansion.
9. LP Policy TTV26 provides that the criteria should be applied where appropriate and
   does not require every criterion to be satisfied in every case. In that respect, even if
   there were conflict with criterion 2(iv) it is only one of a number of considerations
   within the policy. Criterion 2(iii) states that development should be complementary
   to existing viable uses. The appeal proposal would be connected to an established
   and viable storage business, representing an extension to that operation rather
   than the introduction of a new and unrelated countryside use.
10. While the planning history is understood, the existence of this established lawful
    business attracts significant weight. The loss of grade 3 agricultural land counts
    against the proposal, though the appeal site is relatively small, and already
    disturbed by an access track. As such, there would be no meaningful reduction in
    the availability of agricultural land. Moreover, the benefits of expanding the
    business would represent a justification for this small loss. For the reasons given, I
    find no overall conflict with LP Policy TTV26.
11. Turning to national policy, Framework Policy S5 identifies that rural business
    development may be supported outside settlements where such a location is
    shown to be necessary. Given the functional relationship between the proposal and
    the existing business, I am satisfied that this requirement is met. Whilst the
    Council's reliance on Framework Policy E2 is noted, I have found that S5 does not
    require a separate demonstration of unmet demand in the circumstances of this
    appeal. Accordingly, I attach limited weight to this concern.
12. The Council's concerns regarding the countryside location of the development and
    its reliance on private vehicle travel are noted. Additionally, it is acknowledged that
    it would be difficult to put restrictions on future occupiers of the storage units. That
    said, the nature of the proposed use is likely to draw interest from those within a
    convenient distance. Even if it did not, the evidence indicates that the development
    would generate a modest level of activity that would be unlikely to result in a
    significant increase in trips.
13. Furthermore, LP policies DEV15 and TTV2 provide direct support for the growth
    and proportionate expansion of rural businesses and enterprise. This is consistent
    with Framework Policy E4 which supports the sustainable growth of businesses in
    rural areas and expressly recognises that development meeting business needs

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6014952


     may need to be located outside settlements and in locations that are not well
     served by public transport. Additionally, any such small-scale increase in activity
     would not conflict with the objectives of Framework Policy TR3.
14. For these reasons, I conclude that the site is a suitable location for the proposed
    development having regard to the provisions of local and national policy. As such,
    there would be no conflict with LP policies SPT1, SPT2, TTV1, TTV26, and DEV15.
Conditions
15. The Council has suggested a number of conditions which I have considered
    against the tests set out in the Framework and Planning Practice Guidance. I have
    made such amendments and omissions as necessary to comply with those
    documents.
16. I have imposed a plans condition in the interests of clarity. The officer report
    identifies that there is an intervening commercial/agricultural development between
    the appeal site and neighbours. It would not therefore be necessary to restrict the
    use to that granted by the permission in respect of living conditions. With regard to
    the effect of the development on the character and appearance of the area, other
    uses would require express approval of the Council. Moreover, the building’s
    physical appearance would not alter if the use were to change. It is also
    unnecessary to impose a condition to define what is permitted. For these reasons I
    have not imposed this suggested condition.
17. While the environmental health officer comments are noted, the appeal building
    would be some considerable distance from the nearest residential properties, and a
    storage use has not been shown to warrant restrictions to opening hours. I have not
    imposed this condition.
18. The evidence before me does not demonstrate that the proposed development
    would give rise to residential amenity or biodiversity impacts requiring further
    investigation, mitigation or monitoring beyond that already assessed.
    Consequently, I am not persuaded that the submission and approval of a
    Construction and Ecological Management Plan is necessary to make the
    development acceptable in planning terms, and I have not imposed the condition.
19. In the interests of the character and appearance of the area, I have imposed the
    suggested lighting condition. A condition securing parking spaces is reasonable in
    highway safety terms, and a drainage compliance condition is needed to deal with
    surface water. It is however not appropriate to include BNG requirements, as these
    are dealt with under separate legislation.
Conclusion
20. For the reasons given, the appeal succeeds.



J Hills
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6014952


Schedule of conditions


    1. The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than three years from
       the date of this decision.

    2. The development hereby approved shall be implemented in accordance with the
       following plans: Exe1; Exe 2; Exe 3; Exe 5, Exe 6; and Exe 7.

    3. The parking spaces as shown on approved plan Exe 7 shall be provided prior to
       the first use of the development hereby permitted and thereafter be retained free
       of obstruction to enable the parking of vehicles for the lifetime of the
       development.

    4. No external lighting shall be installed on the building unless it is in accordance
       with details that have been submitted to and approved in writing by the local
       planning authority. Details shall include design, siting, illumination type, and lux
       level.

    5. Prior to the first use of the development hereby permitted, the surface water
       drainage scheme shown on drawing Exe 5 shall be fully installed and brought
       into operation. The drainage scheme shall thereafter be retained and maintained
       for the lifetime of the development.




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
