Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 16 September 2026
by Eleni Marshall BSc (hons) MSc FRICS FAAV MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 23 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6014226
Malthouse Farm, Malthouse Lane, Foston, Derby, Derbyshire, DE65 5PU
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
    to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Michael Rowan against South Derbyshire District Council.
•   The application Ref is DMPA/2026/0337.
•   The development proposed is retention of a glazed balustrade to existing flat roof.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed, and planning permission is granted for retention of a glazed
   balustrade to existing flat roof at Malthouse Farm, Malthouse Lane, Foston, Derby,
   Derbyshire, DE65 5PU Ref: DMPA/2026/0337 and the plans submitted with it
   subject to the following conditions:
     1) The development hereby permitted shall be maintained in accordance with the
        following approved plans: 4720/206/01 – General Arrangement – As Proposed;
     2) The external materials of the balustrade hereby permitted shall be maintained
        as outlined within the application form and as labelled on the approved plan for
        the lifetime of the development;
     3) The flat roof area around which the balustrade is constructed shall not be
        utilised as a balcony, roof garden or similar amenity area without the grant of
        further specific permission from the Local Planning Authority.
Procedural Matters
2. Since the determination of this application the Government issued the new revised
   version of the National Planning Policy Framework 2026. On this occasion I do not
   consider there any need to revert to the main parties regarding this change. The
   new policies for decision making do not substantially alter matters relating to the
   main issues which are the subject of this appeal.
3. I have utilised the Council’s description of the proposal as it describes the proposal
   more concisely than that on the original application form.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are the impact of the proposal upon i) neighbouring residential
   amenity and ii) the character of the wider rural area.
Reasons
5. The appeal site was originally a two storey, brick built, detached dwelling, which
   has been subject modern extensions, situated within a small cluster of residential

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6014226


       properties, in a rural/countryside context, accessed off Malthouse Lane. The host
       dwelling stands within a large plot with the immediate neighbour, The Maltings,
       standing to the north of the host dwelling. The appeal site has evolved over time,
       and it is evident, even without the relevant planning history before me, that the host
       dwelling has evolved, significantly, in terms of extensions that are modern which
       has created clear legibility between the original building and the newer extensions.
6. The glazed balustrade has been erected on a single storey flat roof section to the
   rear of the host dwelling and is positioned on the roof of the furthest rear extension
   resulting in clear balustrading (in the region of 1.1 metres high) having been
   installed along the rear edge of the roof and side facing back towards the host
   dwelling. In addition, obscure glazing has been erected (in the region of 1.8 metre
   high) along the side facing the neighbouring property (to the north) acting as a
   privacy screen. The proposal is submitted on a retrospective basis.
7. The area upon which the balustrade has been constructed has not formally resulted
   in creation of a usable balcony and whilst I note comments with regard to potential
   for the intention of facilitating use of the space (as a balcony) the proposal that is
   before me is specific in its limitation to retention of the glazed balustrade to the
   existing flat roof as per the development description and submission documents. It
   is on this basis that I have determined the proposal.
Neighbouring Residential Amenity
8. The existing extensions1 were designed to ensure that the two storey elements
   step down to a single storey flat roof element where development approached the
   shared boundary, to the north of the appeal site, in accordance with the 45-degree
   rule set out within the South Derbyshire Design Guide Design Supplementary
   Planning Document 2017 (SPD). The approach sought to safeguard the amenity of
   neighbouring occupants by limiting overbearing impact and maintaining an
   acceptable sense of openness.
9. Whilst the objective of the guidance within the SPD, and the 45-degree rule, are
   acknowledged in the context of the previous planning permission I do not find that a
   balustrade should be assessed in the same way as a two-storey extension which
   would visually, and physically, be of more substantial construction than the glazed
   balustrading. The balustrade is, evidently, on top of a flat roof and does to an
   extent increase the height and massing at that point of the host dwelling, however, I
   do not find that the proposal gives rise to an increased sense of enclosure which
   would warrant refusal taking into account the positioning and proximity to the
   neighbouring windows and the size of the garden space at The Maltings.
10. At the time of my site visit I viewed the proposal from The Maltings both inside the
    property (a bedroom (first floor) and lounge area (ground floor)) as well as from the
    patio area to the rear of the neighbouring dwelling. The balustrade is, evidently,
    visible from such viewpoints, however, I do not find that the presence of the
    balustrade produces a prominent and visually intrusive feature nor that it could be
    considered incongruous and dominant taking into account the modern design, and
    positioning, of the host dwelling as a result of the existing extensions and
    alterations. I do not find that the proposal gives rise to unacceptable impact on the
    residential amenity of neighbouring occupants nor that it would result (if retained) in

1
    DMPA/2022/0676


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate          2
Appeal Decision 6014226


     a harmful loss of privacy and increased perception of overlooking when assessed,
     as outlined above, on the basis that the proposal that is before me does not seek
     (or have) permission for the flat roof in question to be utilised as a balcony.
11. The Council acknowledge that the area upon which the balustrade has been
    constructed has not formally resulted in creation of a usable balcony, however, the
    assessment of the proposal appears to go on to consider the creation of a balcony
    due to commentary regarding the presence of the balustrade facilitating views from
    an elevated vantage point that would not ordinarily exist. I would reiterate that, at
    this stage, the proposal is for the retention of a glazed balustrade which is stated,
    by the appellant, to have been designed to preclude a view into the neighbouring
    garden from the associated bedroom and vice versa. The proposal is, therefore,
    clearly submitted as retention of a glazed balustrade to the existing flat roof
    fundamentally to prevent direct views into and out of the bedroom in question.
12. Whilst the balustrading does have some small gaps between the panels having
    stood in the relevant bedroom of the host dwelling, I find that it is effective in
    reducing clear views into the neighbouring garden (as a result of day-to-day use
    within that room and stood at the window) from the bedroom which would otherwise
    be available without the obscure glazing. I appreciate neighbouring resident’s
    concern regarding the perception of overlooking from the flat roof area itself,
    however, the proposal falls to be assessed from the bedroom window in question
    and should this appeal be allowed, a condition can be applied preventing utilisation
    of the flat roof as a balcony without specific permission from the Council to control
    any permission granted. The perceived impacts of utilisation of the flat roof, as a
    balcony, would therefore be assessed on their own merits in the event an
    application was subsequently submitted for this.
13. Subject to conditions the proposal would be consistent with South Derbyshire Local
    Plan Policy H27 which seeks to ensure that alterations are not unduly detrimental
    to the living conditions of adjoining properties, Policy SD1 which requires
    development to not lead to adverse impacts on the amenity of existing and future
    occupants and Policy BNE1 which expects development proposals to not have an
    undue adverse effect on the privacy and amenity of existing nearby occupiers. The
    proposal would also be consistent with the SPD which seeks, in terms of its
    guidance, to ensure a high standard of amenity for existing residents and National
    Decision-Making Policy S5 which confirms that the alteration of an existing building
    should be approved, unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially
    outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the National Decision-
    Making Policies in the Framework.
Character of the wider rural area
14. The balustrade is located to the rear of the property and would not be readily visible
    from the public realm albeit I note glimpsed views are available from Malthouse
    Lane between the appeal site and The Maltings to the north. The design of the
    balustrade is distinctly modern and of a contemporary design. Whilst the site is
    located within a rural/countryside context characterised by converted farmhouses
    and traditionally designed buildings, I find that the proposed balustrade is
    appropriate for the host dwelling.
15. The balustrade is entirely consistent with the modern architectural style of the rear
    extension on which it is sited and which already strongly contrasts with the


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
Appeal Decision 6014226


     traditional character of the original dwelling and the surrounding area. The
     balustrade design is, therefore, in keeping with the character of the host dwelling
     and would not result in the visually intrusive and incongruous feature that is at odds
     with the character of the wider rural area taking into account the clearly modern
     extensions that have been approved and constructed as outlined.
16. The proposal would be consistent with Policy H27 which requires alterations to
    dwellings to be of a scale and character in keeping with the property, Policy BNE1
    which requires development to be well designed and the guidance within the SPD
    which advises that it is usually necessary to reflect the existing character, form and
    proportion of buildings (in this case as a result of the clearly modern extensions to
    the host dwelling).
Conditions
17. The Council’s appeals questionnaire does not suggest any conditions. There is no
    requirement for a time condition (usually attached to comply with Section 51 of the
    Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004) due to the fact that the application is
    made on a retrospective basis and has, therefore, already commenced/been
    completed. A condition requiring the development to be in accordance with the
    approved plans is required to control and define the development which is granted
    consent. A materials condition is required to ensure the existing finish, as
    submitted and as assessed, is retained as part of the development.
18. It is clear from both the appellant’s statement of case, and the Council’s delegated
    report, that use of the flat roof as a balcony is a mode of use which the (existing)
    planning consent (DMPA/2022/0676) is stated to not cover nor is such use part of
    the development proposal that is before me. Despite this, for the reasons set out,
    find it is necessary to impose a condition controlling the use of the flat roof as a
    balcony unless a specific grant of permission has been obtained from Council.
Other Matters
19. I note third party comments received during the application process – four in total
    (three from the same individual). I have dealt with the main issues raised within
    these comments in the main body of this decision letter.
20. I note comments that the timber guard over the bedroom door could be removed,
    however, whilst this is a possibility, a condition preventing utilisation of the flat roof
    in question as a balcony, without a grant of planning permission from the Council, is
    sufficient to control and define the use of the flat roof in the context of this appeal
    which seeks to only consider the impact of the retention of the glazed balustrade as
    outlined above. In addition to this the timber guarding on the bedroom window is
    specifically annotated on the proposed plans and would, therefore, be secured as
    part of the plan condition stating the approved plans.
Conclusion
21. For the reasons outlined above, and taking into account all other matters raised, I
    conclude that the appeal should be allowed subject to conditions.

Eleni Marshall
INSPECTOR


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate         4
