Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 8 September 2026
by Mr C J Tivey BSc (Hons) BPl MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date:22 September 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6014215
 30A Blackamoor Lane, Maidenhead SL6 8RD
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr & Mrs Lamb against the decision of the Royal Borough of Windsor and
      Maidenhead Council.
 •    The application Ref is 26/00622.
 •    The development proposed is for single storey side/front extension, single storey side/rear extension,
      new front canopy, 1no front bay window, alterations to fenestration and 1no detached outbuilding.


Decision
1.   The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters

2.   A new National Planning Policy Framework (the ‘Framework’) was issued on 17 August
     2026 which replaced the previous version published in December 2024, and all other
     iterations. Paragraph 1 of Policy S4, as set out therein, stipulates that development
     proposals within settlements should be approved unless the benefits of doing so would be
     substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the national
     decision-making policies in the framework.

2.   Policy L2 of the Framework stipulates that substantial weight should be given to the
     benefits where proposals would achieve, amongst other things, the creation of additional
     homes or floor space within settlements through additional development within existing
     plots, provided that it is consistent with the overall street scene (Policy L2, para. 1.d i.).
     Furthermore, paragraph 1.d.iii. of Policy L2 states that where the development would
     involve the use of residential curtilages, it should not occupy more than twice the footprint
     of all existing buildings on the site and, following development, should retain at least 50%
     of the non-developed area within the curtilage of the existing buildings, unless additional
     development can be accommodated without harm to the overall character of the area.
     Policy DP3 of the Framework sets out the key principles for well-designed places.

3.   I consider that this new national policy does not affect the substance of the proposal before
     me and therefore it was not necessary to refer back to the parties, I have determined the
     appeal on this basis.
Main Issues
4.   The main issue is the effect of the proposal upon the living conditions of the occupants of
     30 Blackamoor Lane, with specific reference to light and outlook.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6014215


Reasons
5.   The appeal site comprises a modern semi-detached dwelling located within a relatively
     generous plot which broadens out towards its rear. No30, adjoining, has a more limited
     rear garden area with the shared boundary between the two being relatively short,
     demarcated by a section of single storey flank wall of no30A and close boarded fencing
     that leads up to the front south-westerly corner of an existing summer house within the
     appeal site.
6.   The proposed extension would be adjacent to French doors serving the living space of
     no30, as well as its immediate rear sitting out area/patio.
7.   I note that there is a discrepancy between the Council and the appellants as to the extent
     of the projection of the rear extension beyond the neighbouring house, no dimensions have
     been provided on the submitted drawing although a scale bar was provided.
     Notwithstanding this, the proposed extension would extend along the shared boundary for
     a quite significant proportion of its length and I consider, in this particular instance, would
     appear overbearing in nature to the occupants of the neighbouring property.
8.   The Council highlights that their Borough-wide Design Guide stipulates that development
     should avoid obstruction to light by ensuring the centre of an existing window serving a
     habitable room does not fall within 60° of a line drawn from the edge of an extension. They
     go on to state that based on the submitted plans, there would be a breach of relevant light
     angles to no30; whereas the appellant stipulates that the proposed rear extension would
     not impinge on a 45° line taken from the mid point of the neighbouring doors.
9.   The drawings before me do not show the location of these windows on the proposed site
     plan and therefore it is difficult to assess who is correct, however a reduction in outlook
     would be quite significant in this case. Due to the orientation being north-west of the
     neighbouring property, any overshadowing caused or consequent loss of sunlight, would
     however not be material.
10. I wholly agree that it is not unacceptable for an extension to be visible from neighbouring
    windows and gardens, but bearing in mind the limited length of the shared boundary and
    the staggered nature of no30 with no30A, I consider, on balance, that the extension at the
    depth proposed, in such close proximity to the neighbouring property would give rise to a
    demonstrable loss of outlook from its rear windows and patio. On this basis I find the
    proposal conflicts with Policy QP3 of the Borough Local Plan 2013 – 2033 which is
    concerned with the character and design of new development and, amongst other things,
    requires proposals to have no unacceptable effect on the amenities enjoyed by the
    occupants of adjoining properties.
Conclusion
11. Having regard to the above and all other matters raised, I conclude that the appeal be
    dismissed.

C Tivey
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate             2
