Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 17 September 2026
by Eleni Marshall BSc (hons) MSc FRICS FAAV MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 29 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6014124
25 Norfolk Drive, Melton Mowbray, Leicestershire, LE13 0AJ
•   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 against a refusal
    to grant planning permission.
•   The appeal is made by Jonathan Parkhurst against Melton Borough Council.
•   The application Ref is 26/00211/FULHH.
•   The development proposed is proposed two-storey rear extension, demolition of outbuilding, and
    renovation of existing building.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed, and planning permission is granted for proposed two-storey
   rear extension, demolition of outbuilding, and renovation of existing building 25
   Norfolk Drive, Melton Mowbray, Leicestershire, LE13 0AJ in accordance with the
   terms of the application Ref: 26/00211/FULHH and the plans submitted with it
   subject to the following conditions:
     1) The development hereby permitted shall be commenced before the expiration of
        three years from the date of this permission;
     2) The development shall be carried out in full accordance with the following
        approved plans and thereafter the development shall be retained in full
        accordance with those approved plans and details: location plan PL000;
        proposed floor plans PL003C and PL005C, proposed elevations PL008C and
        PL009C, proposed site plan PL001A, driveway access plan PL010B, boundary
        fence elevations PL011A and site plan LP012;
     3) The external materials to be used in the develoopment shall be carried out in
        accordance with the details shown in the approved plans and shall be retained
        thereafter;
     4) Prior to commencement of development above ground level relating to the two-
        storey rear extension a biodiversity enhancement scheme shall be submitted to,
        and approved in writing by, the Local Planning Authority. The scheme shall
        include details of bat roosting features, including specification, location and
        installation. Thereafter the development shall be retained in full accordance
        with those approved details;
     5) No construction work shall take place outside of the hours of 08:00 – 18:00
        Monday to Friday.
Procedural Matters
2. Since the determination of this application, and submission of this appeal, the
   Government issued the new revised version of the National Planning Policy

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6014124


     Framework 2026. On this occasion I do not consider there any need to revert to
     the main parties regarding this. The new policies for decision making do not
     substantially alter matters relating to the main issues within this appeal.
3. I have utilised the Council’s description of the proposal as it describes the proposal
   more concisely.
4. This appeal is accompanied by an application for costs. This is subject to a
   separate decision.
Main Issues
5. The main issues are the impact of the proposal upon the host dwelling, street
   scene and character and appearance of the surrounding residential area and
   neighbouring residential amenity with regard to overbearing impact and
   overshadowing.
Reasons
6. The appeal site is a two storey, detached, dwelling that stands within a modern
   housing estate characterised by detached and semi-detached dwellings arranged
   in a consistent layout pattern. Whilst the dwellings share some similarity in
   architectural detailing, and materials, there is clear variation stemming from
   subsequent alterations and extensions as a result of the inevitable evolution and
   alteration of properties within the locality.
7. The proposal seeks to construct a two-storey rear extension with a depth in the
   region of 5 metres which would retain in the region of 10 metres, in depth, for the
   rear garden following demolition of an outbuilding and renovation of an existing
   building. No refusal reasons are raised with regard to the latter elements, and I find
   no reason to conclude differently. In addition, the proposals would include
   alterations to the front elevation and boundary treatment albeit the latter does not
   appear to have been included within the development description in either the
   original application form or the decision notice itself.
8. Despite this, it is evident that the proposed boundary treatment has clearly formed
   part of the Council’s determination, is shown on the proposed plans as well as
   forming part of the discussion at planning committee with its inclusion on the stated
   refusal reason. In that regard the proposal would see the introduction of a
   boundary fence and sliding gate with the proposed boundary treatment being in the
   region of 1 metre in height which is, as noted within the Council’s report, consistent
   with that which could typically be erected under permitted development rights
   beyond the control of the Council. The presence of such a fallback position is,
   therefore, a material consideration within the context of this appeal.
9. The proposal was refused, following planning committee, for a single refusal reason
   which ultimately raises several key issues. These include, for the avoidance of
   doubt, the scale and massing of the two-storey rear extension, and alterations to
   the frontage, in the context of the host dwelling and plot size, the character and
   appearance of the surrounding residential area due to the introduction of a
   boundary fence and gate and the impact of the proposal upon neighbouring
   properties with regard to overbearing and over shadowing.
10. The proposed rear extension would be positioned entirely to the rear of the dwelling
    which would limit its views from the public realm albeit I note that general views,

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
Appeal Decision 6014124


     through neighbouring properties, may be available within the street scene and from
     the open space to the east. The proposal should be considered within the context
     of the site and surrounding development pattern and it is evident that a number of
     properties, within the locality, have been extended meaning that extensions of a
     similar nature are not uncharacteristic. The rear extension would remain
     proportionate in the context of the host dwelling, and I do not find that in terms of
     scale, massing or extent, that the proposal would result in a dominant or
     disproportionate form of development that would warrant refusal. Furthermore, the
     proposal would retain an appropriate garden depth resulting in development that
     would be proportionate to the plot size.
11. It is acknowledged that the use of render and contemporary detailing would be a
    contrast and change in the context of the current host dwelling material palette,
    however, as outlined above, properties within the immediate locality do not exhibit a
    strictly uniform palette. The estate is therefore capable of accommodating a more
    contemporary interpretation of a residential design, enhancing the surroundings
    with National Decision-Making Policy DP3 also being clear that this should not
    preclude innovation or change where appropriate.
12. The proposed boundary treatment to the front of the appeal site would be in the
    region of 1 metre in height which would be modest in scale and reflective of a
    domestic character. Whilst the frontages of properties within the immediate locality
    are generally open, I note some examples of low boundary walls further along
    Norfolk Drive and other low-level examples of general enclosure. It is also a
    material consideration that the General Permitted Development Order (GDPO)
    would allow the construction of a gate, fence or other means of enclosure at a
    height of 1 metre beyond the control of the Council.
13. In the event the appeal failed, the appellant could, therefore, still erect the proposed
    fencing and gate without a requirement for planning permission. It would,
    therefore, be unreasonable to refuse the proposal based upon this element with
    Leicestershire County Council Highways, as the local highway authority, referring to
    standing advice with no objection to the proposal on the grounds of highway safety.
    In addition, the plans demonstrate appropriate visibility splays, and, at low level, I
    have no evidence before me to conclude that the proposal would represent an
    issue with regard to highway safety.
14. The introduction of further built form would, evidently, result in a degree of
    additional overshadowing at certain times of the day, however, within the context of
    an established residential site, and taking into account the guidance within the
    Melton Borough Design Supplementary Planning Document 2021 (SPD), some
    reduction in light is acceptable so long as it does not result in a significant or
    unreasonable loss of amenity. The proposal is supported by proportionate daylight
    and outlook assessment within the submitted documents which apply the
    established 45-degree guideline (the “45-degree check” specifically referenced
    within the SPD), as well as a worst-case scenario analysis, on amended plans,
    upon a 60-degree guideline. The evidence supports that the introduction of the
    proposed built form, to the rear of the property, would result in limited
    encroachment into notional sight lines and would not have an unacceptable impact
    upon daylight and outlook respectively in the context of neighbouring properties.
15. The proposal would not result in a material or unacceptable deterioration in daylight
    or outlook and would not result in unacceptable overlooking into neighbouring

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        3
Appeal Decision 6014124


     dwellings. There would, evidently, be some level of intervisibility between the host
     dwelling and neighbouring gardens, however, this is to an extent to be expected
     within a residential estate, and I do not find that this would be exacerbated as a
     result of extension to an existing property. The existing separation distance
     between the host dwelling and the property to the north is in the region of 13.3
     metres which would be reduced to in the region of 10 metres, however, the
     intervening distance would be sufficient to prevent unacceptable overbearing
     impact having regard for the single storey nature of the property to the north and
     the absence of directly facing habitable rooms along with the boundary treatment
     between the properties in question.
16. The existing flank separation distance of in the region of 2.1 metres would remain
    unchanged between the host dwelling and 23 Norfolk Drive. The proposal would
    not materially alter the spatial relationship between the properties with the proposal
    being positioned so that it would not result in harmful loss of daylight or sunlight to
    habitable rooms as well as not giving rise to a breach of the 45-degree rule
    assessed in plan and elevation terms. 31 Norfolk Drive is sufficiently separated
    and forward of the host dwelling and the proposed extension would be adjacent to
    the access route, driveway and garaging for 29 Norfolk Drive which would give rise
    to no unacceptable impacts with regard to residential amenity.
17. Overall, there would evidently be some impact as a result of proposals of this
    nature where properties are constructed in relatively close proximity to each other
    within a residential estate. The threshold for determining unacceptable impact is
    set out within the Melton Borough Local Plan 2018 (LP) Policy D1 which requires
    amenity of neighbours and neighbouring properties not to be compromised. Whilst
    comments from the neighbours, and planning committee, are acknowledged, based
    upon the evidence before me, I cannot reasonably conclude that the proposal
    would result in overbearing impact and overshadowing, or other issues, to the
    detriment of residential amenity that would warrant refusal.
18. The proposal includes a Juliet balcony serving a first-floor bedroom; however, the
    feature would not provide a usable outdoor platform that would allow a prolonged
    external use. It would, essentially, be a full height window which would not
    increase opportunity for overlooking through natural use of the room in question.
    The relationship between the proposed windows and those of neighbouring
    properties is typical of residential layouts and would not introduce new or materially
    harmful opportunity for overlooking beyond that which already exists in terms of
    relationship between the host dwelling and immediately surrounding properties.
19. The proposal would be consistent with LP Policy D1 which requires siting and
    layout to be sympathetic to the character of the area, that development should be
    designed to reflect the wider context of the local area and respect the local
    vernacular without stifling innovative design and that amenity of neighbours and
    neighbouring properties should not be compromised. The proposal would also be
    consistent with LP Policy EN6 which requires proposals to contribute positively to
    the individual character of a settlement.
20. In accordance with National Decision-Making Policy S4, development proposals
    within settlements should also be approved unless the benefits of doing so would
    be substantially outweighed by any adverse effects, when assessed against the
    National Decision-Making Policies in the Framework. The proposal would also
    integrate with and enhance the surroundings through the use of materials and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate        4
Appeal Decision 6014124


     architectural features which should not preclude innovation or change where
     appropriate in accordance with National Decision-Making Policy DP3.
Other Matters
21. I note a large number of objections to the proposal. The majority of objections and
    concerns relate to the scale of the proposal and its impact on residential amenity
    with regard to overshadowing, outlook and loss of light and privacy. I have dealt
    with matters relating to residential amenity in the context of the main issues above.
    Furthermore, I have dealt with issues relating to scale, massing and extent, along
    with materials, above. There is no evidence to suggest that the scale of the
    development could facilitate a more intensive use of the property given that it is
    submitted as a proposal that would, based upon the floorplans, allow for
    reconfiguration and creation of larger rooms which itself is not determinative of
    more intensive property use.
22. The property would be retained as a 4-bedroom dwelling, and the level of
    accommodation would remain consistent with a typical family dwelling whilst
    parking provision would remain an accordance with the relevant standards set out
    within the Leicestershire Highway Design Guide. Concern has been raised as to
    the proposed boundary fencing; however, this has been dealt with along with the
    main issue above in response to the stated refusal reason. The plans demonstrate
    safe access can be achieved and there is no evidence to suggest that the proposal
    would result in detrimental impact to highway safety.
23. It is inevitable that, during construction works, there would be temporary disruption
    however, such matters are not a material planning consideration and given the
    scale of the proposal, as a domestic extension, it would be disproportionate and
    unreasonable to add a condition requiring the submission of a construction method
    statement taking into the account the requirements of National Decision-Making
    Policy DM6. A condition controlling working hours can, however, be applied to any
    planning permission granted.
24. I note that it is stated that there are minor errors on the drawings such as, for
    example, the bungalow on the plans as 27 in fact being number 31 – for the
    avoidance of doubt my assessment as to the proposals on neighbouring properties
    above (and reference to their numbering) relates to the numbering on the plans that
    are before me. A potential error in numbering does not, however change the basis
    of assessment with it being clear, within the above, that the relevant properties
    have appropriately been considered in the context of the proposals.
25. Concerns have been raised within objections as to timings of the ecology survey
    and whilst comments regarding Biodiversity Net Gain are acknowledged, as
    introduced to the Environment Act 2021, these do not apply to householder
    development and there is no, comparably formal (mandatory) requirement for the
    proposal to deliver a measurable BNG in this case. All bat species are afforded full
    protection under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (as amended) and the
    Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended).
Conditions
26. The Council’s questionnaire suggests conditions alongside the conditions that were
    presented as part of the application being considered by planning committee. A
    time condition is attached to comply with Section 51 of the Planning and

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       5
Appeal Decision 6014124


     Compulsory Purchase Act 2004. A condition requiring the development to be in
     accordance with the approved plans is required to control and define the
     development which is granted consent. A materials condition is required to ensure
     the development is of satisfactory design and implemented in accordance with the
     approved details.
27. A condition controlling construction work to take place within defined hours is
    required to protect the amenity of neighbouring occupiers during the construction
    phase. I have not applied the suggested condition with regard to the sliding gate
    being set back from the highway given that the boundary treatment, and gate, is
    already shown on a plan stated to have been approved as part of the plan
    condition. I also find a further condition of this nature is unnecessary given the
    fallback position relating to this element.
28. Submission of a Biodiversity Enhancement Scheme does not require such details
    to be submitted and approved prior to development. I have, therefore, amended
    this condition in terms of its trigger to require submission and approval prior to
    commencement of works above ground level of the two-storey rear extension.
Conclusion
29. For the reasons outlined above, and taking into account all other matters raised, I
    conclude that the appeal should be allowed subject to conditions.

Eleni Marshall
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       6
