    Appeal Decision
    Site visit made on 23 September 2026
    by G Ellis BSc (Hons) MSc MRTPI
    an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
    Decision date: 01 October 2026


    Appeal Ref:6014361
    17 Roundway, Camberley, Surrey, GU15 1NR
    •   The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
        against a refusal to grant planning permission.
    •   The appeal is made by Tetyana Frew against the decision of Surrey Heath Borough Council.
    •   The application Ref is 26/0493/FFU.
    •   The development proposed is the erection of a boundary fencing.

Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2. On 17 August 2026, a revised National Planning Policy Framework (the
   Framework) was published. The parts of the Framework relevant to this appeal
   have not substantively changed. I have therefore not sought further submissions. I
   have had regard to the latest version of the Framework where relevant in this
   appeal.
Main Issue
3. The main issue is the effect of the development on the character and appearance
   of the area, including the existing trees/vegetation.
Reasons
4. 17 Roundway is a detached property within a residential estate which has an open
   and verdant character. It forms part of a Hedged Estate Character Area as
   identified in the Council’s Western Urban Area Character Supplementary Planning
   Document (WUACSPD)1. The guiding principles for development in this area (HE1
   to HE4) require front gardens to be enclosed by hedges, and resist development,
   including hard boundary treatments, that erodes the area's soft, green character.
5. The proposal would result in a significant length of 2m high, close-boarded fence to
   the front boundary. Introducing a solid structure in front of the existing landscaping
   would create a harsh edge to the back edge of the pavement, out of keeping with
   the prevailing character of the area.
6. The property has an extensive front boundary that curves around with the road. As
   there is no built form on the opposite side of the road at this point, the proposed


1
    Surrey Heath Development Framework 2006 – 2028 Document dated May 2012.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
 Appeal Decision 6014361


     fence would be particularly exposed and would appear visually intrusive and
     incongruous in the street scene.
7. I did observe a similar fence further along Roundway, which forms the side
   boundary to 1 Roundway Close. The background to this boundary is not before me,
   but its weathered appearance suggests it has been in situ for some time.
   Nevertheless, it shows how a boundary treatment of this form appears stark and
   visually prominent and contrasts with the estate's open and verdant appearance. It
   therefore reinforces my view that fencing of this form does not positively integrate
   with the character of the area.
8. The driveway and the area immediately in front of the house would remain open,
   and the landscaping would be seen above the fence. I also recognise that the fence
   would provide a defined and secure boundary with associated security. These
   aspects do not, however, diminish the identified harm from losing the soft, green
   nature of the existing boundary, which contributes to the character of the area, and
   security measures could be achieved in other ways.
9. The installation of the fencing would require the cutting back and some removal of
   existing trees and vegetation. The tree trunks are situated close to the back edge of
   the footpath, and the information provided with the application lacks detailed
   specifications on the precise placement of the fence posts and the construction
   methods to ensure the existing vegetation is sufficiently safeguarded. There would
   be some flexibility in the precise positioning of the fence posts, and further
   information could potentially address this aspect. Nevertheless, these details would
   not overcome the key concerns identified above.
10. Overall, I find that the extent and form of the proposed fencing would create an
    uncharacteristic hard edge to the street which would be harmful to the character
    and appearance of the area. The proposal therefore conflicts with Policy DM9 of
    the Surrey Heath Core Strategy and Development Management Policies 2012, the
    WUACSPD and Principle 9.1 of the Residential Design Guide. These policies and
    guidance seek high-quality design that respects and enhances the character of its
    surroundings and, in particular, discourage panel fencing when visible from the
    public realm.
11. There would also be conflict with Policies DH1and DH5 of the Surrey Heath
    Emerging Local Plan 2019-2039. Again, the proposal would be contrary to the
    design principles and would not demonstrate how trees and hedgerows are to be
    retained, including during construction.
Conclusion
12. For the reasons set out and having regard to all other matters raised, the appeal is
    dismissed.

G Ellis
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       2
