Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 4 September 2026
by David Reed BSc DipTP DMS MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State for Housing, Communities and Local Government
Decision date: 1 October 2026


Appeal Ref: 6014749
8 Ospringe Road, Faversham ME13 7LJ
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mrs Karen McCartney-Samples against the decision of Swale Borough
     Council.
•    The application Ref 26/501240/FULL, dated 30 March 2026, was refused on 28 July 2026.
•    The development proposed is the removal of the existing timber front entrance door and frame and
     replacement with new composite front entrance door and frame, colour to match existing.

Decision
1. The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for the removal of the
   existing timber front entrance door and frame and replacement with new composite
   front entrance door and frame, colour to match existing at 8 Ospringe Road,
   Faversham ME13 7LJ, in accordance with the terms of the application Ref
   26/501240/FULL, dated 30 March 2026, subject to the following conditions:
       1. The development to which this permission relates must be begun not later than
          the expiration of three years beginning with the date of this permission.
       2. The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with the
          following approved plans: Location Plan, Existing and Proposed Elevation
       3. Prior to the development hereby permitted being carried out, the detailed
          specification of the door and frame including design, colour and finish shall be
          submitted to and approved in writing by the local planning authority. The
          development shall then be carried out as agreed.
Main Issue
2.     The main issue is the effect of the proposal on the character and appearance of
       the host property and street scene and the Faversham Conservation Area (CA) of
       which it forms part.
Reasons
3.     The proposal is to replace the current timber front door of No 8 Ospringe Road, a
       traditional mid/late 19th century semi-detached property sited hard up to the
       footway in a road of similar late Victorian housing within the Faversham CA. An
       Article 4(2) Direction dated May 2007 means planning permission is required: this
       is to protect the character and appearance of the area by controlling minor
       alterations to the front/public elevations of buildings in the CA.



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6014749


4.       The significance of the Faversham CA lies in its well-preserved historic townscape
         which in Ospringe Road is characterised by brick built late Victorian housing. The
         CA appraisal states that ‘the loss of original timber doors and windows, especially
         in housing’ is considered harmful (my emphasis). However, in this particular case,
         the two front facing windows have been replaced with white framed UPVC double
         glazing and the front door, whilst of wood, is not original either. The appearance of
         the house has thus already been somewhat compromised.
5.       No 8 complements the appearance of the other half of the semi-detached property,
         No 10. In a clear precedent1, No 10 was recently granted planning permission for
         replacement front windows (previously UPVC) and door (previously a non-original
         door like No 8). These alterations include improved sash-style UPVC windows but
         also demonstrate how a composite door, as proposed at No 8, can maintain the
         character and appearance of the property.
6.       The current non-original timber door has no particular design quality or character.
         Given composite doors are available with a variety of glazing options, in various
         colours and finishes, some like that at No 10 virtually indistinguishable from
         vertical planks of timber, there is no reason why a suitable replacement door
         cannot be selected that maintains the character of the building and street. The
         appellant accepts a condition could be imposed requiring approval of the precise
         details of the door before installation and in the circumstances, this is both
         reasonable and necessary.
Conclusion
7.       For these reasons a replacement composite door and frame would not significantly
         affect the character and appearance of the host property, the street scene or the
         Faversham CA of which it forms part. It would not conflict with Policies CP4,
         DM14, DM16 or DM33 of the Swale Borough Local Plan 2017 or Policies FAV10
         and FAV11 of the Faversham Neighbourhood Plan 2024. These require high-
         quality design, taking account of the Faversham Design Guidance and Codes,
         which reinforces and retains local distinctiveness, preserving or enhancing the
         character or appearance of heritage assets such as the Faversham CA. Allowing
         the door also complies with the legislative duty to have special regard to the
         desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of the CA.
8.       Three conditions are necessary, to impose the standard implementation time limit,
         to define the approved plans in the interests of certainty and to require approval of
         the precise details of the door given its sensitive location in the CA.
9. Having regard to the above the appeal should be allowed.



David Reed
INSPECTOR




1
    Ref 25/501285/FULL. The Council offer no reasoning as to how the cases can be distinguished.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                  2
