Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 23 September 2026
by S Sharp BSc(Hons) BA(Hons) DipTP MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 30th September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6014929
Pennys, Blackwater Road, Buckland St Mary, Chard, Somerset TA20 3LD
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by Mr George Bannister against the decision of Somerset Council.
•    The application reference is 26/00744/HOU.
•    The development proposed is restoration and enhancement of the original cottage, revised two-
     storey side extension, external material alterations across the site.

Decision
1.    The appeal is dismissed.
Preliminary Matters
2.    I have used the description from the amended application form included in the
      appellant’s evidence, restricting the content to the elements of the proposal that
      are development and removing the bullet points.
3.    Some of the evidence refers to the appeal site’s address as Blackmoor House but
      I have used the address given in the application form.
Main Issues
4.    The main issues are the effect of the proposed development on:
           •    the character and appearance of the host dwelling and the surrounding area
                including the special qualities of the Blackdown Hills National Landscape;
                and,
           •    protected species, specifically bats.
Reasons

Character and appearance
5.    The appeal site is located within the countryside, at the end of a small group of
      dwellings, set within the Blackdown Hills National Landscape. The host dwelling
      dates from the late nineteenth century. It is a two-storey cottage that has been the
      subject of alterations such as a corrugated metal roof covering and replacement
      windows. At the time of my site visit, building work was being undertaken and
      some of the window frames and glazing had been removed as had the render
      covering from the front elevation, and the front porch. However, the overall simple
      single coped gabled form with a rear outshut, devoid of elaborate detailing,
      remained. It is characteristic of the Blackdown Hills vernacular for a modest



https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6014929


      dwelling associated with the agrarian landscape. Such buildings are one of the
      special qualities of this designation.
6.    The aesthetic and historical qualities of the host dwelling are apparent from the
      road and from the public right of way (PROW) that follows the driveway and
      passes directly past one of the side elevations. The dwelling is prominent as one
      traverses this public route, and it is part of the PROW’s experience. The qualities
      that the host dwelling possesses, its contribution to the Blackdown Hills’
      landscape, and its prominence from these public visual receptors means that it is
      sensitive to change.
7.    The proposed development would be subservient in terms of its floorspace,
      footprint and height to the host dwelling. It would also be faced in materials to
      reflect the vernacular palette found locally. The proposed use of a gable,
      perpendicular to that of the host dwelling’s, also disaggregates the mass.
8.    However, the proposed projection of this gable forward of the existing elevation, its
      width, and the size of its proposed windows, would result in it being visually
      discordant with, and dominant over the host dwelling. This discordance and
      dominance would result in a substantially harmful effect to the vernacular
      character and appearance that the dwelling possesses. The harm would be
      compounded by the proposed gable’s perpendicular alignment to the existing
      gable. Whilst disaggregating the mass, this would result in an overly complicated
      arrangement that loses the host dwelling’s simple agrarian cottage form.
9.    Such harm would be apparent from the public receptors on Blackwater Road in
      front of the appeal site and from the PROW. Given the importance of buildings
      such as the host dwelling to the character and appearance of the wider area, there
      would also be resultant substantial harm to the special qualities of the Blackdown
      Hills National Landscape.
10. For these reasons the proposed development would conflict with policy EQ2 of the
    South Somerset Local Plan (2015) (SSLP) which seeks to ensure that
    developments are designed to achieve a high quality, which promote the SSLP
    area’s distinctiveness and preserve or enhance its character and appearance. It
    would also conflict with policy HG8 of the SSLP which states that extensions to
    dwellings in the countryside will be permitted where, amongst other things, the size
    and design of the extension are appropriate to the landscape character of the
    location.
Protected species
11. From the evidence before me, the protected species that could be affected by the
    development proposed are bats. A Preliminary Bat and Bird Survey Report dated
    August 2026, incorporating findings and recommendations following emergence
    surveys, was included with the appellant’s evidence but was not included in the
    suite of documents that the Council considered at the application stage.
12. The householder appeal procedure does not afford the opportunity for the Council
    or interested parties to respond to the appellant's evidence. Therefore, in the
    interests of fairness, I can only take into account matters that have been properly
    placed before the main parties and interested parties at the application stage. To
    accept this evidence at this stage would deprive those who should have been
    consulted the opportunity of such consultation. Therefore, I have not taken this

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6014929


      evidence into account and have determined the appeal on the basis of the
      evidence that was before the Council at the time of its decision.
13. As such, there is insufficient evidence that I can consider to enable me to fully
    assess the effect of the development on bats. The proposed development is
    therefore contrary to Policy EQ4 of the SSLP. This policy states that, where there
    is a reasonable likelihood of the presence of protected and priority species,
    development design should be informed by, and applications should be
    accompanied by, a survey and impact assessment assessing their presence.
Other Matters
14. Schedule 7A (Biodiversity Gain in England) of the Town and Country Planning Act
    1990 introduced a requirement for biodiversity net gain (BNG). However, in this
    instance, the proposed development would benefit from the de minimis exemption.
15. The appellant has drawn my attention to extensions and alterations that were
    granted planning permission (Council reference 22/01987/HOU) at Apple Tree
    Lodge. This property is within the same group of dwellings as the appeal property,
    and I was able to view it from the road following my site visit. The development
    permitted appears to have been implemented. However, I note that the host
    dwelling was a modern bungalow. There is also no PROW running through the
    property and it is less prominent in the landscape, being within the group rather
    than at the end of it. These are material differences to the appeal property’s
    characteristics and context. I therefore afford this matter very minor weight as a
    material consideration and it is not determinative to my decision.
16. I note that there are supportive comments from an interested party. I have had
    regard to these comments and acknowledge that the appellant, through the
    proposed development, is seeking to bring back a currently vacant property back
    into habitation. This use would have benefits from future occupiers being members
    of and supporting the local community. I afford very minor weight to this matter as
    it is the reuse of the property rather than the specific development proposed that
    affords these benefits.
17. The Council’s decision notice cites other SSLP policies in addition to those which I
    have cited already in this decision. The first of these policies is SS1 which provides
    the SSLP’s hierarchy of settlements to guide growth across its area. There is no
    conflict with this policy per se, but it clarifies that the appeal site lies within the
    countryside, which confirms the applicability of policy HG8. The other policy is SD1
    which states that the Council will take a proactive approach to reflect the
    presumption in favour of sustainable development in the National Planning Policy
    Framework (the Framework).
18. The Framework is a material consideration. Policy S5 applies to proposed
    developments outside of settlements, such as the appeal site. Paragraph 1 of the
    policy states that, subject to caveats, only certain forms of development should be
    approved in these locations. One such type of development is listed in category 1
    c). This is the reuse, extension, alteration or replacement of an existing building as
    proposed here. The caveats to the policy are that the existing building is of
    permanent and substantial construction and lawful in planning terms. Such matters
    are not in dispute. Further caveats are that the extension or alteration would not
    result in a disproportionate increase in size compared to the existing building,
    which in footprint, floorspace and height terms it would not.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
Appeal Decision 6014929


19. However, policy S5 also states that the proposed development should be
    approved, unless the benefits of doing so would be substantially outweighed by
    any adverse effects, when assessed against the Framework’s national decision-
    making policies (NDMPs).
20. A relevant NDMP given the Blackdown Hills location is policy N4. This advises that
    development proposals within Protected Landscapes (PT) should be limited in
    scale and extent and sensitively located and designed to avoid harm to the
    statutory purposes and special qualities of the PT. The policy continues by
    clarifying that substantial weight should be placed on the importance of conserving
    and enhancing the natural beauty of these areas. I have already found that the
    proposed development would result in substantial harm to the special qualities of
    the landscape and, as such, there would be conflict with policy N4 too.
21. A further relevant NDMP is DP3. It advises that development proposals should
    respond to their context (the history, character and features of their site and its
    setting), so that they integrate with and enhance their surroundings. For the
    reasons I have already given, there would be conflict with this policy.
22. Turning to the Framework’s relevance to the second main issue in my decision,
    NDMP N2 criterion f) states that development proposals should, amongst other
    things, minimise any adverse impacts on biodiversity. Given that I cannot accept
    the bat emergence survey as evidence, I cannot be certain that there would be
    accordance with this criterion.
23. There are benefits afforded by the proposed development such as the facilitation
    of the dwelling’s re-habitation, the contribution future occupiers would make to the
    community, and the improved energy performance and long-term durability of the
    dwelling’s fabric as cited in the appellant’s evidence. However, I afford these
    benefits minor weight and, for the reasons I have given above, they would be
    substantially outweighed by the adverse effects when assessed against the
    Framework’s NDMPs. As such, support is not forthcoming when the proposed
    development is assessed against policy S5.
24. Having considered the Framework’s provisions, I find that the relevant
    development plan policies are consistent with it in this instance.
Conclusion
25. There are material considerations that I have had regard to and afforded weight in
    the overall planning balance. However, they do not indicate that a decision should
    be made other than in accordance with the development plan.
26. For the reasons given above the appeal should be dismissed.

S Sharp
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   4
