Appeal Decision
Site visit made on 15 September 2026
by J Hills MRTPI
an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
Decision date: 24 September 2026


Appeal Ref: 6015017
550 Topsham Road, Exeter, Devon EX2 7DP
•    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
     against a refusal to grant planning permission.
•    The appeal is made by A & S Damous & Alkurdi against the decision of Exeter City Council.
•    The application Ref is 26/0700/FUL.
•    The development proposed is described as “demolition of existing single-storey extension, erection
     of linked, single-storey, dependant relative's annexe”.

Decision
1.    The appeal is allowed and planning permission is granted for demolition of existing
      single-storey extension, erection of linked, single-storey annexe at 550 Topsham
      Road, Exeter, Devon EX2 7DP in accordance with the terms of the application,
      Ref 26/0700/FUL subject to the following conditions:
     1)       The development hereby permitted shall begin not later than 3 years from the
              date of this decision.
     2)       The development hereby permitted shall be carried out in accordance with
              the following approved plans: 00 02-A; 2505 0302-A; 2505 0101-A; 2505
              0100-A; 2505 0304-A; 2505 0303-A; 2505 0301-A; 2505 0200-A;
              2505 0305-A; and 2505 0300-A.
Preliminary matters
2.    On 17 August 2026, the Government published a new National Planning Policy
      Framework (the Framework). Both parties have had the opportunity to comment
      on its implications for their respective cases. I have considered the new
      Framework in my determination of the appeal.
3.    Having had regard to the submissions, the appellant's description of development
      includes the words "dependant relative's". Howeverthis wording relates to the
      intended occupation of the annexe rather than the development itself. As it is not
      an act of development, I have omitted those words and determined the appeal on
      the basis of the description used in the Council's decision notice. This is reflected
      in the formal decision above.
Main issues
4.    The main issues are the effect of the proposed development on (i) the character
      and appearance of the area; and (ii) the living conditions of the occupiers of
      No 548 Topsham Road (No 548), with particular regard to natural light and
      outlook.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
Appeal Decision 6015017


Reasons
Character and appearance
5.    The appeal site comprises one of a pair of predominantly red brick semi-detached
      dwellings that are positioned on the spacious corner of a housing estate. House
      styles follow similar themes here, though some nearby properties contain large
      box roof dormers which contrast with the tall, pitched gables found on the appeal
      building. When walking the surrounding area, I saw a number of flat roofed, side
      extensions attached to similar properties, including one on a corner plot.
      Extensions generally appeared to lack uniformity in respect of their scale, design,
      and use of materials. Within that context, prominent grey cladding forms part of an
      adjacent property’s façade.
6.    The existing lean-to extension that covers most of the width of the rear garden
      would be removed to accommodate a linked extension. There is no dispute that
      the proposed red brick would be appropriate for this area. The Council is however
      concerned that the painted brick, as shown on the plans, would appear overly
      prominent and out of character with the area’s colour palette. However, the
      existing extension already includes painted brickwork and has some white
      cladding facing the street. The link represents only a small section of the
      extension, and its grey colour scheme would not be dissimilar from the adjacent
      property. Additionally, the extension would be positioned behind an existing fence
      which would minimise public views in towards it. It would not be unduly prominent.
7.    It is acknowledged that the overall depth of the extension may exceed informal
      design guidance and possible permitted development limitations. Be that as it may,
      the stepped link would be of a similar height to the existing extension, and its small
      section of unassuming grey paint would also help break up the perceived bulk and
      massing of the wider extension. The simple and well-proportioned design would
      create a clean arrangement that would complement the host property.
8.    Further, the substantial set back from the road would reduce the effect of height
      increases along the rear garden area. Although covering a larger footprint than the
      existing extension, a generous garden area would be retained. Overall, the
      development would be subservient to the taller host property and sympathetic to
      surrounding built form. The scheme would reinforce local distinctiveness which is
      consistent with Objective 9 of the Exeter City Council Core Strategy (CS), as well
      as Framework Policy DP3.
9.    For the reasons given, I conclude on this main issue that the proposal would not
      have a harmful effect on the character and appearance of the area. As such, there
      would be no conflict with CS Policy CP17 and Policy DG1 of the Exeter Local Plan
      First Review (LP), which, together in this respect, seek a high standard of design
      that complements Exeter’s character and local identity, with heights, volumes and
      materials that should relate well to adjoining buildings and the area.
Living conditions
10. There are concerns that the extension’s height and length would combine
    negatively to impact on natural light reaching ground floor windows at No 548.
    However, the first 3m or so of the extension would be set well away from the
    neighbouring fence and ground floor windows. This would be likely to improve
    upon the current light levels reaching both garden and ground floor windows here.

https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   2
Appeal Decision 6015017


      While the increase in height would probably result in a marginal alteration to
      shading patterns, it is not clear that the garden or house of No 548 would be
      unacceptably gloomy as a result. In the absence of any substantive evidence to
      the contrary, the living conditions of the occupiers of No 548 would not be
      harmfully affected by a loss of light.
11. Although the total length of the extension would cover around two-thirds of the
    garden area, the narrow linking element would create a notable break in the built
    form. Furthermore, notwithstanding the height of the extension, the main annexe
    element would not be close to the neighbouring dwelling. This, together with the
    retention of substantial areas of lawn and garden space, would reduce the overall
    sense of dominance experienced from the neighbouring house and garden. As
    such, whilst the outlook from both would be altered, it would be maintained to an
    acceptable standard.
12. For these reasons, I conclude on this main issue that the proposal would have an
    acceptable effect on the living conditions of the occupiers of No 548, with particular
    regard to natural light and outlook. As such, there would be no conflict with
    LP Policy DG4, which says, in part, that residential development should ensure a
    quality of amenity which allows residents to feel at ease within their own homes
    and gardens.
Conditions
13. I have imposed the standard time limit and plans conditions in the interests of
    clarity.
Conclusion
14. For the reasons given the appeal is allowed.



J Hills
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate   3
