 Appeal Decision
 Site visit made on 21 September 2026
 by Chris Couper BA (Hons) DipTP MRTPI
 an Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State
 Decision date: 01 October 2026


 Appeal Ref: 6015003
 38 Sequoia Park, Hatch End, Harrow HA5 4DG
 •    The appeal is made under section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
      against a refusal to grant planning permission.
 •    The appeal is made by Mr Akhil Shah against the decision of the Council of the London Borough of
      Harrow.
 •    The application Ref is PL/2309/25.
 •    The development proposed is a front, side and rear ground floor extension, and a first floor extension
      and loft conversion.



Decision
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Application for costs
2. An application for costs was made by Mr Akhil Shah against the Council of the
   London Borough of Harrow. This is the subject of a separate decision.
Procedural Matter
3. The revised National Planning Policy Framework was published in August 2026
   (‘the Framework’). Having regard to the main issues in this appeal, there are no
   substantive differences between it and the now superceded version which was in
   place at the time of the Council’s decision.
Main Issues
4. The main issues are the effect of the proposal on:
     •    adjacent occupiers’ living conditions, with particular regard to the outlook from
          40 Sequoia Park (‘No 40’); and
     •    the character and appearance of the host property and the area.
Reasons
     Living conditions
5. The properties in this part of Sequoia Park are sited at varying distances from the
   highway. The host and its detached neighbour at No 40 have a particularly
   staggered siting relative to one another, with the front face of the host set further
   back from the highway compared to No 40’s principal rear elevation.


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate
    Appeal Decision: 6015003


6. The proposed ground floor front, side and rear extension would be sited next to the
   boundary with No 40. Based on the Council’s calculation, it would be around 14.6
   metres deep, and thus much longer than the garage it would replace. The scheme
   would also include a shorter first floor side extension which would be set in slightly
   further from that boundary.
7. Having regard to the staggered relationship of these two houses, the considerable
   bulk and depth of the proposed extensions so close to the boundary and beyond
   No 40’s rear elevation, would have a harmfully overbearing impact on the outlook
   from that property. That impact would be particularly apparent from the set of patio
   doors in its single storey rear projection and from the adjacent patio, which are at a
   lower level compared to the host. Thus, whilst levels converge beyond the patio,
   the scheme’s side walls would loom over those areas.
8. Having regard to the submitted Daylight and Sunlight Assessment1, I am satisfied,
   on the evidence before me, that the scheme would not have a harmfully adverse
   impact on the availability of natural light at No 40. Nevertheless, for the above
   reasons, it would significantly harm those occupiers’ living conditions.
9. It would thereby conflict with Policy GR1 of the Harrow Local Plan (2021-2041)
   (2026) (‘HLP’) and with Policy D3 of the London Plan 2021 (‘LP’). Amongst other
   things and in broad terms, these set out that proposals should safeguard
   neighbouring occupiers’ amenities, having regard to matters including outlook.
10. It would also conflict with the general advice in the Harrow Residential Design
    Guide Supplementary Planning Document 2010 (‘SPD’) that extensions should
    consider the impact on the amenity of neighbours, with regard to matters such as
    outlook, and factors such as design, distance from boundaries, siting and levels.
       Character and appearance
11. I observed on my visit that whilst most of the properties in this part of Sequoia Park
    are in a broadly similar style, many have been extended. That includes No 34
    which, whilst situated slightly differently relative to the highway and neighbouring
    properties compared to the appeal site, has permitted two storey side and rear
    extensions and a raised ridge line. Given the diverse size of the buildings, their
    staggered siting, and the sloping topography, there is no perception of consistent
    ridgelines or building heights in the streetscene.
12. The host’s size and scale would significantly increase, and its appearance would
    change, as a result of the scheme. However, the extensions would be faced with
    matching materials, and the resultant building would still be set well back from the
    road on a spacious plot. In the context of the area, including large extensions to
    some nearby buildings, its bulk, including its roughly 0.5 metre higher ridgeline,
    would not appear incongruous.
13. The scheme would not harm the character and appearance of the host property or
    the area. On this issue, it would not therefore conflict with those parts of HLP
    Policy GR1 or LP Policy D3 which seek a high standard of design, with
    development which respects the character and context of the locality, and local
    distinctiveness, having regard to matters such as height, bulk, massing, footprint,
    appearance, shape, building lines and scale.

1
    Sunlight Assessments UK Sunlight and Daylight Assessment – Neighbour Impact Report (5 March 2026)


https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate                   2
 Appeal Decision: 6015003


14. Neither would it conflict with the stance at Section 14 of the Framework for
    proposals to respond to their context, and to create visually attractive, distinctive
    and characterful development which maintains a strong sense of place; nor with the
    broad thrust of the advice in the SPD that extensions should harmonise with the
    scale and architectural style of the host and the character of the area, and should
    not dominate the original building or the surrounding streetscape.
     Other matters
15. The scheme was amended in response to officer feedback, and the appellant has
    concerns regarding the Council’s handling of his application, including delays,
    inconsistent advice, and a late change to the officer recommendation which allowed
    no opportunity for further amendment. However, I have dealt with the appeal on its
    planning merits.
Conclusion
16. Although the proposal would not harm the character and appearance of the host
    property or the area, I have found that it would have a significant adverse impact on
    the living conditions at 40 Sequoia Park.
17. The scheme would conflict with the development plan, and material considerations,
    including the Framework, do not indicate that the appeal should be decided other
    than in accordance with it. For these reasons, and having regard to all other
    matters raised, including representations by interested parties, the appeal is
    dismissed.

Chris Couper
INSPECTOR




https://www.gov.uk/planning-inspectorate       3
